---
reference_id: "PMID:20301372"
title: Acute Intermittent Porphyria.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Sardh E
- Barbaro M
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute Intermittent Porphyria.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Sardh E, Barbaro M

## Content

1. Acute Intermittent Porphyria.

Sardh E(1), Barbaro M(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2005 Sep 27 [updated 2024 Feb 8].

Author information:
(1)Porphyria Centre Sweden, Center for Inherited Metabolic Diseases (CMMS),
Karolinska University Hospital, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: An acute porphyria attack is characterized by a urine
porphobilinogen (PBG)-to-creatinine ratio ≥10 times the upper limit of normal
(ULN) and the presence of ≥2 porphyria manifestations (involving the visceral,
peripheral, autonomic, and/or central nervous systems) persisting for >24 hours
in the absence of other likely explanations. Onset of acute attacks typically
occurs in the second or third decade of life. Acute attacks are more common in
women than men. Although attacks in most individuals are typically caused by
exposure to certain endogenous or exogenous factors, often no precipitating
factor can be identified. The course of acute porphyria attacks is highly
variable in an individual and between individuals. Recovery from acute porphyria
attacks may occur within days; however, recovery from severe attacks that are
not promptly recognized and treated may take weeks or months. The five
categories of acute intermittent porphyria (AIP), caused by a heterozygous HMBS
pathogenic variant, are based on the urine PBG-to-creatinine ratio and
occurrence of acute attacks. Active (symptomatic) AIP: An individual who has
experienced at least one acute attack within the last two years. Symptomatic
high excreter: Urine PBG-to-creatinine ratio ≥4 times ULN and no acute attacks
in the last two years but chronic long-standing manifestations of acute
porphyria. Asymptomatic high excreter: Urine PBG-to-creatinine ratio ≥4 times
ULN and no acute attacks in the last two years and no porphyria-related
manifestations. Asymptomatic AIP: Urine PBG-to-creatinine ratio <4 times ULN and
no acute attacks in the last two years but has had ≥1 acute attack in the past.
Latent (inactive) AIP: Urine PBG-to-creatinine ratio <4 times ULN and no acute
porphyria-related manifestations to date.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: When the diagnosis of an AIP attack is suspected based on
clinical findings, establishing the diagnosis begins with biochemical testing.
If the urinary concentration of PBG is increased, molecular genetic testing is
performed to confirm the diagnosis and/or to facilitate cascade screening of
family members. When a multigene panel or genomic testing has identified an HMBS
pathogenic variant, the diagnosis of an AIP attack is confirmed when the urinary
concentration of PBG is increased.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treat intercurrent infections and other
diseases promptly. For mild acute neurovisceral attacks, a high carbohydrate
intake, preferably oral. When required, intravenous (IV) fluid may be used for
up to 48 hours. IV fluid should contain a minimum of 5% dextrose; the
recommendation in most countries is 10% glucose with added sodium (40 mmol) and
potassium (20 mmol) given at a rate of 1,000 mL over 12 hours. Note that
hypotonic dextrose in water solutions should be avoided because of the risk of
hyponatremia. Referral to a porphyria specialist for more detailed clinical
advice on treatment of AIP. Targeted therapies: For sporadic acute neurovisceral
attacks (i.e., when an individual has experienced one to ≤3 acute porphyria
attacks in any 12-month period in the last two years): IV human hemin is the
most effective treatment and may be lifesaving if employed early when neuronal
damage is reversible. If the criteria for recurrent attacks are met, Givlaari®
(givosiran) should be considered, as long-term complications of hemin such as
iron overload, phlebitis, and loss of venous access can be avoided. Liver
transplantation, as reported from several centers, is curative. Indications
include repeated life-threatening acute porphyria attacks and poor quality of
life when givosiran is not available or has shown insufficient medical efficacy.
Alternative medical therapies to reduce frequency and/or severity of acute
attacks when givosiran is not available include suppression of ovulation and
prophylactic hemin infusion. Supportive care: To reduce the frequency and/or
severity of acute attacks, maintain adequate nutrition and seek timely treatment
of systemic illness or infection. Supportive treatment involves pain relief,
treatment of hypertension, prevention of nausea and vomiting, prompt treatment
of seizures, and maintenance of fluid and electrolyte balance. Combined liver
and kidney transplantation can be considered in individuals with AIP who have
recurrent acute porphyria attacks and end-stage kidney disease. Surveillance:
For all individuals heterozygous for an HMBS pathogenic variant who are older
than age 50 years, annual or twice a year hepatic imaging is recommended for
early detection of primary liver cancer (PLC), which improves survival.
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Individuals with AIP are advised to avoid
excessive alcohol consumption, as alcohol upregulates the enzyme ALAS1, the
first enzyme of hepatic heme biosynthesis, and thus could be a trigger for acute
attacks. In all the acute porphyrias, information on the safety of many drugs
and other over-the-counter preparations is incomplete; however, evidence-based
guidelines for assessment of drug porphyrogenicity have been published.
Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status
of apparently asymptomatic at-risk relatives of an individual with a known HMBS
pathogenic variant (regardless of the presence or absence of acute
porphyria-related manifestations and/or a highly elevated urine
PBG-to-creatinine ratio in that individual) so that those who are heterozygous
for the familial HMBS pathogenic variant (and thus at increased risk of
developing AIP attacks and PLC) can be identified early and counseled about
preventive measures and surveillance. For the same reasons it is also
appropriate to try to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic
family members of an individual with a biochemical diagnosis of AIP and an
unknown HMBS pathogenic variant by assessing erythrocyte HMBS activity; however,
this method is less sensitive and specific than molecular genetic testing.
Pregnancy management: Preconception counseling is recommended to advise women
with AIP about the clinical manifestations of porphyria, self-care, preventative
measures to avoid exacerbations (i.e., adequate and regular nutrition, rest, and
carbohydrate intake for treating mild-to-moderate manifestations), and
agents/circumstances to avoid. Additionally, there is a higher risk for
pregnancy-induced hypertensive disorder, gestational diabetes, and fetuses with
intrauterine growth restriction. In general, risk ratios are higher among women
with AIP who have high lifetime urinary PBG concentrations.
GENETIC COUNSELING: AIP is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. The
majority of individuals diagnosed with AIP inherited an HMBS pathogenic variant
from one of their parents, who may or may not have experienced manifestations of
porphyria. Rarely, individuals diagnosed with AIP have the disorder as the
result of a de novo HMBS pathogenic variant. Each child of an individual with an
HMBS pathogenic variant has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant.
Because clinical penetrance is low, it is not possible to predict whether
offspring who inherit an HMBS pathogenic variant will be symptomatic or, if they
are symptomatic, the age of onset, severity, or type of manifestations. However,
all individuals who inherit an HMBS pathogenic variant should be counseled about
preventive measures and surveillance. Once the familial HMBS pathogenic variant
has been identified, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing for AIP are
possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301372
