---
reference_id: "PMID:16550169"
title: Common loss-of-function variants of the epidermal barrier protein filaggrin are a major predisposing factor for atopic dermatitis.
authors:
- Palmer CN
- Irvine AD
- Terron-Kwiatkowski A
- Zhao Y
- Liao H
- Lee SP
- Goudie DR
- Sandilands A
- Campbell LE
- Smith FJ
- "O'Regan GM"
- Watson RM
- Cecil JE
- Bale SJ
- Compton JG
- DiGiovanna JJ
- Fleckman P
- Lewis-Jones S
- Arseculeratne G
- Sergeant A
- Munro CS
- El Houate B
- McElreavey K
- Halkjaer LB
- Bisgaard H
- Mukhopadhyay S
- McLean WH
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1038/ng1767
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Common loss-of-function variants of the epidermal barrier protein filaggrin are a major predisposing factor for atopic dermatitis.
**Authors:** Palmer CN, Irvine AD, Terron-Kwiatkowski A, Zhao Y, Liao H, Lee SP, Goudie DR, Sandilands A, Campbell LE, Smith FJ, O'Regan GM, Watson RM, Cecil JE, Bale SJ, Compton JG, DiGiovanna JJ, Fleckman P, Lewis-Jones S, Arseculeratne G, Sergeant A, Munro CS, El Houate B, McElreavey K, Halkjaer LB, Bisgaard H, Mukhopadhyay S, McLean WH
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1767](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1767)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2006 Apr;38(4):441-6. doi: 10.1038/ng1767. Epub 2006 Mar 19.

Common loss-of-function variants of the epidermal barrier protein filaggrin are 
a major predisposing factor for atopic dermatitis.

Palmer CN(1), Irvine AD, Terron-Kwiatkowski A, Zhao Y, Liao H, Lee SP, Goudie 
DR, Sandilands A, Campbell LE, Smith FJ, O'Regan GM, Watson RM, Cecil JE, Bale 
SJ, Compton JG, DiGiovanna JJ, Fleckman P, Lewis-Jones S, Arseculeratne G, 
Sergeant A, Munro CS, El Houate B, McElreavey K, Halkjaer LB, Bisgaard H, 
Mukhopadhyay S, McLean WH.

Author information:
(1)Population Pharmacogenetics Group, Biomedical Research Centre, University of 
Dundee, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, Dundee DD1 9SY, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2006 Apr;38(4):399-400. doi: 10.1038/ng0406-399.

Atopic disease, including atopic dermatitis (eczema), allergy and asthma, has 
increased in frequency in recent decades and now affects approximately 20% of 
the population in the developed world. Twin and family studies have shown that 
predisposition to atopic disease is highly heritable. Although most genetic 
studies have focused on immunological mechanisms, a primary epithelial barrier 
defect has been anticipated. Filaggrin is a key protein that facilitates 
terminal differentiation of the epidermis and formation of the skin barrier. 
Here we show that two independent loss-of-function genetic variants (R510X and 
2282del4) in the gene encoding filaggrin (FLG) are very strong predisposing 
factors for atopic dermatitis. These variants are carried by approximately 9% of 
people of European origin. These variants also show highly significant 
association with asthma occurring in the context of atopic dermatitis. This work 
establishes a key role for impaired skin barrier function in the development of 
atopic disease.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1767
PMID: 16550169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]