---
reference_id: "PMID:35165832"
title: Newer Drugs to Reduce High Blood Pressure and Mitigate Hypertensive Target Organ Damage.
authors:
- Upadhya B
- Kozak PM
- Stacey RB
- Vasan RS
journal: Curr Hypertens Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s11906-022-01166-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Newer Drugs to Reduce High Blood Pressure and Mitigate Hypertensive Target Organ Damage.
**Authors:** Upadhya B, Kozak PM, Stacey RB, Vasan RS
**Journal:** Curr Hypertens Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11906-022-01166-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11906-022-01166-9)

## Content

1. Curr Hypertens Rep. 2022 Jan;24(1):1-20. doi: 10.1007/s11906-022-01166-9. Epub
 2022 Feb 14.

Newer Drugs to Reduce High Blood Pressure and Mitigate Hypertensive Target Organ 
Damage.

Upadhya B(1), Kozak PM(2), Stacey RB(2), Vasan RS(3).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Medicine Section, Department of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest 
School of Medicine, Medical Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC, 27157-1045, 
USA. bupadhya@wakehealth.edu.
(2)Cardiovascular Medicine Section, Department of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest 
School of Medicine, Medical Center Boulevard, Winston-Salem, NC, 27157-1045, 
USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Sections of Preventative Medicine and Epidemiology 
and Cardiovascular Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Department of 
Epidemiology, Boston University School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review aims to investigate the blood pressure 
(BP)-lowering effects of emerging drugs developed to treat diabetic kidney 
disease and heart failure (HF). We summarize the potential pathophysiological 
mechanisms responsible for mitigating hypertensive target organ damage and 
evaluating the available clinical data on these newer drugs.
RECENT FINDINGS: Nonsteroidal dihydropyridine-based mineralocorticoid receptor 
antagonists (MRAs), dual angiotensin II receptor-neprilysin inhibitors 
(valsartan with sacubitril), sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors (SGLT2i), 
and soluble guanylate cyclase stimulators are new classes of chemical agents 
that have distinct mechanisms of action and have been shown to be effective for 
the treatment of cardiovascular (CV) disease (CVD), HF, and type 2 diabetes 
mellitus (T2D). These drugs can be used either alone or in combination with 
other antihypertensive and CV drugs. Among these, SGLT2i and valsartan with 
sacubitril offer new avenues to reduce CVD mortality. SGLT2i have a 
mild-to-moderate effect on BP lowering with a favorable effect on CV and renal 
hemodynamics and have been shown to produce a significant reduction in the 
incidence of major adverse CVD events (as monotherapy or add-on therapy) 
compared with controls (placebo or non-SGLT2i treatment). Most of the 
participants in these studies had hypertension (HTN) at baseline and were 
receiving antihypertensive therapy, including renin-angiotensin system blockers. 
The combination of valsartan with sacubitril also lowers BP in the short term 
and has demonstrated a striking reduction in CVD mortality and morbidity in HF 
patients with a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction. If widely adopted, 
these novel therapeutic agents hold significant promise for reducing the public 
health burden posed by HTN and CVD. Based on the results of several clinical 
trials and considering the high prevalence of HTN and T2D, these new classes of 
agents have emerged as powerful therapeutic tools in managing and lowering the 
BP of patients with diabetic kidney disease and HF.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11906-022-01166-9
PMID: 35165832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]