---
reference_id: "PMID:28502583"
title: Homozygous EDNRB mutation in a patient with Waardenburg syndrome type 1.
authors:
- Morimoto N
- Mutai H
- Namba K
- Kaneko H
- Kosaki R
- Matsunaga T
journal: Auris Nasus Larynx
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.anl.2017.03.022
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Models, Molecular"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Receptor, Endothelin B/genetics"
- "Waardenburg Syndrome/genetics, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homozygous EDNRB mutation in a patient with Waardenburg syndrome type 1.
**Authors:** Morimoto N, Mutai H, Namba K, Kaneko H, Kosaki R, Matsunaga T
**Journal:** Auris Nasus Larynx (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.anl.2017.03.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anl.2017.03.022)

## Content

1. Auris Nasus Larynx. 2018 Apr;45(2):222-226. doi: 10.1016/j.anl.2017.03.022.
Epub  2017 May 11.

Homozygous EDNRB mutation in a patient with Waardenburg syndrome type 1.

Morimoto N(1), Mutai H(2), Namba K(2), Kaneko H(3), Kosaki R(4), Matsunaga T(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Otolaryngology, National Center for Child Health and Development,
2-10-1 Ohkura, Setagaya, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan.
(2)Division of Hearing and Balance Research, National Institute of Sensory
Organ, National Hospital Organization Tokyo Medical Center, 2-5-1 Higashigaoka,
Meguro, Tokyo 152-8902, Japan.
(3)The Institute of Natural Sciences, College of Humanities and Sciences, Nihon
University, 3-25-40 Sakurajosui, Segataya, Tokyo 156-8550, Japan.
(4)Division of Medical Genetics, National Center for Child Health and
Development, 2-10-1 Ohkura, Setagaya, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan.
(5)Division of Hearing and Balance Research, National Institute of Sensory
Organ, National Hospital Organization Tokyo Medical Center, 2-5-1 Higashigaoka,
Meguro, Tokyo 152-8902, Japan; Medical Genetics Center, National Hospital
Organization Tokyo Medical Center, 2-5-1 Higashigaoka, Meguro, Tokyo 152-8902,
Japan. Electronic address: matsunagatatsuo@kankakuki.go.jp.

OBJECTIVE: To examine and expand the genetic spectrum of Waardenburg syndrome
type 1 (WS1).
METHODS: Clinical features related to Waardenburg syndrome (WS) were examined in
a five-year old patient. Mutation analysis of genes related to WS was performed
in the proband and her parents. Molecular modeling of EDNRB and the p.R319W
mutant was conducted to predict the pathogenicity of the mutation.
RESULTS: The proband showed sensorineural hearing loss, heterochromia iridis,
and dystopia canthorum, fulfilling the clinical criteria of WS1. Genetic
analyses revealed that the proband had no mutation in PAX3 which has been known
as the cause of WS1, but had a homozygous missense mutation (p.R319W) in
endothelin receptor type B (EDNRB) gene. The asymptomatic parents had the
mutation in a heterozygote state. This mutation has been previously reported in
a heterozygous state in a patient with Hirschsprung's disease unaccompanied by
WS, but the patient and her parents did not show any symptoms in
gastrointestinal tract. Molecular modeling of EDNRB with the p.R319W mutation
demonstrated reduction of the positively charged surface area in this region,
which might reduce binding ability of EDNRB to G protein and lead to abnormal
signal transduction underlying the WS phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggested that autosomal recessive mutation in EDNRB
may underlie a part of WS1 with the current diagnostic criteria, and supported
that Hirschsprung's disease is a multifactorial genetic disease which requires
additional factors. Further molecular analysis is necessary to elucidate the
gene interaction and to reappraise the current WS classification.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anl.2017.03.022
PMID: 28502583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
