---
reference_id: "PMID:38816354"
title: ARID1B maintains mesenchymal stem cell quiescence via inhibition of BCL11B-mediated non-canonical Activin signaling.
authors:
- Zhang M
- Guo T
- Pei F
- Feng J
- Jing J
- Xu J
- Yamada T
- Ho TV
- Du J
- Sehgal P
- Chai Y
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-48285-2
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- Activins/metabolism
- Cell Proliferation
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- "Mesenchymal Stem Cells/metabolism, cytology"
- "Repressor Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- Signal Transduction
- "Transcription Factors/metabolism, genetics"
- "Tumor Suppressor Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- Zinc Finger Protein GLI1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ARID1B maintains mesenchymal stem cell quiescence via inhibition of BCL11B-mediated non-canonical Activin signaling.
**Authors:** Zhang M, Guo T, Pei F, Feng J, Jing J, Xu J, Yamada T, Ho TV, Du J, Sehgal P, Chai Y
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-024-48285-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-48285-2)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2024 May 30;15(1):4614. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-48285-2.

ARID1B maintains mesenchymal stem cell quiescence via inhibition of 
BCL11B-mediated non-canonical Activin signaling.

Zhang M(1), Guo T(1), Pei F(1), Feng J(1), Jing J(1), Xu J(1), Yamada T(1), Ho 
TV(1), Du J(1), Sehgal P(1), Chai Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, University of Southern California, 
Los Angeles, CA, 90033, USA.
(2)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, University of Southern California, 
Los Angeles, CA, 90033, USA. ychai@usc.edu.

ARID1B haploinsufficiency in humans causes Coffin-Siris syndrome, associated 
with developmental delay, facial dysmorphism, and intellectual disability. The 
role of ARID1B has been widely studied in neuronal development, but whether it 
also regulates stem cells remains unknown. Here, we employ scRNA-seq and 
scATAC-seq to dissect the regulatory functions and mechanisms of ARID1B within 
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) using the mouse incisor model. We reveal that loss 
of Arid1b in the GLI1+ MSC lineage disturbs MSCs' quiescence and leads to their 
proliferation due to the ectopic activation of non-canonical Activin signaling 
via p-ERK. Furthermore, loss of Arid1b upregulates Bcl11b, which encodes a BAF 
complex subunit that modulates non-canonical Activin signaling by directly 
regulating the expression of activin A subunit, Inhba. Reduction of Bcl11b or 
non-canonical Activin signaling restores the MSC population in Arid1b mutant 
mice. Notably, we have identified that ARID1B suppresses Bcl11b expression via 
specific binding to its third intron, unveiling the direct inter-regulatory 
interactions among BAF subunits in MSCs. Our results demonstrate the vital role 
of ARID1B as an epigenetic modifier in maintaining MSC homeostasis and reveal 
its intricate mechanistic regulatory network in vivo, providing novel insights 
into the linkage between chromatin remodeling and stem cell fate determination.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-48285-2
PMCID: PMC11139927
PMID: 38816354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.