---
reference_id: "PMID:21463282"
title: Insights into pathophysiology and therapy from a mouse model of Dravet syndrome.
authors:
- Oakley JC
- Kalume F
- Catterall WA
journal: Epilepsia
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2011.03004.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Insights into pathophysiology and therapy from a mouse model of Dravet syndrome.
**Authors:** Oakley JC, Kalume F, Catterall WA
**Journal:** Epilepsia (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1528-1167.2011.03004.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1528-1167.2011.03004.x)

## Content

1. Epilepsia. 2011 Apr;52 Suppl 2(Suppl 2):59-61. doi: 
10.1111/j.1528-1167.2011.03004.x.

Insights into pathophysiology and therapy from a mouse model of Dravet syndrome.

Oakley JC(1), Kalume F, Catterall WA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology Neurology, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington 98195-7280, USA.

Mutations in voltage-gated sodium channels are associated with epilepsy 
syndromes with a wide range of severity. Complete loss of function in the Na(v) 
1.1 channel encoded by the SCN1A gene is associated with severe myoclonic 
epilepsy in infancy (SMEI), a devastating infantile-onset epilepsy with ataxia, 
cognitive dysfunction, and febrile and afebrile seizures resistant to current 
medications. Genetic mouse models of SMEI have been created that strikingly 
recapitulate the SMEI phenotype including age and temperature dependence of 
seizures and ataxia. Loss-of-function in Na(v) 1.1 channels results in severely 
impaired sodium current and action potential firing in hippocampal 
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic interneurons without detectable changes in 
excitatory pyramidal neurons. The resulting imbalance between excitation and 
inhibition likely contributes to hyperexcitability and seizures. Reduced sodium 
current and action potential firing in cerebellar Purkinje neurons likely 
contributes to comorbid ataxia. A mechanistic understanding of 
hyperexcitability, seizures, and comorbidities such as ataxia has led to novel 
strategies for treatment.

Wiley Periodicals, Inc. © 2011 International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2011.03004.x
PMCID: PMC3547637
PMID: 21463282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure The authors declare no conflicts of 
interest. We confirm that we have read the Journal’s position on issues involved 
in ethical publication and affirm that this report is consistent with those 
guidelines.