---
reference_id: "PMID:33139977"
title: "Acute intermittent porphyria: focus on possible mechanisms of acute and chronic manifestations."
authors:
- Ma Y
- Teng Q
- Zhang Y
- Zhang S
journal: Intractable Rare Dis Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.5582/irdr.2020.03054
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute intermittent porphyria: focus on possible mechanisms of acute and chronic manifestations.
**Authors:** Ma Y, Teng Q, Zhang Y, Zhang S
**Journal:** Intractable Rare Dis Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.5582/irdr.2020.03054](https://doi.org/10.5582/irdr.2020.03054)

## Content

1. Intractable Rare Dis Res. 2020 Nov;9(4):187-195. doi: 10.5582/irdr.2020.03054.

Acute intermittent porphyria: focus on possible mechanisms of acute and chronic
manifestations.

Ma Y(1), Teng Q(1), Zhang Y(2), Zhang S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The second Hospital of Hebei Medical University,
Shijiazhuang, Hebei, China.
(2)School of First Clinical Medical College, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

Porphyrias are a group of inherited metabolic diseases that include eight types,
each of which is caused by a mutation that affects an enzyme of the heme
biosynthetic pathway. When an enzyme defect has physiological significance, it
leads to overproduction of pathway precursors prior to the defective step. The
partial absence of the third enzyme in the heme biosynthetic pathway,
porphobilinogen deaminase (PBGD) also known as hydroxymethylbilane synthase
(HMBS), results in acute intermittent porphyria (AIP), which affects mainly
women. Subjects who had AIP symptoms were deemed to have manifest AIP (MAIP).
Clinical manifestations are usually diverse and non-specific. Acute AIP episodes
may present with abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting, and repeated episodes may
result in a series of chronic injuries. Therefore, studying the mechanisms of
acute and chronic manifestations of AIP is of great significance. This review
aims to summarize the possible mechanisms of acute and chronic manifestations in
patients with AIP.

2020, International Research and Cooperation Association for Bio & Socio -
Sciences Advancement.

DOI: 10.5582/irdr.2020.03054
PMCID: PMC7586881
PMID: 33139977
