---
reference_id: "PMID:34146746"
title: Diversity in Serine/Threonine Protein Kinase-4 Deficiency and Review of the Literature.
authors:
- Cagdas D
- Halacli SO
- Tan C
- Esenboga S
- Karaatmaca B
- Cetinkaya PG
- Balcı-Hayta B
- Ayhan A
- Uner A
- Orhan D
- Boztug K
- Ozen S
- Topaloglu R
- Sanal O
- Tezcan I
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaip.2021.05.032
keywords:
- Epstein-Barr Virus Infections
- "Herpesvirus 4, Human"
- Humans
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Lymphopenia/diagnosis
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases
- Serine
- Threonine
- Hippo Kinases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diversity in Serine/Threonine Protein Kinase-4 Deficiency and Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Cagdas D, Halacli SO, Tan C, Esenboga S, Karaatmaca B, Cetinkaya PG, Balcı-Hayta B, Ayhan A, Uner A, Orhan D, Boztug K, Ozen S, Topaloglu R, Sanal O, Tezcan I
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaip.2021.05.032](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaip.2021.05.032)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2021 Oct;9(10):3752-3766.e4. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2021.05.032. Epub 2021 Jun 17.

Diversity in Serine/Threonine Protein Kinase-4 Deficiency and Review of the 
Literature.

Cagdas D(1), Halacli SO(2), Tan C(2), Esenboga S(3), Karaatmaca B(3), Cetinkaya 
PG(3), Balcı-Hayta B(4), Ayhan A(5), Uner A(5), Orhan D(5), Boztug K(6), Ozen 
S(7), Topaloglu R(8), Sanal O(9), Tezcan I(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Immunology, Hacettepe University Medical School, 
Ankara, Turkey; Department of Pediatric Immunology, Institute of Child Health, 
Hacettepe University Medical School, Ankara, Turkey. Electronic address: 
deniz.ayvaz@hacettepe.edu.tr.
(2)Department of Pediatric Immunology, Institute of Child Health, Hacettepe 
University Medical School, Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Department of Pediatric Immunology, Hacettepe University Medical School, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(4)Department of Medical Biology, Hacettepe University Medical School, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(5)Department of Pediatric Pathology, Hacettepe University Medical School, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(6)CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of 
Sciences, Vienna, Austria.
(7)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Hacettepe University Medical School, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(8)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Hacettepe University Medical School, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(9)Department of Pediatric Immunology, Hacettepe University Medical School, 
Ankara, Turkey; Department of Pediatric Immunology, Institute of Child Health, 
Hacettepe University Medical School, Ankara, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Serine/threonine kinase-4 (STK4) deficiency is an autosomal 
recessive combined immunodeficiency.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to define characteristic clinical and laboratory features to 
aid the differential diagnosis and determine the most suitable therapy.
METHODS: In addition to nine STK4 deficiency patients, we reviewed 15 patients 
from the medical literature. We compared B lymphocyte subgroups of the cohort 
with age-matched healthy controls.
RESULTS: In the cohort, median age at symptom onset and age at diagnosis were 6 
years 8 months (range, 6-248 months) and 7 years 5 months (range, 6-260 months), 
respectively. The main clinical findings were infections (in all nine patients 
[9 of 9]), autoimmune or inflammatory diseases (7 of 9), and atopy (4 of 9). CD4 
lymphopenia (9 out 9), lymphopenia (7 out 9), intermittent eosinophilia (4 out 
9), transient neutropenia (3 out 9), low IgM (4 out 9), and high IgE (4 out 9) 
were common. Decreased recent thymic emigrants, naive and central memory T 
cells, but increased effector memory T cells were present. The increase in 
plasmablasts (P = .003) and decrease in switched memory B cells (P = .022) were 
significant. When 24 patients are analyzed, cutaneous viral infections (n = 20), 
recurrent pneumonia (n = 18), Epstein Barr virus-associated lymphoproliferation 
(n = 11), atopic dermatitis (n = 10), autoimmune cytopenia (n = 7), and lymphoma 
(n = 6) were frequent. Lymphopenia, CD4 lymphopenia, high IgG, IgA, and IgE were 
common laboratory characteristics.
CONCLUSIONS: The differential diagnosis with autosomal recessive hyper-IgE 
syndrome is crucial. Because, atopy and CD4 lymphopenia are common in both 
diseases. Immunoglobulins, antibacterial, and antiviral prophylaxis are the 
mainstays of treatment. Clinicians may use immunomodulatory therapies during 
inflammatory or autoimmune complications. However, more data are needed to 
recommend hematopoietic stem cell transplantation as a safe therapy.

Copyright © 2021 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2021.05.032
PMID: 34146746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]