---
reference_id: "PMID:40960909"
title: Expression and Clinical Implications of LAG-3 in Small Cell Lung Cancer.
authors:
- Sun L
- Hu J
- Wang J
- Zhu X
- Yan Y
- Wan S
- Yu H
- Jiang G
- Zhang L
- Hu H
- Zhang J
- Zhang P
journal: FASEB J
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1096/fj.202502183R
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expression and Clinical Implications of LAG-3 in Small Cell Lung Cancer.
**Authors:** Sun L, Hu J, Wang J, Zhu X, Yan Y, Wan S, Yu H, Jiang G, Zhang L, Hu H, Zhang J, Zhang P
**Journal:** FASEB J (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.202502183R](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.202502183R)

## Content

1. FASEB J. 2025 Sep 30;39(18):e71069. doi: 10.1096/fj.202502183R.

Expression and Clinical Implications of LAG-3 in Small Cell Lung Cancer.

Sun L(1), Hu J(1), Wang J(1), Zhu X(1), Yan Y(1), Wan S(1), Yu H(2), Jiang G(1), 
Zhang L(3), Hu H(3), Zhang J(1), Zhang P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, School of 
Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Animal Experimental Center, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(3)Central Laboratory, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, School of Medicine, Tongji 
University, Shanghai, China.

The PD-L1 immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) improve the survival in small cell 
lung cancer (SCLC), yet only a small subset experiences durable responses, 
possibly due to less than 20% of SCLC expressing PD-L1 > 1% of tumor cells. 
Evaluating the expression of checkpoint molecules in SCLC may identify molecules 
beyond PD-L1 that are amenable to ICIs. We firstly evaluated 28 immune 
checkpoint molecules via RNA-seq data in the Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia 
database. Next, our in-house proteogenomic dataset and other publicly available 
datasets, including microarray data, RNA-seq data, and scRNA-seq data from tumor 
specimens, were enrolled. IMpower133 and Roper et al. datasets were employed to 
evaluate LAG-3 as a predictive marker of immunotherapy efficacy in SCLC. 
Finally, Immunohistochemistry was performed to verify LAG-3 expression in SCLC. 
LAG-3 exhibited higher expression in SCLC cell lines than in lung 
adenocarcinoma, lung squamous cell carcinoma, and melanoma. Analysis of SCLC 
tumor and paired normal samples revealed the highest overexpression of LAG-3 in 
SCLC tumors among compiled checkpoint molecules. Higher LAG-3 expression 
correlated with longer overall survival and served as an independent favorable 
prognostic factor. Furthermore, higher LAG-3 expression was associated with 
increased MHC-I expression, immune cell infiltration, and certain immune 
checkpoints' expression. Increased LAG-3 expression correlated with ICI benefit 
in SCLC patients. scRNA-seq analysis revealed that LAG-3 was primarily expressed 
in the tumor cells and T cells, and LAG-3 expression was higher than that of 
PD-1, CD274, and CTLA-4 on the CD8+ T cells. LAG-3 might serve as a potential 
biomarker in SCLC.

© 2025 Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.202502183R
PMID: 40960909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]