---
reference_id: "PMID:27784723"
title: Dientamoeba fragilis colonization is not associated with gastrointestinal symptoms in children at primary care level.
authors:
- Holtman GA
- Kranenberg JJ
- Blanker MH
- Ott A
- Lisman-van Leeuwen Y
- Berger MY
journal: Fam Pract
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/fampra/cmw111
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dientamoeba fragilis colonization is not associated with gastrointestinal symptoms in children at primary care level.
**Authors:** Holtman GA, Kranenberg JJ, Blanker MH, Ott A, Lisman-van Leeuwen Y, Berger MY
**Journal:** Fam Pract (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/fampra/cmw111](https://doi.org/10.1093/fampra/cmw111)

## Content

1. Fam Pract. 2017 Feb;34(1):25-29. doi: 10.1093/fampra/cmw111. Epub 2016 Oct 26.

Dientamoeba fragilis colonization is not associated with gastrointestinal 
symptoms in children at primary care level.

Holtman GA(1), Kranenberg JJ(2), Blanker MH(2), Ott A(3), Lisman-van Leeuwen 
Y(2), Berger MY(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Practice, University of Groningen, University Medical 
Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands and g.a.holtman@umcg.nl.
(2)Department of General Practice, University of Groningen, University Medical 
Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands and.
(3)Certe, Division of Medical Microbiology, Groningen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Dientamoeba fragilis is commonly identified in children in primary 
care and is suspected to cause gastrointestinal disease.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the association between D. fragilis colonization and 
gastrointestinal symptoms in children.
METHODS: We performed a cross-sectional study with children who presented in 
primary care with gastrointestinal symptoms. The associations between D. 
fragilis colonization and specific symptoms were explored by means of logistic 
regression analyses. Asymptomatic siblings of these cases were invited as 
control subjects for a case-control analysis, where we explored the association 
between D. fragilis and gastrointestinal symptoms with conditional logistic 
regression analysis.
RESULTS: In the cross-sectional study, 107 children were included. Their median 
age was 9 years (interquartile range = 6-12) and 38 (35.5%) were boys. 
Colonization of D. fragilis was present in 59 children (55.1%). The absence of 
D. fragilis was associated with soft to watery stool [odds ratio (OR) = 0.29; 
95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.10-0.85], chronic diarrhoea (OR = 0.42; 95% CI 
= 0.18-0.97) and fatigue (OR = 0.45; 95% CI = 0.20-0.99). The case-control 
analyses included 44 children in each group. Dientamoeba fragilis colonization 
was not observed more often in cases than in controls after adjustment for age 
and sex (OR = 1.02; 95% CI = 0.28-3.65).
CONCLUSION: Dientamoeba fragilis is a common parasite in children with and 
without gastrointestinal symptoms. The anomalous finding of the association 
between the absence of D. fragilis with soft to watery stools, chronic diarrhoea 
and fatigue are inexplicable. Our study suggests that D. fragilis colonization 
does not increase the risk for gastrointestinal symptoms.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/fampra/cmw111
PMID: 27784723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]