---
reference_id: "PMID:37398410"
title: The patient-specific mouse model with Foxg1 frameshift mutation uncovers the pathophysiology of FOXG1 syndrome.
authors:
- Park J
- Moon JH
- "O'Shea H"
- Shin D
- Hwang SU
- Li L
- Lee H
- Brimble E
- Lee J
- Clark S
- Lee SK
- Jeon S
journal: Res Sq
year: '2023'
doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-2953760/v1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The patient-specific mouse model with Foxg1 frameshift mutation uncovers the pathophysiology of FOXG1 syndrome.
**Authors:** Park J, Moon JH, O'Shea H, Shin D, Hwang SU, Li L, Lee H, Brimble E, Lee J, Clark S, Lee SK, Jeon S
**Journal:** Res Sq (2023)
**DOI:** [10.21203/rs.3.rs-2953760/v1](https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-2953760/v1)

## Content

1. Res Sq [Preprint]. 2023 Jun 2:rs.3.rs-2953760. doi:
10.21203/rs.3.rs-2953760/v1.

The patient-specific mouse model with Foxg1 frameshift mutation uncovers the
pathophysiology of FOXG1 syndrome.

Park J(1), Moon JH(1), O'Shea H(1), Shin D(1), Hwang SU(1), Li L(1), Lee H(2),
Brimble E(3), Lee J(1), Clark S(1), Lee SK(1), Jeon S(4).

Author information:
(1)University at Buffalo.
(2)Sungkyunkwan University.
(3)Invitae.
(4)University of Pennsylvania.

Update in
    Nat Commun. 2025 May 22;16(1):4760. doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-59838-4.

Single allelic mutations in the gene encoding the forebrain-specific
transcription factor FOXG1 lead to FOXG1 syndrome (FS). Patient-specific animal
models are needed to understand the etiology of FS, as FS patients show a wide
spectrum of symptoms correlated with location and mutation type in the FOXG1
gene. Here we report the first patient-specific FS mouse model, Q84Pfs
heterozygous (Q84Pfs-Het) mice, mimicking one of the most predominant single
nucleotide variants in FS. Intriguingly, we found that Q84Pfs-Het mice
faithfully recapitulate human FS phenotypes at the cellular, brain structural,
and behavioral levels. Importantly, Q84Pfs-Het mice exhibited myelination
deficits like FS patients. Further, our transcriptome analysis of Q84Pfs-Het
cortex revealed a new role for FOXG1 in synapse and oligodendrocyte development.
The dysregulated genes in Q84Pfs-Het brains also predicted motor dysfunction and
autism-like phenotypes. Correspondingly, Q84Pfs-Het mice showed movement
deficits, repetitive behaviors, increased anxiety, and prolonged behavior
arrest. Together, our study revealed the crucial postnatal role of FOXG1 in
neuronal maturation and myelination and elucidated the essential pathophysiology
mechanisms of FS.

DOI: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-2953760/v1
PMCID: PMC10312924
PMID: 37398410
