---
reference_id: "PMID:27182706"
title: "Exome Sequencing Identifies a Novel LMNA Splice-Site Mutation and Multigenic Heterozygosity of Potential Modifiers in a Family with Sick Sinus Syndrome, Dilated Cardiomyopathy, and Sudden Cardiac Death."
authors:
- Zaragoza MV
- Fung L
- Jensen E
- Oh F
- Cung K
- McCarthy LA
- Tran CK
- Hoang V
- Hakim SA
- Grosberg A
journal: PLoS One
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0155421
keywords:
- Adult
- Alleles
- Biomarkers
- "Cardiomyopathy, Dilated/diagnosis, genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac/etiology"
- Exome
- Female
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Gene Frequency
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- Lamin Type A/genetics
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- RNA Splice Sites
- Reproducibility of Results
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- "Sick Sinus Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exome Sequencing Identifies a Novel LMNA Splice-Site Mutation and Multigenic Heterozygosity of Potential Modifiers in a Family with Sick Sinus Syndrome, Dilated Cardiomyopathy, and Sudden Cardiac Death.
**Authors:** Zaragoza MV, Fung L, Jensen E, Oh F, Cung K, McCarthy LA, Tran CK, Hoang V, Hakim SA, Grosberg A
**Journal:** PLoS One (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0155421](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0155421)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2016 May 16;11(5):e0155421. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0155421. 
eCollection 2016.

Exome Sequencing Identifies a Novel LMNA Splice-Site Mutation and Multigenic 
Heterozygosity of Potential Modifiers in a Family with Sick Sinus Syndrome, 
Dilated Cardiomyopathy, and Sudden Cardiac Death.

Zaragoza MV(1), Fung L(1), Jensen E(1), Oh F(1), Cung K(1), McCarthy LA(2), Tran 
CK(1), Hoang V(1), Hakim SA(1), Grosberg A(2).

Author information:
(1)UC Irvine Cardiogenomics Program, Department of Pediatrics, Division of 
Genetics & Genomics and Department of Biological Sciences, University of 
California Irvine, Irvine, California, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering and The Edwards Lifesciences Center for 
Advanced Cardiovascular Technology, University of California Irvine, Irvine, 
California, United States of America.

The goals are to understand the primary genetic mechanisms that cause Sick Sinus 
Syndrome and to identify potential modifiers that may result in intrafamilial 
variability within a multigenerational family. The proband is a 63-year-old male 
with a family history of individuals (>10) with sinus node dysfunction, 
ventricular arrhythmia, cardiomyopathy, heart failure, and sudden death. We used 
exome sequencing of a single individual to identify a novel LMNA mutation and 
demonstrated the importance of Sanger validation and family studies when 
evaluating candidates. After initial single-gene studies were negative, we 
conducted exome sequencing for the proband which produced 9 gigabases of 
sequencing data. Bioinformatics analysis showed 94% of the reads mapped to the 
reference and identified 128,563 unique variants with 108,795 (85%) located in 
16,319 genes of 19,056 target genes. We discovered multiple variants in known 
arrhythmia, cardiomyopathy, or ion channel associated genes that may serve as 
potential modifiers in disease expression. To identify candidate mutations, we 
focused on ~2,000 variants located in 237 genes of 283 known arrhythmia, 
cardiomyopathy, or ion channel associated genes. We filtered the candidates to 
41 variants in 33 genes using zygosity, protein impact, database searches, and 
clinical association. Only 21 of 41 (51%) variants were validated by Sanger 
sequencing. We selected nine confirmed variants with minor allele frequencies 
<1% for family studies. The results identified LMNA c.357-2A>G, a novel 
heterozygous splice-site mutation as the primary mutation with rare or novel 
variants in HCN4, MYBPC3, PKP4, TMPO, TTN, DMPK and KCNJ10 as potential 
modifiers and a mechanism consistent with haploinsufficiency.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0155421
PMCID: PMC4868298
PMID: 27182706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.