---
reference_id: "PMID:34550374"
title: "Spread and Endemicity of Cholera in India: Factors Beyond the Numbers."
authors:
- Saha GK
- Ganguly NK
journal: J Infect Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiab436
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spread and Endemicity of Cholera in India: Factors Beyond the Numbers.
**Authors:** Saha GK, Ganguly NK
**Journal:** J Infect Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/infdis/jiab436](https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiab436)

## Content

1. J Infect Dis. 2021 Dec 20;224(12 Suppl 2):S710-S716. doi: 
10.1093/infdis/jiab436.

Spread and Endemicity of Cholera in India: Factors Beyond the Numbers.

Saha GK(1), Ganguly NK(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Apollo Hospitals Educational and Research Foundation, Delhi, India.
(2)Former DG, Indian Council of Medical Research, Delhi, India.

Cholera outbreaks currently account for 1.3 to 4.0 million cases and cause 
between 21 000 and 143 000 deaths worldwide. Cholera is preventable by proper 
sanitization and immunization; however, in many developing nations such as 
India, cholera disease is endemic. The surveillance system in India does not 
adequately capture the actual number of cases. As a result, it is important to 
utilize limited public health resources correctly in India and other developing 
counties more effectively to reach vulnerable communities. In this study, we 
analyze how studies make sense of cholera transmission and spread in India from 
1996 to 2015. Furthermore, we analyze how a more sensitive surveillance system 
can contribute to cholera eradication by giving rise to outbreak preparedness.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious 
Diseases Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiab436
PMCID: PMC8687089
PMID: 34550374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]