---
reference_id: "PMID:31717494"
title: Celiac Disease Monocytes Induce a Barrier Defect in Intestinal Epithelial Cells.
authors:
- Delbue D
- Cardoso-Silva D
- Branchi F
- Itzlinger A
- Letizia M
- Siegmund B
- Schumann M
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3390/ijms20225597
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Celiac Disease/pathology
- Cell Line
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Epithelial Cells/pathology
- Humans
- Intestinal Mucosa/pathology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Monocytes/pathology
- Tight Junctions/pathology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Celiac Disease Monocytes Induce a Barrier Defect in Intestinal Epithelial Cells.
**Authors:** Delbue D, Cardoso-Silva D, Branchi F, Itzlinger A, Letizia M, Siegmund B, Schumann M
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms20225597](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms20225597)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Nov 9;20(22):5597. doi: 10.3390/ijms20225597.

Celiac Disease Monocytes Induce a Barrier Defect in Intestinal Epithelial Cells.

Delbue D(1), Cardoso-Silva D(1), Branchi F(1), Itzlinger A(1), Letizia M(1),
Siegmund B(1), Schumann M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Infectious Diseases and Rheumatology, Campus
Benjamin Franklin, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 12203 Berlin, Germany.

Intestinal epithelial barrier function in celiac disease (CeD) patients is
altered. However, the mechanism underlying this effect is not fully understood.
The aim of the current study was to evaluate the role of monocytes in eliciting
the epithelial barrier defect in CeD. For this purpose, human monocytes were
isolated from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from active and
inactive CeD patients and healthy controls. PBMCs were sorted for expression of
CD14 and co-cultured with intestinal epithelial cells (IECs, Caco2BBe). Barrier
function, as well as tight junctional alterations, were determined. Monocytes
were characterized by profiling of cytokines and surface marker expression.
Transepithelial resistance was found to be decreased only in IECs that had been
exposed to celiac monocytes. In line with this, tight junctional alterations
were found by confocal laser scanning microscopy and Western blotting of ZO-1,
occludin, and claudin-5. Analysis of cytokine concentrations in monocyte
supernatants revealed higher expression of interleukin-6 and MCP-1 in celiac
monocytes. However, surface marker expression, as analyzed by FACS analysis
after immunostaining, did not reveal significant alterations in celiac
monocytes. In conclusion, CeD peripheral monocytes reveal an intrinsically
elevated pro-inflammatory cytokine pattern that is associated with the potential
of peripheral monocytes to affect barrier function by altering TJ composition.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20225597
PMCID: PMC6888450
PMID: 31717494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
