---
reference_id: "PMID:19210957"
title: "Creatine administration prevents Na+,K+-ATPase inhibition induced by intracerebroventricular administration of isovaleric acid in cerebral cortex of young rats."
authors:
- Ribeiro CA
- Leipnitz G
- Amaral AU
- de Bortoli G
- Seminotti B
- Wajner M
journal: Brain Res
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.01.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Creatine administration prevents Na+,K+-ATPase inhibition induced by intracerebroventricular administration of isovaleric acid in cerebral cortex of young rats.
**Authors:** Ribeiro CA, Leipnitz G, Amaral AU, de Bortoli G, Seminotti B, Wajner M
**Journal:** Brain Res (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.brainres.2009.01.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2009.01.005)

## Content

1. Brain Res. 2009 Mar 25;1262:81-8. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.01.005. Epub
2009  Jan 13.

Creatine administration prevents Na+,K+-ATPase inhibition induced by 
intracerebroventricular administration of isovaleric acid in cerebral cortex of 
young rats.

Ribeiro CA(1), Leipnitz G, Amaral AU, de Bortoli G, Seminotti B, Wajner M.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica, Instituto de Ciências Básicas da Saúde, UFRGS, 
Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.

Isovaleric acidemia (IVAcidemia) is an inborn error of metabolism due to 
deficiency of isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase activity, leading to predominant 
accumulation of isovaleric acid (IVA). Patients affected by IVAcidemia suffer 
from acute episodes of encephalopathy, whose underlying mechanisms are poorly 
known. In the present study we investigated whether an intracerebroventricular 
injection of IVA could compromise energy metabolism in cerebral cortex of young 
rats. IVA administration significantly inhibited (14)CO(2) production from 
acetate (22%) and citrate synthase activity (20%) in cerebral cortex homogenates 
prepared 24 h after injection. However, no alterations of these parameters were 
observed 2 h after injection. In contrast, no significant differences were found 
in the activities of succinate dehydrogenase, isocitrate dehydrogenase, electron 
transfer chain complexes or creatine kinase in rats sacrificed 2 or 24 h after 
IVA administration. Moreover, IVA injection significantly inhibited 
Na(+),K(+)-ATPase activity (25%) in cerebral cortex of rats 2 or 24 h after IVA 
administration, while pre-treatment of rats with creatine completely prevented 
the inhibitory effects of IVA on Na(+),K(+)-ATPase. In conclusion, in vivo 
administration of IVA inhibits the citric acid cycle probably through the enzyme 
citrate synthase, as well as Na(+),K(+)-ATPase, a crucial enzyme responsible for 
maintaining the basal potential membrane necessary for a normal 
neurotransmission. It is presumed that inhibition of these activities may be 
involved in the pathophysiology of the neurological dysfunction of isovaleric 
academic patients. The present findings are of particular interest because 
treatment with creatine supplementation may represent a potential novel adjuvant 
therapeutic strategy in IVAcidemia.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.01.005
PMID: 19210957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]