---
reference_id: "PMID:28345112"
title: Experience with direct acting anti-viral agents for treating hepatitis C virus infection in renal transplant recipients.
authors:
- Goel A
- Bhadauria DS
- Kaul A
- Prasad N
- Gupta A
- Sharma RK
- Rai P
- Aggarwal R
journal: Indian J Gastroenterol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s12664-017-0745-5
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Adult
- "Antiviral Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Biomarkers/blood
- Carbamates
- Creatinine/blood
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Female
- Hepacivirus/genetics
- "Hepatitis C/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Humans
- "Imidazoles/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- India
- Kidney Function Tests
- Kidney Transplantation
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Nephritis, Interstitial/chemically induced, diagnosis, prevention & control"
- Pyrrolidines
- "RNA, Viral/blood"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Sofosbuvir/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Time Factors
- "Valine/analogs & derivatives"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Experience with direct acting anti-viral agents for treating hepatitis C virus infection in renal transplant recipients.
**Authors:** Goel A, Bhadauria DS, Kaul A, Prasad N, Gupta A, Sharma RK, Rai P, Aggarwal R
**Journal:** Indian J Gastroenterol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12664-017-0745-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12664-017-0745-5)

## Content

1. Indian J Gastroenterol. 2017 Mar;36(2):137-140. doi:
10.1007/s12664-017-0745-5.  Epub 2017 Mar 27.

Experience with direct acting anti-viral agents for treating hepatitis C virus
infection in renal transplant recipients.

Goel A(1), Bhadauria DS(2), Kaul A(2), Prasad N(2), Gupta A(2), Sharma RK(2),
Rai P(1), Aggarwal R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of
Medical Sciences, Rae Bareli Road, Lucknow, 226 014, India.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical
Sciences, Rae Bareli Road, Lucknow, 226 014, India.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of
Medical Sciences, Rae Bareli Road, Lucknow, 226 014, India.
aggarwal.ra@gmail.com.

In recent past, direct-acting anti-viral drugs (DAAs) have become the standard
of care for the treatment of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. However, the
experience with the use of these drugs in Indian renal transplant recipients is
limited. We retrospectively reviewed our experience with DAA-based treatment for
HCV infection in such patients. Between April 2015 and December 2016, six adults
(median age 41 [range 34-52] years, male 5; GT1 2, GT3 3, and GT4 1; including
three with prior failed interferon-based treatment) had received
genotype-guided, DAA-based anti-HCV treatment 1 to 158 (median 15) months after
renal transplantation. Of them, four completed the planned 24-week treatment
without any significant adverse event. One of them had increase in serum
creatinine after 16 weeks of treatment with sofosbuvir and daclatasvir, with
acute interstitial nephritis on kidney biopsy; his renal function improved on
stopping the drugs. The other patient had preexisting mild renal dysfunction,
which worsened after 8 weeks of sofosbuvir-ledipasvir treatment; this did not
reverse on stopping treatment. All the six patients achieved undetectable HCV
RNA after 4 weeks of treatment and also achieved sustained virologic response,
i.e. lack of detectable HCV RNA in serum 12 weeks after stopping treatment.
Overall, DAA-based treatment was effective in treating HCV infection in our
renal transplant recipients; however, caution and monitoring of renal function
during such treatment is advisable in patients who have additional factors that
predispose to renal injury.

DOI: 10.1007/s12664-017-0745-5
PMID: 28345112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
