---
reference_id: "PMID:37075475"
title: "Seasonal activity patterns of host-seeking Ixodes scapularis (Acari: Ixodidae) in Minnesota, 2015-2017."
authors:
- Burtis JC
- Bjork J
- Johnson TL
- Schiffman E
- Neitzel D
- Eisen RJ
journal: J Med Entomol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/jme/tjad048
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Ixodes
- Ixodidae
- Seasons
- Minnesota/epidemiology
- Lyme Disease/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Seasonal activity patterns of host-seeking Ixodes scapularis (Acari: Ixodidae) in Minnesota, 2015-2017.
**Authors:** Burtis JC, Bjork J, Johnson TL, Schiffman E, Neitzel D, Eisen RJ
**Journal:** J Med Entomol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jme/tjad048](https://doi.org/10.1093/jme/tjad048)

## Content

1. J Med Entomol. 2023 Jul 12;60(4):769-777. doi: 10.1093/jme/tjad048.

Seasonal activity patterns of host-seeking Ixodes scapularis (Acari: Ixodidae) 
in Minnesota, 2015-2017.

Burtis JC(1), Bjork J(2), Johnson TL(1), Schiffman E(2), Neitzel D(2), Eisen 
RJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Vector-Borne Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, 3156 Rampart Road, Fort Collins, CO 80521, USA.
(2)Minnesota Department of Health, 625 North Robert Street, Saint Paul, MN 
55164, USA.

As the primary vector of Lyme disease spirochetes and several other medically 
significant pathogens, Ixodes scapularis presents a threat to public health in 
the United States. The incidence of Lyme disease is growing rapidly in upper 
midwestern states, particularly Michigan, Minnesota, and Wisconsin. The 
probability of a tick bite, acarological risk, is affected by the phenology of 
host-seeking I. scapularis. Phenology has been well-studied in northeastern 
states, but not in the Upper Midwest. We conducted biweekly drag sampling across 
4 woodland sites in Minnesota between April and November from 2015 to 2017. The 
majority of ticks collected were I. scapularis (82%). Adults were active 
throughout our entire 8-month collection season, with sporadic activity during 
the summer, larger peaks in activity observed in April, and less consistent and 
lower peaks observed in October. Nymphs were most active from May through 
August, with continuing low-level activity in October, and peak activity most 
commonly observed in June. The observed nymphal peak corresponded with the 
typical peak in reported human Lyme disease and anaplasmosis cases. These 
findings are consistent with previous studies from the Upper Midwest and 
highlight a risk of human exposure to I. scapularis at least from April through 
November. This information may aid in communicating the seasonality of 
acarological risk for those living in Minnesota and other upper midwestern 
states as well as being relevant to the assessment of the ecoepidemiology of 
Lyme disease and the modeling of transmission dynamics.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Entomological Society of 
America 2023.

DOI: 10.1093/jme/tjad048
PMCID: PMC10593201
PMID: 37075475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]