---
reference_id: "PMID:39521937"
title: JAK-STAT1 as therapeutic target for EGFR deficiency-associated inflammation and scarring alopecia.
authors:
- Strobl K
- Klufa J
- Jin R
- Artner-Gent L
- Krauß D
- Novoszel P
- Strobl J
- Stary G
- Vujic I
- Griss J
- Holcmann M
- Farlik M
- Homey B
- Sibilia M
- Bauer T
journal: EMBO Mol Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s44321-024-00166-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# JAK-STAT1 as therapeutic target for EGFR deficiency-associated inflammation and scarring alopecia.
**Authors:** Strobl K, Klufa J, Jin R, Artner-Gent L, Krauß D, Novoszel P, Strobl J, Stary G, Vujic I, Griss J, Holcmann M, Farlik M, Homey B, Sibilia M, Bauer T
**Journal:** EMBO Mol Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s44321-024-00166-3](https://doi.org/10.1038/s44321-024-00166-3)

## Content

1. EMBO Mol Med. 2024 Dec;16(12):3142-3168. doi: 10.1038/s44321-024-00166-3. Epub
 2024 Nov 9.

JAK-STAT1 as therapeutic target for EGFR deficiency-associated inflammation and 
scarring alopecia.

Strobl K(1), Klufa J(1), Jin R(1), Artner-Gent L(1), Krauß D(1), Novoszel P(1), 
Strobl J(2), Stary G(2), Vujic I(3), Griss J(2), Holcmann M(1), Farlik M(2), 
Homey B(4), Sibilia M(5), Bauer T(6).

Author information:
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Medical University of Vienna and Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, Vienna, 1090, Austria.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, 1090, 
Austria.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergy, Clinical Center 
Landstrasse, Vienna, 1030, Austria.
(4)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Düsseldorf, Medical Faculty, 
Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(5)Center for Cancer Research, Medical University of Vienna and Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, Vienna, 1090, Austria. maria.sibilia@meduniwien.ac.at.
(6)Center for Cancer Research, Medical University of Vienna and Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, Vienna, 1090, Austria. thomas.bauer@meduniwien.ac.at.

The hair follicle stem cell niche is an immune-privileged microenvironment, 
characterized by reduced antigen presentation, thus shielding against permanent 
immune-mediated tissue damage. In this study, we demonstrated the protective 
role of hair follicle-specific epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) against 
scarring hair follicle destruction. Mechanistically, disruption of EGFR 
signaling generated a cell-intrinsic hypersensitivity within the JAK-STAT1 
pathway, which, synergistically with interferon gamma expressing CD8 T-cell and 
NK-cell-mediated inflammation, compromised the stem cell niche. Hair 
follicle-specific genetic depletion of either JAK1/2 or STAT1 or therapeutic 
inhibition of JAK1/2 ameliorated the inflammation, restored skin barrier 
function and activated the residual stem cells to resume hair growth in mouse 
models of epidermal and hair follicle-specific EGFR deletion. Skin biopsies from 
EGFR inhibitor-treated and cicatricial alopecia patients revealed an active 
JAK-STAT1 signaling signature along with upregulation of antigen presentation 
and downregulation of key components of the EGFR pathway. Our findings offer 
molecular insights and highlight a mechanism-based therapeutic strategy for 
addressing chronic folliculitis associated with EGFR-inhibitor anti-cancer 
therapy and cicatricial alopecia.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s44321-024-00166-3
PMCID: PMC11628629
PMID: 39521937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure and competing interests statement. 
The authors declare no competing interests.