---
reference_id: "PMID:15806441"
title: "Autosomal recessive primary microcephaly (MCPH): a review of clinical, molecular, and evolutionary findings."
authors:
- Woods CG
- Bond J
- Enard W
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1086/429930
keywords:
- Animals
- Biological Evolution
- "Brain/anatomy & histology, embryology"
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- Cytoskeletal Proteins
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Genetic Linkage
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/embryology, metabolism"
- "Microcephaly/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Organ Size
- Phenotype
- Phylogeny
- "Selection, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal recessive primary microcephaly (MCPH): a review of clinical, molecular, and evolutionary findings.
**Authors:** Woods CG, Bond J, Enard W
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1086/429930](https://doi.org/10.1086/429930)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2005 May;76(5):717-28. doi: 10.1086/429930. Epub 2005 Mar 31.

Autosomal recessive primary microcephaly (MCPH): a review of clinical, 
molecular, and evolutionary findings.

Woods CG(1), Bond J, Enard W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom. cw347@cam.ac.uk

Autosomal recessive primary microcephaly (MCPH) is a neurodevelopmental 
disorder. It is characterized by two principal features, microcephaly present at 
birth and nonprogressive mental retardation. The microcephaly is the consequence 
of a small but architecturally normal brain, and it is the cerebral cortex that 
shows the greatest size reduction. There are at least seven MCPH loci, and four 
of the genes have been identified: MCPH1, encoding Microcephalin; MCPH3, 
encoding CDK5RAP2; MCPH5, encoding ASPM; and MCPH6, encoding CENPJ. These 
findings are starting to have an impact on the clinical management of families 
affected with MCPH. Present data suggest that MCPH is the consequence of 
deficient neurogenesis within the neurogenic epithelium. Evolutionary interest 
in MCPH has been sparked by the suggestion that changes in the MCPH genes might 
also be responsible for the increase in brain size during human evolution. 
Indeed, evolutionary analyses of Microcephalin and ASPM reveal evidence for 
positive selection during human and great ape evolution. So an understanding of 
this rare genetic disorder may offer us significant insights into neurogenic 
mitosis and the evolution of the most striking differences between us and our 
closest living relatives: brain size and cognitive ability.

DOI: 10.1086/429930
PMCID: PMC1199363
PMID: 15806441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]