---
reference_id: "PMID:11440917"
title: Defects in insulin receptor signaling in vivo in the polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).
authors:
- Dunaif A
- Wu X
- Lee A
- Diamanti-Kandarakis E
journal: Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1152/ajpendo.2001.281.2.E392
keywords:
- Adult
- Biopsy
- Blood Glucose/metabolism
- Body Mass Index
- "Chromatography, Thin Layer"
- Female
- Glucose/pharmacokinetics
- Glucose Clamp Technique
- Humans
- "Insulin/blood, pharmacology"
- Insulin Receptor Substrate Proteins
- Insulin Resistance
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism, pathology"
- Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/metabolism
- "Phosphoproteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Polycystic Ovary Syndrome/metabolism, pathology"
- "RNA, Messenger/metabolism"
- "Receptor, Insulin/metabolism"
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defects in insulin receptor signaling in vivo in the polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).
**Authors:** Dunaif A, Wu X, Lee A, Diamanti-Kandarakis E
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpendo.2001.281.2.E392](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpendo.2001.281.2.E392)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Aug;281(2):E392-9. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.2001.281.2.E392.

Defects in insulin receptor signaling in vivo in the polycystic ovary syndrome
(PCOS).

Dunaif A(1), Wu X, Lee A, Diamanti-Kandarakis E.

Author information:
(1)Division of Women's Health, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) are insulin resistant secondary to a
postbinding defect in insulin signaling. Sequential euglycemic glucose clamp
studies at 40 and 400 mU. m(-2). min(-1) insulin doses with serial skeletal
muscle biopsies were performed in PCOS and age-, weight-, and ethnicity-matched
control women. Steady-state insulin levels did not differ, but insulin-mediated
glucose disposal was significantly decreased in PCOS women (P < 0.05). Insulin
receptor substrate (IRS)-1-associated phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3K)
activity was significantly decreased in PCOS (n = 12) compared with control
skeletal muscle (n = 8; P < 0.05). There was no significant difference in the
abundance of IR, IRS-1, or the p85 regulatory subunit of PI 3K in PCOS (n = 14)
compared with control (n = 12) muscle. The abundance of IRS-2 was significantly
increased (P < 0.05) in PCOS skeletal muscle, suggesting a compensatory change.
We conclude that there is a physiologically relevant defect in insulin receptor
signaling in PCOS that is independent of obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpendo.2001.281.2.E392
PMID: 11440917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
