---
reference_id: "PMID:17021321"
title: Lenalidomide in the myelodysplastic syndrome with chromosome 5q deletion.
authors:
- List A
- Dewald G
- Bennett J
- Giagounidis A
- Raza A
- Feldman E
- Powell B
- Greenberg P
- Thomas D
- Stone R
- Reeder C
- Wride K
- Patin J
- Schmidt M
- Zeldis J
- Knight R
- Myelodysplastic Syndrome-003 Study Investigators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa061292
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Bone Marrow/pathology
- Chromosome Aberrations
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 5/genetics"
- Cytogenetic Analysis
- "Erythrocyte Transfusion/statistics & numerical data"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Lenalidomide
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Myelodysplastic Syndromes/drug therapy, genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Remission Induction
- "Thalidomide/administration & dosage, adverse effects, analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lenalidomide in the myelodysplastic syndrome with chromosome 5q deletion.
**Authors:** List A, Dewald G, Bennett J, Giagounidis A, Raza A, Feldman E, Powell B, Greenberg P, Thomas D, Stone R, Reeder C, Wride K, Patin J, Schmidt M, Zeldis J, Knight R, Myelodysplastic Syndrome-003 Study Investigators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa061292](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa061292)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2006 Oct 5;355(14):1456-65. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa061292.

Lenalidomide in the myelodysplastic syndrome with chromosome 5q deletion.

List A(1), Dewald G, Bennett J, Giagounidis A, Raza A, Feldman E, Powell B, 
Greenberg P, Thomas D, Stone R, Reeder C, Wride K, Patin J, Schmidt M, Zeldis J, 
Knight R; Myelodysplastic Syndrome-003 Study Investigators.

Author information:
(1)University of South Florida College of Medicine and Malignant Hematology 
Division, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, FL 
33612-9497, USA. heberten@moffitt.usf.edu

Comment in
    Nat Clin Pract Oncol. 2007 Jul;4(7):396-7. doi: 10.1038/ncponc0823.

BACKGROUND: Severe, often refractory anemia is characteristic of the 
myelodysplastic syndrome associated with chromosome 5q31 deletion. We 
investigated whether lenalidomide (CC5013) could reduce the transfusion 
requirement and suppress the abnormal 5q31- clone in patients with this 
disorder.
METHODS: One hundred forty-eight patients received 10 mg of lenalidomide for 21 
days every 4 weeks or daily. Hematologic, bone marrow, and cytogenetic changes 
were assessed after 24 weeks of treatment by an intention-to-treat analysis.
RESULTS: Among the 148 patients, 112 had a reduced need for transfusions (76%; 
95% confidence interval [CI], 68 to 82) and 99 patients (67%; 95% CI, 59 to 74) 
no longer required transfusions, regardless of the karyotype complexity. The 
response to lenalidomide was rapid (median time to response, 4.6 weeks; range, 1 
to 49) and sustained; the median duration of transfusion independence had not 
been reached after a median of 104 weeks of follow-up. The maximum hemoglobin 
concentration reached a median of 13.4 g per deciliter (range, 9.2 to 18.6), 
with a corresponding median rise of 5.4 g per deciliter (range, 1.1 to 11.4), as 
compared with the baseline nadir value before transfusion. Among 85 patients who 
could be evaluated, 62 had cytogenetic improvement, and 38 of the 62 had a 
complete cytogenetic remission. There was complete resolution of cytologic 
abnormalities in 38 of 106 patients whose serial bone marrow samples could be 
evaluated. Moderate-to-severe neutropenia (in 55% of patients) and 
thrombocytopenia (in 44%) were the most common reasons for interrupting 
treatment or adjusting the dose of lenalidomide.
CONCLUSIONS: Lenalidomide can reduce transfusion requirements and reverse 
cytologic and cytogenetic abnormalities in patients who have the myelodysplastic 
syndrome with the 5q31 deletion. (ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT00065156 
[ClinicalTrials.gov].).

Copyright 2006 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa061292
PMID: 17021321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]