---
reference_id: "PMID:11723826"
title: "[Elastase inhibitors]."
authors:
- Reboud-Ravaux M
journal: J Soc Biol
year: '2001'
keywords:
- Animals
- Coumarins/pharmacology
- "Cytoplasmic Granules/drug effects, enzymology, metabolism"
- Drug Design
- Elastin/metabolism
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- "Leukocyte Elastase/antagonists & inhibitors, chemistry, physiology"
- Molecular Structure
- "Neutrophils/enzymology, metabolism"
- Pancreas/enzymology
- "Pancreatic Elastase/antagonists & inhibitors, physiology"
- Phagosomes/enzymology
- "Pulmonary Emphysema/enzymology, etiology"
- "Serine Proteinase Inhibitors/chemical synthesis, pharmacology"
- Structure-Activity Relationship
- Substrate Specificity
- alpha 1-Antitrypsin/physiology
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/complications, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Elastase inhibitors].
**Authors:** Reboud-Ravaux M
**Journal:** J Soc Biol (2001)

## Content

1. J Soc Biol. 2001;195(2):143-50.

[Elastase inhibitors].

[Article in French]

Reboud-Ravaux M(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire d'Enzymologie Moléculaire et Fonctionnelle, Département de 
Biologie Cellulaire Institut Jacques Monod, CNRS-Universités Paris VI et VII, 2 
place Jussieu, 75251 Paris. reboud@ccr.jussieu.fr

The serine proteinase elastase is located in the azurophil granules of mature 
circulating polymorphonuclear neutrophils. This neutrophil elastase or NE is a 
potent non specific serine protease which plays a role as bactericidal agent and 
in the degradation of immune complexes by intraphagosomal processes. It promotes 
inflammation when the granule contents are secreted in the extracellular 
environment. In certain pathological circumstances, an imbalance between NE and 
its major plasmatic inhibitor alpha 1-PI (formerly, alpha 1-antitrypsin) leads 
to abnormal tissue destruction and disease development. Genetic or acquired 
alpha 1-PI deficiency is thought to be involved in the pathogenesis of pulmonary 
emphysema. A variety of degenerative and degradative disorders are also 
associated to uncontrolled proteolysis by NE (rheumatoid arthritis, 
glomerulonephritis, adult respiratory distress symptom, psoriasis, cancer). 
Numerous inhibitors of NE have been reported. Various molecules are currently 
undergoing clinical trials for emphysema and other pulmonary diseases.

PMID: 11723826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]