---
reference_id: "PMID:10713890"
title: Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome resulting from mutation of the FKHL7 gene on chromosome 6p25.
authors:
- Mirzayans F
- Gould DB
- Héon E
- Billingsley GD
- Cheung JC
- Mears AJ
- Walter MA
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200354
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome resulting from mutation of the FKHL7 gene on chromosome 6p25.
**Authors:** Mirzayans F, Gould DB, Héon E, Billingsley GD, Cheung JC, Mears AJ, Walter MA
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200354](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200354)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2000 Jan;8(1):71-4. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200354.

Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome resulting from mutation of the FKHL7 gene on chromosome 
6p25.

Mirzayans F(1), Gould DB, Héon E, Billingsley GD, Cheung JC, Mears AJ, Walter 
MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

Mutations in the forkhead-like 7 (FKHL7) gene have been recently shown to cause 
juvenile glaucoma and anterior segment anomalies. We report on a 
three-generation family with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS), harboring an 
alteration in the FKHL7 gene. Genetic linkage analyses excluded the ARS 
phenotype from chromosomes 4q25 and 13q14, the locations of the PITX2 and RIEG2 
loci, respectively. Evidence of linkage was observed with markers at 6p25, near 
the FKHL7 gene. Direct sequencing of FKHL7 detected a C67T mutation that 
segregated with the ARS phenotype in this family, but was not detected in over 
80 control chromosomes. This mutation is predicted to cause a nonsense mutation 
of the FKHL7 protein (Gln23Stop) upstream of the forkhead DNA-binding domain, 
and thus to generate a truncated FKHL7 protein product. This discovery broadly 
implicates FKHL7 in ocular, craniofacial, dental, and umbilical development.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5200354
PMID: 10713890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]