---
reference_id: "PMID:31884868"
title: "Review of Cerliponase Alfa: Recombinant Human Enzyme Replacement Therapy for Late-Infantile Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis Type 2."
authors:
- Lewis G
- Morrill AM
- Conway-Allen SL
- Kim B
journal: J Child Neurol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1177/0883073819895694
keywords:
- Dipeptidyl-Peptidases and Tripeptidyl-Peptidases/therapeutic use
- Disease Progression
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy/methods
- Humans
- Neuronal Ceroid-Lipofuscinoses/drug therapy
- Recombinant Proteins/therapeutic use
- Treatment Outcome
- Tripeptidyl-Peptidase 1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Review of Cerliponase Alfa: Recombinant Human Enzyme Replacement Therapy for Late-Infantile Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis Type 2.
**Authors:** Lewis G, Morrill AM, Conway-Allen SL, Kim B
**Journal:** J Child Neurol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0883073819895694](https://doi.org/10.1177/0883073819895694)

## Content

1. J Child Neurol. 2020 Apr;35(5):348-353. doi: 10.1177/0883073819895694. Epub
2019  Dec 29.

Review of Cerliponase Alfa: Recombinant Human Enzyme Replacement Therapy for 
Late-Infantile Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinosis Type 2.

Lewis G(1)(2), Morrill AM(1), Conway-Allen SL(1), Kim B(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department Pharmacy Practice, MCPHS University School of 
Pharmacy-Worcester/Manchester, Worcester, MA, USA.
(2)Sanofi Genzyme, Cambridge, MA, USA.

The objective of this review is to summarize the pharmacology, efficacy, and 
safety of cerliponase alfa for the treatment of late infantile neuronal ceroid 
lipofuscinosis type 2 (CLN2). Cerliponase alfa is recombinant human tripeptidyl 
peptidase 1 enzyme replacement therapy. A phase 1/2 trial established the 
efficacy and safety of cerliponase alfa for treatment of neuronal ceroid 
lipofuscinosis type 2. Treatment with intracerebroventricular cerliponase alfa 
resulted in slower decline of motor and language functions compared with natural 
history controls. Common adverse events include convulsions, electrocardiography 
abnormalities, pyrexia, vomiting, and upper respiratory tract infections. 
Intracerebroventricular device-related adverse events also occur. Cerliponase 
alfa is the first therapy for neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis type 2 that targets 
the disease etiology. Cerliponase alfa is effective in delaying the progression 
of motor language decline for patients with neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis type 
2.

DOI: 10.1177/0883073819895694
PMID: 31884868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]