---
reference_id: "PMID:38772729"
title: "Number of tetanus toxoid injections before birth and associated factors among pregnant women in low and middle income countries: Negative binomial poisson regression."
authors:
- Zegeye AF
- Tamir TT
- Mekonen EG
- Ali MS
- Gonete AT
- Techane MA
- Wassie M
- Kassie AT
- Ahmed MA
- Tsega SS
- Wassie YA
- Tekeba B
- Workneh BS
journal: Hum Vaccin Immunother
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/21645515.2024.2352905
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Number of tetanus toxoid injections before birth and associated factors among pregnant women in low and middle income countries: Negative binomial poisson regression.
**Authors:** Zegeye AF, Tamir TT, Mekonen EG, Ali MS, Gonete AT, Techane MA, Wassie M, Kassie AT, Ahmed MA, Tsega SS, Wassie YA, Tekeba B, Workneh BS
**Journal:** Hum Vaccin Immunother (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/21645515.2024.2352905](https://doi.org/10.1080/21645515.2024.2352905)

## Content

1. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2024 Dec 31;20(1):2352905. doi: 
10.1080/21645515.2024.2352905. Epub 2024 May 21.

Number of tetanus toxoid injections before birth and associated factors among 
pregnant women in low and middle income countries: Negative binomial poisson 
regression.

Zegeye AF(1), Tamir TT(2), Mekonen EG(3), Ali MS(2), Gonete AT(2), Techane 
MA(2), Wassie M(4), Kassie AT(5), Ahmed MA(1), Tsega SS(1), Wassie YA(1), Tekeba 
B(2), Workneh BS(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Nursing, School of Nursing, College of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, University of Gondar, Gondar, Ethiopia.
(2)Department of Pediatrics and Child Health Nursing, School of Nursing, College 
of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Gondar, Gondar, Ethiopia.
(3)Department of Surgical Nursing, School of Nursing, College of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, University of Gondar, Gondar, Ethiopia.
(4)School of Nursing, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of 
Gondar, Gondar, Ethiopia.
(5)Department of Clinical Midwifery, School of Midwifery, College of Medicine 
and Health Sciences, University of Gondar, Gondar, Ethiopia.
(6)Department of Emergency and Critical Care Nursing, School of Nursing, College 
of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Gondar, Gondar, Ethiopia.

BACKGROUND: In low- and middle-income countries where vaccination rates are low, 
tetanus is still an important threat to public health. Although maternal and 
neonatal tetanus remains a major global health concern, its magnitude and 
determinates are not well studied. Therefore, this study aimed to assess the 
number of tetanus toxoid injections and associated factors among pregnant women 
in low- and middle-income countries.
METHODS: Data from the most recent Demographic and Health Surveys, which covered 
60 low- and middle-income countries from 2010 to 2022, was used for secondary 
data analysis. The study included a total of 118,704 pregnant women. A 
statistical software package, STATA 14, was used to analyze the data. A negative 
binomial regression of a cross-sectional study was carried out. Factors 
associated with the number of tetanus vaccinations were declared significant at 
a p-value of < 0.05. The incidence rate ratio and confidence interval were used 
to interpret the results. A model with the smallest Akaike Information Criterion 
and Bayesian Information Criterion values and the highest log likelihood was 
considered the best-fit model for this study.
RESULTS: In low- and middle-income countries, 26.0% of pregnant women took at 
least two doses of the tetanus toxoid vaccine. Factors such as maternal 
education, primary (IRR = 1.22, 95% CI: 1.17, 1.26), secondary (IRR = 1.19, 95% 
CI: 1.15, 1.23), higher (IRR = 1.16, 95% CI: 1.12, 1.20), employment (IRR = 
1.11, 95% CI: 1.09, 1.13), 1-3 ANC visits (IRR = 2.49, 95% CI: 2.41, 2.57), ≥4 
visits (IRR = 2.94, 95% CI: 2.84, 3.03), wealth index (IRR = 1.06; 95% CI: 
11.04, 1.08), ≥birth order (IRR = 1.04, 95% CI: 1.02, 1.27), distance to health 
facility (IRR = 1.02, 95% CI: 1.00, 1.03), and health insurance coverage (IRR = 
1.08; 95% CI: 1.06, 1.10) had a significant association with the number of 
tetanus vaccinations among pregnant women.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS: This study concludes that the number of tetanus 
toxoid vaccinations among pregnant women in low- and middle-income countries is 
low. In the negative binomial model, the frequency of tetanus vaccinations has a 
significant association with maternal employment, educational status, wealth 
index, antenatal care visits, birth order, distance from a health facility, and 
health insurance. Therefore, the ministries of health in low and middle-income 
countries should give attention to those women who had no antenatal care visits 
and women from poor wealth quantiles while designing policies and strategies.

DOI: 10.1080/21645515.2024.2352905
PMCID: PMC11110706
PMID: 38772729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).