---
reference_id: "PMID:42234924"
title: Tip Lesion Variant of Focal Segmental Glomerulosclerosis in Familial Relapsing Polychondritis.
authors:
- Ghalia Khellaf
- Hadj Sahraoui R
- Chelghoum S
- Debchi L
- Djennane N
- Benziane A
journal: Iran J Kidney Dis
year: '2026'
doi: 10.61882/ijkd.3.03.8871
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tip Lesion Variant of Focal Segmental Glomerulosclerosis in Familial Relapsing Polychondritis.
**Authors:** Ghalia Khellaf, Hadj Sahraoui R, Chelghoum S, Debchi L, Djennane N, Benziane A
**Journal:** Iran J Kidney Dis (2026)
**DOI:** [10.61882/ijkd.3.03.8871](https://doi.org/10.61882/ijkd.3.03.8871)

## Content

1. Iran J Kidney Dis. 2026 May 31;20(3):168-174. doi: 10.61882/ijkd.3.03.8871.

Tip Lesion Variant of Focal Segmental Glomerulosclerosis in Familial Relapsing 
Polychondritis.

Ghalia Khellaf(1), Hadj Sahraoui R(2), Chelghoum S(3), Debchi L(4), Djennane 
N(5), Benziane A(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Health and Sciences Youcef El Khattib, Faculty of Medicine, 
Algiers, Algeria. AND Nephrology Department, Bab El Oued University Hospital 
Center, Algiers, Algeria.
(2)University of Health and Sciences Youcef El Khattib, Faculty of Medicine, 
Algiers, Algeria. AND Pathology Department Salim Zemirli Hospital, Algiers, 
Algeria.
(3)University of Health and Sciences Youcef El Khattib, Faculty of Medicine, 
Algiers, Algeria .AND Nephrology Department, Nafissa Hamoud Hospital, Algiers, 
Algeria.
(4)1University of Health and Sciences Youcef El Khattib, Faculty of Medicine, 
Algiers, Algeria. AND Nephrology Department, Bab El Oued University Hospital 
Center, Algiers, Algeria.
(5)University of Health and Sciences Youcef El Khattib, Faculty of Medicine, 
Algiers, Algeria. AND Pathology Department, Bab El Oued University Hospital 
Center, Algiers, Algeria.

Relapsing polychondritis (RP) is a rare autoimmune disorder with minimal 
reported renal involvement. We describe the first case of tip lesion variant of 
focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) in a 60-year-old male with familial 
RP. The patient initially presented with nephrotic syndrome concomitant with RP, 
which was diagnosed 17 years ago; renal biopsy revealed minimal change disease 
at that time. Over the subsequent 17 years, he experienced four RP flares 
without nephrotic syndrome recurrence until his recent presentation with severe 
nephrotic syndrome. Repeated renal biopsy confirmed tip lesion variant of FSGS, 
demonstrating excellent response to corticosteroid therapy with prednisolone 1 
mg/kg/day; proteinuria declined from 7g/24h to 0.98g/24h and serum albumin 
increased from 0.9g/dL to 2.2g/dL within three months. This case underscores the 
importance of considering FSGS in RP-associated nephrotic syndrome and suggests 
potential shared immune/genetic mechanisms. To our knowledge, this represents 
both the first report of tip lesion FSGS in RP and the first documented familial 
RP case with FSGS development.

DOI: 10.61882/ijkd.3.03.8871
PMID: 42234924