---
reference_id: "PMID:14969069"
title: Disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drug therapy and structural damage in early rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Mullan RH
- Bresnihan B
journal: Clin Exp Rheumatol
year: '2003'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drug therapy and structural damage in early rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Mullan RH, Bresnihan B
**Journal:** Clin Exp Rheumatol (2003)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2003 Sep-Oct;21(5 Suppl 31):S158-64.

Disease-modifying anti-rheumatic drug therapy and structural damage in early 
rheumatoid arthritis.

Mullan RH(1), Bresnihan B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, St Vincent's University Hospital, Elm Park, 
Dublin 4, Ireland. mrronan@hotmail.com

The appearance of measurable structural damage in rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is 
an indicator of disease severity and future disability. Disease-modifying 
anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs) used in combination appear to be more effective 
than monotherapies at reducing the rate of progressive joint damage during 
randomized controlled trials. In clinical practice, however, combination DMARD 
therapy is still largely reserved for patients who have failed to respond to 
monotherapy. High dose corticosteroid, when given in early disease with 
combination DMARD therapy, may continue to ameliorate disease severity and 
progression for years after discontinuation of the high dose. To date, no DMARD 
combination has totally arrested joint damage in all patients with early RA. 
Future randomised controlled trials should always include prospective 
radiographic data as a primary outcome measure.

PMID: 14969069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]