---
reference_id: "PMID:25655250"
title: "Pemphigus vulgaris: an evidence-based treatment update."
authors:
- Zhao CY
- Murrell DF
journal: Drugs
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s40265-015-0353-6
keywords:
- "Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Non-Steroidal/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- "Glucocorticoids/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Humans
- "Immunologic Factors/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Pemphigus/drug therapy, immunology"
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pemphigus vulgaris: an evidence-based treatment update.
**Authors:** Zhao CY, Murrell DF
**Journal:** Drugs (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40265-015-0353-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40265-015-0353-6)

## Content

1. Drugs. 2015 Feb;75(3):271-84. doi: 10.1007/s40265-015-0353-6.

Pemphigus vulgaris: an evidence-based treatment update.

Zhao CY(1), Murrell DF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, St George Hospital, Gray St, Sydney, NSW, 2217, 
Australia.

BACKGROUND: While a variety of intervention options have been described for 
pemphigus vulgaris, the optimal treatment strategy has not been established.
OBJECTIVES: The objective of this systematic review is to assess the literature 
on the efficacy and safety of interventions for the treatment of pemphigus 
vulgaris.
DATA SOURCES: Five electronic databases were searched, including The Cochrane 
Skin Group's Specialized Register, The Cochrane Central Register of Controlled 
Trials (CENTRAL), EMBASE, MEDLINE and Latin American and Caribbean Health 
science Information database (LILACS). Five trial registers as well as reference 
lists of included RCTs were also searched.
STUDY ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA: Any published randomised controlled trial (RCT) on 
intervention for pemphigus vulgaris was included, provided the diagnosis of 
pemphigus vulgaris was confirmed with appropriate clinical features, 
histopathology and immunofluorescence studies. Studies which included forms of 
pemphigus other than pemphigus vulgaris were excluded.
INTERVENTIONS: Altogether 18 RCTs were identified including 16 distinct 
interventions.
STUDY APPRAISAL AND SYNTHESIS METHODS: Included studies were assessed for 
patient selection, methods of randomisation, blinding, follow-up and selective 
reporting.
RESULTS: Current evidence is incomplete and inconclusive. The interventions 
which appear promising, but will require further evaluation include adjuvant 
mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), azathioprine, intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG), 
sulfasalazine and pentoxifylline, infliximab, epidermal growth factor and 
pimecrolimus. Interventions with inconclusive evidence include high (120-180 mg) 
versus low (45-60 mg) prednisone dosage, pulsed dexamethasone, cyclophosphamide, 
dexamethasone-cyclophosphamide pulse therapy (DCP), cyclosporine, dapsone, 
etanercept, acyclovir and tacrolimus.
LIMITATIONS: Our review is limited by the small number of high-quality RCTs and 
variety of outcome measures, precluding the performing of a meta-analysis.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS OF KEY FINDINGS: The optimal treatment strategy for 
pemphigus vulgaris remains unclear. Higher quality RCTs are required in the 
future to re-evaluate many interventions and to explore other unstudied 
interventions.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-015-0353-6
PMID: 25655250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]