---
reference_id: "PMID:30096703"
title: Possible immune adverse events as predictors of durable response to BRAF inhibitors in patients with BRAF V600-mutant metastatic melanoma.
authors:
- Ben-Betzalel G
- Baruch EN
- Boursi B
- Steinberg-Silman Y
- Asher N
- Shapira-Frommer R
- Schachter J
- Markel G
journal: Eur J Cancer
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2018.06.030
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Arthralgia/chemically induced
- "Azetidines/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Female
- Humans
- "Imidazoles/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- "MAP Kinase Kinase 1/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Male
- "Melanoma/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Metastasis
- "Oximes/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Piperidines/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- "Pyridones/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Pyrimidinones/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Retrospective Studies
- Skin Diseases/chemically induced
- "Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Vemurafenib/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Possible immune adverse events as predictors of durable response to BRAF inhibitors in patients with BRAF V600-mutant metastatic melanoma.
**Authors:** Ben-Betzalel G, Baruch EN, Boursi B, Steinberg-Silman Y, Asher N, Shapira-Frommer R, Schachter J, Markel G
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejca.2018.06.030](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2018.06.030)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer. 2018 Sep;101:229-235. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2018.06.030. Epub 2018
 Aug 7.

Possible immune adverse events as predictors of durable response to BRAF
inhibitors in patients with BRAF V600-mutant metastatic melanoma.

Ben-Betzalel G(1), Baruch EN(2), Boursi B(3), Steinberg-Silman Y(4), Asher N(4),
Shapira-Frommer R(4), Schachter J(5), Markel G(6).

Author information:
(1)Ella Lemelbaum Institute for Immuno-Oncology, Sheba Medical Center,
Ramat-Gan, Israel. Electronic address: Guy.ben-betzalel@sheba.health.gov.il.
(2)Ella Lemelbaum Institute for Immuno-Oncology, Sheba Medical Center,
Ramat-Gan, Israel; Department of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology, Sackler
Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Israel.
(3)Division of Oncology, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat-Gan, Israel.
(4)Ella Lemelbaum Institute for Immuno-Oncology, Sheba Medical Center,
Ramat-Gan, Israel.
(5)Ella Lemelbaum Institute for Immuno-Oncology, Sheba Medical Center,
Ramat-Gan, Israel; Department of Oncology, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Israel.
(6)Ella Lemelbaum Institute for Immuno-Oncology, Sheba Medical Center,
Ramat-Gan, Israel; Department of Clinical Microbiology and Immunology, Sackler
Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Israel; Talpiot Medical Leadership
Program, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat-Gan, Israel.

Comment in
    Eur J Cancer. 2021 Apr;147:58-59. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2021.01.026.

BRAF inhibitors (BRAFi) and MEK inhibitors (MEKi) are among the cornerstones of
metastatic melanoma therapy demonstrating excellent response rates with duration
of 7-12 m. Long-term benefit from these agents was reported in patients with
normal lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and less than three disease sites. However, a
treatment-dependent marker for long-term efficacy is lacking. Data suggest that
immune-related adverse events (irAEs) are associated with clinical benefit in
patients treated with immunotherapy and that response to BRAF/MEK therapy may
have an underlying immune mechanism. We hypothesised that AEs with an underlying
immune mechanism may be associated with a durable response to targeted therapy.
We retrospectively identified a cohort of 78 BRAF V600-mutant metastatic
melanoma patients treated with BRAFi or BRAFi + MEKi between November 2010 and
November 2013. Four treatment-related AEs including vitiligo, uveitis, erythema
nodosum and keratitis sicca were defined as irAEs of interest. Retrospective
analysis of AEs in relationship to progression-free survival (PFS), disease
burden and LDH levels was performed. Median PFS (mPFS) for all patients was 7.5
months with responses ongoing in eight patients as of April 2017. Ten patients
were identified with the AEs defined previously. Cox regression analysis
revealed a very strong association between those AEs and PFS; mPFS was 42.8 m in
patients with at least one AE versus 6.1 m in those without an AE (hazard ratio
[HR] 0.22, p = 0.002). This association was independent of LDH levels and
disease burden (HR 0.24, p = 0.035). This analysis demonstrates a strong
association between immune AEs and durable response to targeted therapy and may
provide a treatment-related biomarker to estimate the outcome of therapy.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2018.06.030
PMID: 30096703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
