---
reference_id: "PMID:27587986"
title: "Arthrogryposis as a Syndrome: Gene Ontology Analysis."
authors:
- Hall JG
- Kiefer J
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1159/000446617
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arthrogryposis as a Syndrome: Gene Ontology Analysis.
**Authors:** Hall JG, Kiefer J
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000446617](https://doi.org/10.1159/000446617)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2016 Jul;7(3):101-9. doi: 10.1159/000446617. Epub 2016 Jun 7.

Arthrogryposis as a Syndrome: Gene Ontology Analysis.

Hall JG(1), Kiefer J(2).

Author information:
(1)Departments of a Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia and BC 
Children's Hospital, Vancouver, B.C., Canada; Departments of Pediatrics, 
University of British Columbia and BC Children's Hospital, Vancouver, B.C., 
Canada.
(2)Translational Genomics Research Institute (TGen), Phoenix, Ariz., USA.

Arthrogryposis by definition has multiple congenital contractures. All types of 
arthrogryposis have decreased in utero fetal movement. Because so many things 
are involved in normal fetal movement, there are many causes and processes that 
can go awry. In this era of molecular genetics, we have tried to place the known 
mutated genes seen in genetic forms of arthrogryposis into biological processes 
or cellular functions as defined by gene ontology. We hope this leads to better 
identification of all interacting pathways and processes involved in the 
development of fetal movement in order to improve diagnosis of the genetic forms 
of arthrogryposis, to lead to the development of molecular therapies, and to 
help better define the natural history of various types of arthrogryposis.

DOI: 10.1159/000446617
PMCID: PMC4988256
PMID: 27587986