---
reference_id: "PMID:37008391"
title: "New Noncoding Base Pair Mutation at the Identical Locus as the Original NCMD/MCDR1 in a Mexican Family, Suggesting a Mutational Hotspot."
authors:
- Small KW
- Van de Sompele S
- Avetisjan J
- Udar N
- Agemy S
- De Baere E
- Shaya FS
journal: J Vitreoretin Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1177/24741264221129432
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New Noncoding Base Pair Mutation at the Identical Locus as the Original NCMD/MCDR1 in a Mexican Family, Suggesting a Mutational Hotspot.
**Authors:** Small KW, Van de Sompele S, Avetisjan J, Udar N, Agemy S, De Baere E, Shaya FS
**Journal:** J Vitreoretin Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1177/24741264221129432](https://doi.org/10.1177/24741264221129432)

## Content

1. J Vitreoretin Dis. 2023 Jan 2;7(1):33-42. doi: 10.1177/24741264221129432. 
eCollection 2023 Jan-Feb.

New Noncoding Base Pair Mutation at the Identical Locus as the Original 
NCMD/MCDR1 in a Mexican Family, Suggesting a Mutational Hotspot.

Small KW(1)(2), Van de Sompele S(3), Avetisjan J(1)(2), Udar N(1)(2), Agemy 
S(4), De Baere E(3), Shaya FS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Macula and Retina Institute, Glendale and Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Molecular Insight Research Foundation, Glendale and Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Center for Medical Genetics Ghent (CMGG), Department of Biomolecular 
Medicine, Ghent University, and Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(4)New York Retina Consultants PLLC, New York, NY, USA.

PURPOSE: To clinically and molecularly study a newly found family with North 
Carolina macular dystrophy (NCMD/MCDR1) from Mexico.
METHODS: This retrospective study comprised 6 members of a 3-generation Mexican 
family with NCMD. Clinical ophthalmic examinations, including fundus imaging, 
spectral-domain optical coherence tomography, electroretinography, and 
electrooculography, were performed. Genotyping with polymorphic markers in the 
MCDR1 region was performed to determine haplotypes. Whole-genome sequencing 
(WGS) was performed followed by variant filtering and copy number variant 
analysis.
RESULTS: Four subjects from 3 generations were found to have macular 
abnormalities. The proband presented with lifelong bilateral vision impairment 
with bilaterally symmetric vitelliform Best disease-like appearing macular 
lesions. Her 2 children had bilateral large macular coloboma-like malformations, 
consistent with autosomal dominant NCMD. The 80-year-old mother of the proband 
had drusen-like lesions consistent with grade 1 NCMD. WGS and subsequent Sanger 
sequencing found a point mutation at chr6:99593030G>C (hg38) in the noncoding 
region of the DNase I site thought to be a regulatory element of the retinal 
transcription factor gene PRDM13. This mutation is the identical site/nucleotide 
as in the original NCMD family (#765) but is a guanine to cytosine change rather 
than a guanine to thymine mutation, as found in the original NCMD family.
CONCLUSIONS: We report a new noncoding mutation at the same locus 
(chr6:99593030G>C) involving the same DNase I site regulating the retinal 
transcription factor gene PRDM13. This suggests that this site, chr6:99593030, 
is a mutational hotspot.

© The Author(s) 2023.

DOI: 10.1177/24741264221129432
PMCID: PMC9954157
PMID: 37008391

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared the following potential 
conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or 
publication of this article. Pending North Carolina Macular Dystrophy 
(NCMD/MCDR1) patent: Kent Small, MD.