---
reference_id: "PMID:15609246"
title: Mutations in the D-2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase gene cause D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria.
authors:
- Struys EA
- Salomons GS
- Achouri Y
- Van Schaftingen E
- Grosso S
- Craigen WJ
- Verhoeven NM
- Jakobs C
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1086/427890
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the D-2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase gene cause D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria.
**Authors:** Struys EA, Salomons GS, Achouri Y, Van Schaftingen E, Grosso S, Craigen WJ, Verhoeven NM, Jakobs C
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1086/427890](https://doi.org/10.1086/427890)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Feb;76(2):358-60. doi: 10.1086/427890. Epub 2004 Dec 17.

Mutations in the D-2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase gene cause 
D-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria.

Struys EA(1), Salomons GS, Achouri Y, Van Schaftingen E, Grosso S, Craigen WJ, 
Verhoeven NM, Jakobs C.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Unit, Department of Clinical Chemistry, VU University Medical 
Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

d-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria is a neurometabolic disorder with both a mild and a 
severe phenotype and with unknown etiology. Recently, a novel enzyme, 
d-2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase, which converts d-2-hydroxyglutarate into 
2-ketoglutarate, and its gene were identified. In the genes of two unrelated 
patients affected with d-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria, we identified 
disease-causing mutations. One patient was homozygous for a missense mutation 
(c.1331T-->C; p.Val444Ala). The other patient was compound heterozygous for a 
missense mutation (c.440T-->G; p.Ile147Ser) and a splice-site mutation 
(IVS1-23A-->G) that resulted in a null allele. Overexpression studies in HEK-293 
cells of proteins containing the missense mutations showed a marked reduction of 
d-2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase activity, proving that mutations in the 
d-2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase gene cause d-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria.

DOI: 10.1086/427890
PMCID: PMC1196381
PMID: 15609246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]