---
reference_id: "PMID:24413006"
title: Minimally invasive cardiac surgery-coronary artery bypass graft.
authors:
- Lemma M
- Atanasiou T
- Contino M
journal: Multimed Man Cardiothorac Surg
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/mmcts/mmt007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Minimally invasive cardiac surgery-coronary artery bypass graft.
**Authors:** Lemma M, Atanasiou T, Contino M
**Journal:** Multimed Man Cardiothorac Surg (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/mmcts/mmt007](https://doi.org/10.1093/mmcts/mmt007)

## Content

1. Multimed Man Cardiothorac Surg. 2013;2013:mmt007. doi: 10.1093/mmcts/mmt007.

Minimally invasive cardiac surgery-coronary artery bypass graft.

Lemma M(1), Atanasiou T, Contino M.

Author information:
(1)Minimally Invasive Cardiac Surgery Unit, Cardio-Cerebro-Vascular Department, 
Luigi Sacco University General Hospital, Milan, Italy.

Coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) is among the most common operations 
performed in the world. Different surgical strategies can be used with different 
invasiveness. This paper describes a recent development of the technique that 
merges the advantages resulting from both the adoption of an 'off-pump no-touch 
aorta operation' and a 'complete arterial revascularization through a left 
minithoracotomy' in a single procedure. This operation is currently known with 
the acronym MICS (minimally invasive cardiac surgery)-CABG (minimally invasive 
cardiac surgery). It is an off-pump operation performed through a 
minithoracotomy in the fourth or fifth left intercostal space across the 
midclavicular line. The left internal thoracic artery (LITA) is harvested under 
direct vision using a special rib-retractor with multiple interchangeable 
thoracotomy blades, including blades to use with lift systems for proximal 
artery harvesting, while the right radial artery (RA) is harvested 
endoscopically. A Y-connection is made between the two arteries. The LITA is 
used to bypass the left anterior descending coronary artery, while the right RA 
is used on the obtuse marginal branches and/or the posterior descending coronary 
artery. A special coronary stabilizer and a heart positioner with a shaft for 
remote thoracic insertion are needed.

DOI: 10.1093/mmcts/mmt007
PMID: 24413006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]