---
reference_id: PMID:11274444
title: Excitation--contraction uncoupling by a human central core disease mutation in the ryanodine receptor.
authors:
- Avila G
- "O'Brien JJ"
- Dirksen RT
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.071048198
keywords:
- Animals
- Calcium/metabolism
- Cytosol/metabolism
- Electrophysiology
- Humans
- In Vitro Techniques
- Mice
- Muscle Contraction/physiology
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism, physiology"
- Mutation
- "Myopathy, Central Core/genetics"
- "Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/genetics, metabolism"
- "Sarcoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism, physiology"
- Transfection
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Excitation--contraction uncoupling by a human central core disease mutation in the ryanodine receptor.
**Authors:** Avila G, O'Brien JJ, Dirksen RT
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.071048198](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.071048198)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Mar 27;98(7):4215-20. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.071048198.

Excitation--contraction uncoupling by a human central core disease mutation in 
the ryanodine receptor.

Avila G(1), O'Brien JJ, Dirksen RT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, University of Rochester, 601 
Elmwood Avenue, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Central core disease (CCD) is a human congenital myopathy characterized by fetal 
hypotonia and proximal muscle weakness that is linked to mutations in the gene 
encoding the type-1 ryanodine receptor (RyR1). CCD is thought to arise from 
Ca(2+)-induced damage stemming from mutant RyR1 proteins forming "leaky" 
sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) Ca(2+) release channels. A novel mutation in the 
C-terminal region of RyR1 (I4898T) accounts for an unusually severe and highly 
penetrant form of CCD in humans [Lynch, P. J., Tong, J., Lehane, M., Mallet, A., 
Giblin, L., Heffron, J. J., Vaughan, P., Zafra, G., MacLennan, D. H. & McCarthy, 
T. V. (1999) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 96, 4164--4169]. We expressed in 
skeletal myotubes derived from RyR1-knockout (dyspedic) mice the analogous 
mutation engineered into a rabbit RyR1 cDNA (I4897T). Here we show that 
homozygous expression of I4897T in dyspedic myotubes results in a complete 
uncoupling of sarcolemmal excitation from voltage-gated SR Ca(2+) release 
without significantly altering resting cytosolic Ca(2+) levels, SR Ca(2+) 
content, or RyR1-mediated enhancement of dihydropyridine receptor (DHPR) channel 
activity. Coexpression of both I4897T and wild-type RyR1 resulted in a 60% 
reduction in voltage-gated SR Ca(2+) release, again without altering resting 
cytosolic Ca(2+) levels, SR Ca(2+) content, or DHPR channel activity. These 
findings indicate that muscle weakness suffered by individuals possessing the 
I4898T mutation involves a functional uncoupling of sarcolemmal excitation from 
SR Ca(2+) release, rather than the expression of overactive or leaky SR Ca(2+) 
release channels.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.071048198
PMCID: PMC31205
PMID: 11274444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]