---
reference_id: "PMID:31725251"
title: Autosomal Recessive RPE65-Related Retinal Degeneration.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Koritala BA
- Pennesi M
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal Recessive RPE65-Related Retinal Degeneration.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Koritala BA, Pennesi M

## Content

1. Autosomal Recessive RPE65-Related Retinal Degeneration.

Koritala BA(1), Pennesi M(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2019 Nov 14 [updated 2026 Jan 8].

Author information:
(1)Retina Foundation of the Southwest, Dallas, TX

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: The three phenotypes of autosomal recessive 
RPE65-related retinal degeneration, from most severe to mildest, are Leber 
congenital amaurosis (LCA), early-onset severe retinal dystrophy (EOSRD), and 
juvenile retinitis pigmentosa (RP). In RPE65-related LCA, onset of visual 
manifestations frequently occurs in infancy during the first year of life. 
Central vision can be variable, but children ages four to ten years in the 
largest case series had severe visual impairment (mean visual acuity: 20/126). 
While vision is relatively stable in the first decade of life, it begins to 
decline again starting in the teens, with 50% of individuals being legally blind 
(visual acuity of 20/200 and/or visual fields extending <20 degrees from 
fixation) by age 20 years. After age 20 years, vision loss is more rapidly 
progressive: all affected individuals are legally blind by the fourth decade and 
many have complete loss of vision (i.e., no light perception). In RPE65-related 
EOSRD, onset of visual manifestations typically occurs in early childhood often 
presenting with nyctalopia (i.e., inability or reduced ability to see in dim 
light or at night) and reduced visual acuity. Individuals typically experience 
progressive decline in central vision, and many meet the criteria for legal 
blindness by the fourth decade; some progress to profound visual loss (including 
no light perception) by mid-adulthood. In RPE65-related juvenile RP, onset of 
visual manifestations typically occurs in late childhood or adolescence. 
Individuals often present with nyctalopia, progressive peripheral visual field 
loss, and relatively preserved central visual acuity in earlier stages. Affected 
individuals often maintain central vision into early adulthood; however, many 
meet the criteria for legal blindness by age 40 to 50 years, and some experience 
further decline in later decades, occasionally progressing to very poor vision, 
including no light perception.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of autosomal recessive RPE65-related retinal 
degeneration is established in a proband with suggestive findings and biallelic 
pathogenic variants in RPE65 identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapy: Subretinal gene supplementation therapy for 
individuals between ages 12 months and 65 years with retinal degeneration known 
to be associated with biallelic RPE65 pathogenic variants. Supportive treatment: 
Healthy balanced diet to reach the minimum reference daily intake (RDI) for 
nutrients. Docosahexaenoic acid / eicosapentaenoic acid supplements up to 500 
mg/day as well as lutein supplements up to 10 mg/day can be considered if 
dietary intake is not sufficient. Children with autosomal recessive 
RPE65-related retinal degeneration are usually of normal intellect but may 
experience learning delays due to visual impairment. Overarching principles 
should include involving child development and educational specialists at the 
earliest available opportunity, often with specialist teachers/schools for the 
visually impaired and early referral to low vision services to access low vision 
aids, especially with improving technologies, such as the refreshable Braille 
display. Advice on learning / intellectual disability / educational issues will 
vary from country to country, or even region to region within a country, 
depending on support services available. Surveillance: Routinely scheduled 
follow up with the treating ophthalmologist. Agents/circumstances to avoid: 
Children should be discouraged whenever possible from repeatedly poking and 
pressing on their eyes, as it may cause damage to the cornea and/or retina. 
Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status 
of apparently unaffected older and younger at-risk sibs in order to identify 
those who have biallelic RPE65 pathogenic variants and may benefit from early 
evaluation, counseling, and timely consideration of subretinal gene 
supplementation therapy.
GENETIC COUNSELING: RPE65-related retinal degeneration is inherited in an 
autosomal recessive manner. If both parents of a child diagnosed with autosomal 
recessive RPE65-related retinal degeneration are known to be heterozygous for an 
RPE65 pathogenic variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 
25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and 
a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the RPE65 pathogenic 
variants have been identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for 
at-risk relatives and prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 31725251