---
reference_id: "PMID:40996634"
title: Iptacopan/LNP023 and rituximab as rescue therapy in a patient with systemic lupus erythematosus-associated atypical haemolytic uraemic syndrome.
authors:
- Benvenuti F
- Proglio M
- Rigno M
- Sorbo D
journal: J Nephrol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s40620-025-02425-z
keywords:
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- "Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome/drug therapy, etiology, diagnosis, immunology"
- Complement Inactivating Agents/therapeutic use
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/complications, drug therapy, diagnosis, immunology"
- Plasma Exchange
- Renal Dialysis
- Rituximab/therapeutic use
- Treatment Outcome
- Male
- Benzoates
- Indoles
- Piperidines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Iptacopan/LNP023 and rituximab as rescue therapy in a patient with systemic lupus erythematosus-associated atypical haemolytic uraemic syndrome.
**Authors:** Benvenuti F, Proglio M, Rigno M, Sorbo D
**Journal:** J Nephrol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40620-025-02425-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40620-025-02425-z)

## Content

1. J Nephrol. 2025 Nov;38(8):2435-2440. doi: 10.1007/s40620-025-02425-z. Epub
2025  Sep 25.

Iptacopan/LNP023 and rituximab as rescue therapy in a patient with systemic
lupus erythematosus-associated atypical haemolytic uraemic syndrome.

Benvenuti F(1), Proglio M(2), Rigno M(3), Sorbo D(4).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine Unit, AULSS8 Berica, "San Bortolo" Hospital, Vicenza,
Veneto, Italy. francesco.benvenuti@aulss8.veneto.it.
(2)Nephrology Renal Transplant Unit, AULSS8 Berica, "San Bortolo" Hospital,
Vicenza, Veneto, Italy.
(3)Trasfusion Medicine Unit, AULSS8 Berica, "San Bortolo" Hospital, Vicenza,
Veneto, Italy.
(4)Nephrology and Renal Transplant Unit, AULSS8 Berica, "San Bortolo" Hospital,
Vicenza, Veneto, Italy.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is rarely associated with atypical haemolytic
uraemic syndrome, leading to a poor prognosis with multi-system involvement. The
pathogenesis seems to be driven by hyperactivation of alternate pathways of
complement cascade and patients should be treated with prompt administration of
complement inhibitors and immunosuppressive therapy. Iptacopan/LNP023, a novel,
orally administered C3 convertase inhibitor that has shown efficacy in C3
glomerulopathy and paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria, is going to be tested
in patients with atypical haemolytic syndrome. We present a case of a
59 year-old patient with mild systemic lupus erythematosus developing atypical
haemolytic uraemic syndrome with renal, myocardial and neurological involvement,
which was refractory to synthetic immunosuppressive, eculizumab and plasma
exchange therapies. The syndrome rapidly subsided after iptacopan/LPN023
administration associated with a single rituximab cycle, followed by tapering of
glucocorticoids, immunosuppressive therapy and plasma exchange. Unfortunately,
kidney failure occurred requiring twice weekly haemodialysis sessions. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first case of SLE-aHUS successfully treated
with iptacopan/LPN023, in association with standard SLE immunosuppression.

© 2025. The Author(s) under exclusive licence to Italian Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1007/s40620-025-02425-z
PMID: 40996634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: Francesco
Benvenuti received consultant fees from Galapagos. Marta Proglio, Manuela Rigno
and David Sorbo declare no conflicts of interest. Ethical approval: This study
(CLNP023B12002I) was approved by our ethics committee (Comitato etico
territoriale area sud-ovest Veneto) on January, 17th, 2024. Human and animal
rights: Not applicable. Informed consent: The patient provided consent to report
the case.
