---
reference_id: "PMID:35520754"
title: "Xeroderma pigmentosum: an updated review."
authors:
- Leung AK
- Barankin B
- Lam JM
- Leong KF
- Hon KL
journal: Drugs Context
year: '2022'
doi: 10.7573/dic.2022-2-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Xeroderma pigmentosum: an updated review.
**Authors:** Leung AK, Barankin B, Lam JM, Leong KF, Hon KL
**Journal:** Drugs Context (2022)
**DOI:** [10.7573/dic.2022-2-5](https://doi.org/10.7573/dic.2022-2-5)

## Content

1. Drugs Context. 2022 Apr 25;11:2022-2-5. doi: 10.7573/dic.2022-2-5. eCollection
 2022.

Xeroderma pigmentosum: an updated review.

Leung AK(1)(2), Barankin B(3), Lam JM(4)(5), Leong KF(6), Hon KL(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, 
Canada.
(2)The Alberta Children's Hospital, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(3)Toronto Dermatology Centre, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Department of Pediatrics and Department of Dermatology and Skin Sciences, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(5)BC Children's Hospital, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(6)Pediatric Institute, Kuala Lumpur General Hospital, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(7)Department of Paediatrics, Hong Kong Institute of Integrative Medicine, The 
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
(8)Jockey Club School of Public Health and Primary Care, The Chinese University 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

BACKGROUND: Early recognition of xeroderma pigmentosum is important to minimize 
the complications arising from the harmful effects of exposure to ultraviolet 
radiation. This narrative review aims to familiarize physicians with the 
clinical features, diagnosis and management of xeroderma pigmentosum.
METHODS: A search was conducted in December 2021 in PubMed Clinical Queries 
using the key term "xeroderma pigmentosum". The search strategy included all 
clinical trials, observational studies and reviews published within the past 10 
years. The information retrieved from the search was used in the compilation of 
this article.
RESULTS: Xeroderma pigmentosum is a condition of abnormal DNA repair of 
ultraviolet radiation-induced and oxidative DNA damage, which leads to increased 
skin cancer susceptibility. Approximately 50% of patients with xeroderma 
pigmentosum have increased photosensitivity and certain types of xeroderma 
pigmentosum are more prone to ocular disease and progressive neurodegeneration 
depending on the causative mutation. The diagnosis should be suspected in 
patients with increased photosensitivity and characteristic cutaneous, 
ophthalmological and neurological findings. A definite diagnosis can be made by 
the identification of biallelic mutation in one of the causative genes. Strict 
and consistent sun avoidance and protection and early detection and treatment of 
premalignant and malignant skin lesions are the mainstays of management. 
Treatment options for actinic keratosis include cryotherapy, topical imiquimod, 
topical 5-fluorouracil, chemical peeling, excision, CO2 laser resurfacing, 
fractional/pulsed laser therapy, and photodynamic therapy. Cutaneous malignancy 
can be treated by photodynamic therapy, curettage and electrodesiccation, or 
surgical excision. Oral isotretinoin, oral niacinamide, topical imiquimod and 
topical fluorouracil can be used for the prevention of skin malignancy. 
Treatment options for poikiloderma include chemical peeling, dermabrasion and 
laser resurfacing. Methylcellulose eyedrops and soft ultraviolet-protective 
contact lenses may be used to keep the cornea moist and protect against the 
harmful effects of keratitis sicca. Investigational therapies include the use of 
T4 endonuclease-V liposome lotion and oral nicotinamide to reduce the rate of 
actinic keratoses and non-melanoma skin cancers and gene therapy for radical 
cure of this condition.
CONCLUSION: Although currently there is no cure for xeroderma pigmentosum, 
increased awareness and early diagnosis of the condition, followed by rigorous 
sun avoidance and protection and optimal management, can dramatically improve 
the quality of life and life expectancy.

Copyright © 2022 Leung AKC, Barankin B, Lam JM, Leong KF, Hon KL.

DOI: 10.7573/dic.2022-2-5
PMCID: PMC9045481
PMID: 35520754

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure and potential conflicts of interest: 
AKCL and KLH are associate editors of Drugs in Context and confirm that this 
article has no other conflicts of interest otherwise. This manuscript was sent 
out for independent peer review. The International Committee of Medical Journal 
Editors (ICMJE) Potential Conflicts of Interests form for the authors is 
available for download at: 
https://www.drugsincontext.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/04/dic.2022-2-5-COI.pdf