---
reference_id: "PMID:16773508"
title: Pitfall in metabolic screening in a patient with fatal peroxisomal beta-oxidation defect.
authors:
- Rosewich H
- Waterham HR
- Wanders RJ
- Ferdinandusse S
- Henneke M
- Hunneman D
- Gärtner J
journal: Neuropediatrics
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1055/s-2006-923943
keywords:
- "Acyl-CoA Oxidase/deficiency, genetics"
- Fatty Acids/metabolism
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Peroxisomal Disorders/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pitfall in metabolic screening in a patient with fatal peroxisomal beta-oxidation defect.
**Authors:** Rosewich H, Waterham HR, Wanders RJ, Ferdinandusse S, Henneke M, Hunneman D, Gärtner J
**Journal:** Neuropediatrics (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-2006-923943](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-2006-923943)

## Content

1. Neuropediatrics. 2006 Apr;37(2):95-8. doi: 10.1055/s-2006-923943.

Pitfall in metabolic screening in a patient with fatal peroxisomal 
beta-oxidation defect.

Rosewich H(1), Waterham HR, Wanders RJ, Ferdinandusse S, Henneke M, Hunneman D, 
Gärtner J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Pediatric Neurology, Georg August University 
Goettingen, Robert-Koch-Strasse 40, 37075 Goettingen, Germany. 
hendrik.rosewich@med.uni-goettingen.de

We present a rare case of peroxisomal acyl-CoA oxidase deficiency that was not 
detected by the common metabolic screening program for peroxisomal disorders. 
The patient presented with a typical MRI pattern showing pachygyria, perisylvian 
polymicrogyria, cerebral and cerebellar white matter abnormalities, and facial 
dysmorphia, progressive psychomotor retardation, deafness, retinopathy, 
peripheral neuropathy, and infantile seizures strongly indicative for a 
peroxisomal disorder. Yet, repetitive measurements of very long-chain fatty 
acids (VLCFAs) and phytanic acid in serum and plasma as well as plasmalogens in 
erythrocytes revealed normal values apparently excluding a peroxisomal defect 
(methods of measurement published by Moser and co-workers in 1980 [4 ] and 1981 
[2 ]). Subsequent biochemical investigation in cultured skin fibroblasts of the 
patient, however, revealed elevated concentrations of VLCFAs, deficient 
oxidation of C26:0, but normal oxidation of both phytanic acid and pristanic 
acid and normal DE NOVO plasmalogen synthesis, indicative for a defect in the 
peroxisomal beta-oxidation system. Enzymatic studies in these fibroblasts 
pointed to peroxisomal acyl-CoA oxidase deficiency and subsequent molecular 
analyses revealed a homozygous acceptor splice site mutation IVS3-1G>A in the 
ACOX1 gene (MIM *609751).

DOI: 10.1055/s-2006-923943
PMID: 16773508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]