---
reference_id: "PMID:29512576"
title: "Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy : clinical, electrophysiological and morphological study."
authors:
- Vasanth A
- Mullatti N
- Shankar SK
- Taly AB
- Veerendra KM
- Anisya V
- Nandini M
- Kumar MV
journal: Neurol India
year: '1997'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy : clinical, electrophysiological and morphological study.
**Authors:** Vasanth A, Mullatti N, Shankar SK, Taly AB, Veerendra KM, Anisya V, Nandini M, Kumar MV
**Journal:** Neurol India (1997)

## Content

1. Neurol India. 1997 Apr-Jun;45(2):74-80.

Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy : clinical,
electrophysiological and morphological study.

Vasanth A(1), Mullatti N(1), Shankar SK(1), Taly AB(1), Veerendra KM(1), Anisya
V(1), Nandini M(1), Kumar MV(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro
Sciences (NIMHANS), Bangalore - 560 029, India.

Twelve patients (M:F 9:3) who fulfilled diagnostic criteria of chronic
inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP) were seen at NIMHANS over a
period of three years (1987-1990). Their ages ranged from 20 yrs to 71 yrs and
the mean duration of symptoms was 30 months (range 3 months to 6 yrs). Symptoms
at the onset were dependent on the duration of disease. These included
paraesthesia (7), weakness (4) and ataxia in lower limbs (1). Salient features
on examintion were: distal weakness (10), proximal weakness (6), impaired touch
and pain (12), impaired joint position and vibration sense (6), distal areflexia
(12), bilateral impaired hearing (2) and thickened nerves (4).
Electrophysiological evidence of demyelination was present in all and albumino
cytological dissociation in CSF was noted in 55 of the patients. Sural nerve
biopsy revealed significant loss of myelinated fibres in all the five patients
studied. Increase in endo and perineural collagen, remyelination and schwann
cell proliferation were also seen. Inflammatory infiltrates were conspicuously
absent. Steroids were given in 10 patients. The therapeutic response was good in
5 and moderate in 5. Two patients had remitting relapsing course. Response to
steroids could not be predicted on the basis of clinical or laboratory features.
The recent diagnostic criteria and their therapeutic relevance are discussed.

PMID: 29512576
