---
reference_id: "PMID:38884744"
title: Human Genetics of Defects of Situs.
authors:
- Perrot A
- Rickert-Sperling S
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-44087-8_42
keywords:
- Humans
- Mutation
- Heterotaxy Syndrome/genetics
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/genetics"
- Situs Inversus/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human Genetics of Defects of Situs.
**Authors:** Perrot A, Rickert-Sperling S
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-031-44087-8_42](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-44087-8_42)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2024;1441:705-717. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-44087-8_42.

Human Genetics of Defects of Situs.

Perrot A(1), Rickert-Sperling S(2).

Author information:
(1)Experimental and Clinical Research Center, a cooperation between the Max
Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association and Charité
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Cardiovascular Genetics, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
silke.sperling@charite.de.

Defects of situs are associated with complex sets of congenital heart defects in
which the normal concordance of asymmetric thoracic and abdominal organs is
disturbed. The cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying the formation of the
embryonic left-right axis have been investigated extensively in the past decade.
This has led to the identification of mutations in at least 33 different genes
in humans with heterotaxy and situs defects. Those mutations affect a broad
range of molecular components, from transcription factors, signaling molecules,
and chromatin modifiers to ciliary proteins. A substantial overlap of these
genes is observed with genes associated with other congenital heart diseases
such as tetralogy of Fallot and double-outlet right ventricle, d-transposition
of the great arteries, and atrioventricular septal defects. In this chapter, we
present the broad genetic heterogeneity of situs defects including recent human
genomics efforts.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-44087-8_42
PMID: 38884744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
