---
reference_id: "PMID:19776201"
title: "Adrenal crisis in treated Addison's disease: a predictable but under-managed event."
authors:
- White K
- Arlt W
journal: Eur J Endocrinol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1530/EJE-09-0559
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adrenal crisis in treated Addison's disease: a predictable but under-managed event.
**Authors:** White K, Arlt W
**Journal:** Eur J Endocrinol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1530/EJE-09-0559](https://doi.org/10.1530/EJE-09-0559)

## Content

1. Eur J Endocrinol. 2010 Jan;162(1):115-20. doi: 10.1530/EJE-09-0559. Epub 2009 
Sep 23.

Adrenal crisis in treated Addison's disease: a predictable but under-managed 
event.

White K(1), Arlt W.

Author information:
(1)Addison's Disease Self-Help Group, Guildford, UK. kgwhite@addisons.org.uk

CONTEXT: Adrenal crisis is a life-threatening event that occurs regularly in 
Addison's patients receiving standard replacement therapy. Patient reports 
suggest that it is an underestimated and under-managed event.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the frequency of adrenal crisis in diagnosed patients and 
to understand the factors contributing to the risks of adrenal crisis.
DESIGN: We conducted a postal survey of Addison's patients in four countries, UK 
(n=485), Canada (n=148), Australia (n=123) and New Zealand (n=85) in 2003, 
asking about patients' experiences of adrenal crisis and their demographic 
characteristics. In 2006, a shorter follow-up survey was conducted in the UK 
(n=261).
METHOD: The frequency and causes of adrenal crisis were compared across both 
surveys. Demographic data from the 2003 survey were analysed to establish the 
main variables associated with an elevated risk of crisis.
RESULTS: Around 8% of diagnosed cases can be expected to need hospital treatment 
for adrenal crisis annually. Exposure to gastric infection is the single most 
important factor predicting the likelihood of adrenal crisis. Concomitant 
diabetes and/or asthma increase the frequency of adrenal crises reported by 
patients.
CONCLUSION: The endocrinologist has a responsibility to ensure that Addison's 
patients have adequate access to life-saving emergency injection materials and 
repeated, practical training sessions in how to use them, while the general 
practitioner plays a vital role as in arranging prompt emergency admissions.

DOI: 10.1530/EJE-09-0559
PMID: 19776201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]