---
reference_id: "PMID:24914338"
title: "Autophagy in hepatitis C virus-host interactions: potential roles and therapeutic targets for liver-associated diseases."
authors:
- Ke PY
- Chen SS
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i19.5773
keywords:
- Animals
- Antiviral Agents/chemistry
- Autophagy
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/complications, virology"
- Disease Progression
- "Fatty Liver/complications, physiopathology, virology"
- "Genome, Viral"
- "Hepacivirus/genetics, physiology"
- "Hepatitis C, Chronic/complications"
- Hepatocytes/virology
- Humans
- Liver/physiopathology
- "Liver Cirrhosis/complications, virology"
- "Liver Diseases/physiopathology, virology"
- "Liver Neoplasms/complications, virology"
- Virus Replication
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autophagy in hepatitis C virus-host interactions: potential roles and therapeutic targets for liver-associated diseases.
**Authors:** Ke PY, Chen SS
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.v20.i19.5773](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v20.i19.5773)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 May 21;20(19):5773-93. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v20.i19.5773.

Autophagy in hepatitis C virus-host interactions: potential roles and
therapeutic targets for liver-associated diseases.

Ke PY(1), Chen SS(1).

Author information:
(1)Po-Yuan Ke, Steve S-L Chen, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia
Sinica, Taipei 11529, Taiwan.

Autophagy is a lysosome-associated, degradative process that catabolizes
cytosolic components to recycle nutrients for further use and maintain cell
homeostasis. Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is a major cause of chronic hepatitis,
which often leads to end-stage liver-associated diseases and is a significant
burden on worldwide public health. Emerging lines of evidence indicate that
autophagy plays an important role in promoting the HCV life cycle in host cells.
Moreover, the diverse impacts of autophagy on a variety of signaling pathways in
HCV-infected cells suggest that the autophagic process is required for balancing
HCV-host cell interactions and involved in the pathogenesis of HCV-related liver
diseases. However, the detailed molecular mechanism underlying how HCV activates
autophagy to benefit viral growth is still enigmatic. Additionally, how the
autophagic response contributes to disease progression in HCV-infected cells
remains largely unknown. Hence, in this review, we overview the interplay
between autophagy and the HCV life cycle and propose possible mechanisms by
which autophagy may promote the pathogenesis of HCV-associated chronic liver
diseases. Moreover, we outline the related studies on how autophagy interplays
with HCV replication and discuss the possible implications of autophagy and
viral replication in the progression of HCV-induced liver diseases, e.g.,
steatosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Finally, we explore the potential
therapeutics that target autophagy to cure HCV infection and its related liver
diseases.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i19.5773
PMCID: PMC4024787
PMID: 24914338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
