---
reference_id: "PMID:20453440"
title: Association of IRF5, STAT4 and BLK with systemic lupus erythematosus and other rheumatic diseases.
authors:
- Tsuchiya N
- Ito I
- Kawasaki A
journal: Nihon Rinsho Meneki Gakkai Kaishi
year: '2010'
doi: 10.2177/jsci.33.57
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of IRF5, STAT4 and BLK with systemic lupus erythematosus and other rheumatic diseases.
**Authors:** Tsuchiya N, Ito I, Kawasaki A
**Journal:** Nihon Rinsho Meneki Gakkai Kaishi (2010)
**DOI:** [10.2177/jsci.33.57](https://doi.org/10.2177/jsci.33.57)

## Content

1. Nihon Rinsho Meneki Gakkai Kaishi. 2010;33(2):57-65. doi: 10.2177/jsci.33.57.

Association of IRF5, STAT4 and BLK with systemic lupus erythematosus and other 
rheumatic diseases.

Tsuchiya N(1), Ito I, Kawasaki A.

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Genetic Epidemiology Laboratory, Doctoral Program in Life 
System Medical Sciences, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, 
University of Tsukuba.

Recent large-scale studies in the Caucasian populations identified many new 
susceptibility genes to systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). In this review, we 
discuss our findings on some of such genes, interferon regulatory factor 5 
(IRF5), signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) and B 
lymphoid tyrosine kinase (BLK), in the Japanese population. All of these genes 
were associated with SLE also in Japanese; however, there are notable 
differences. In IRF5, the risk haplotype in Caucasians was not present in 
Japanese. Instead, a SNP that does not exist in Caucasians defined a protective 
haplotype in Japanese. In STAT4 and especially in BLK, the risk allele frequency 
was substantially larger in the Japanese population than in Caucasians; as a 
result, the genetic contribution of these genes in the population is considered 
to be greater in the Japanese. Presence of susceptibility genes shared by the 
Caucasian and Asian populations as well as population-specific susceptibility 
genes was supported by the first genome-wide association study in the Asians 
published from China in 2009. We and other investigators also found that IRF5, 
STAT4 and BLK are associated not only with SLE, but also rheumatoid arthritis 
and systemic sclerosis. Thus, a substantial proportion of susceptibility genes 
are shared by multiple autoimmune rheumatic diseases.

DOI: 10.2177/jsci.33.57
PMID: 20453440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]