---
reference_id: "PMID:37478161"
title: "USP1 Expression Driven by EWS::FLI1 Transcription Factor Stabilizes Survivin and Mitigates Replication Stress in Ewing Sarcoma."
authors:
- Mallard HJ
- Wan S
- Nidhi P
- Hanscom-Trofy YD
- Mohapatra B
- Woods NT
- Lopez-Guerrero JA
- Llombart-Bosch A
- Machado I
- Scotlandi K
- Kreiling NF
- Perry MC
- Mirza S
- Coulter DW
- Band V
- Band H
- Ghosal G
journal: Mol Cancer Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-23-0323
keywords:
- Humans
- Child
- "Sarcoma, Ewing/metabolism"
- "Proto-Oncogene Protein c-fli-1/genetics, metabolism"
- "Survivin/genetics, metabolism"
- "RNA-Binding Protein EWS/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics, metabolism"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Ubiquitin-Specific Proteases/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# USP1 Expression Driven by EWS::FLI1 Transcription Factor Stabilizes Survivin and Mitigates Replication Stress in Ewing Sarcoma.
**Authors:** Mallard HJ, Wan S, Nidhi P, Hanscom-Trofy YD, Mohapatra B, Woods NT, Lopez-Guerrero JA, Llombart-Bosch A, Machado I, Scotlandi K, Kreiling NF, Perry MC, Mirza S, Coulter DW, Band V, Band H, Ghosal G
**Journal:** Mol Cancer Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-23-0323](https://doi.org/10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-23-0323)

## Content

1. Mol Cancer Res. 2023 Nov 1;21(11):1186-1204. doi:
10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-23-0323.

USP1 Expression Driven by EWS::FLI1 Transcription Factor Stabilizes Survivin and
Mitigates Replication Stress in Ewing Sarcoma.

Mallard HJ(1), Wan S(1), Nidhi P(1), Hanscom-Trofy YD(1), Mohapatra B(1), Woods
NT(2)(3), Lopez-Guerrero JA(4), Llombart-Bosch A(5), Machado I(5), Scotlandi
K(6), Kreiling NF(1), Perry MC(1), Mirza S(1), Coulter DW(3)(7), Band V(1)(3),
Band H(2)(3), Ghosal G(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska.
(2)Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska.
(3)Fred and Pamela Buffett Cancer Center, University of Nebraska Medical Center,
Omaha, Nebraska.
(4)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Instituto Valenciano de Oncología, Valencia,
Spain.
(5)Department of Pathology, Instituto Valenciano de Oncología and Patologika
Laboratory, Hospital QuironSalud, Valencia, Spain.
(6)Laboratory of Experimental Oncology, IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli,
Bologna, Italy.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
Nebraska.

In this study, we identify USP1 as a transcriptional target of EWS::FLI1 and
demonstrate the requisite function of USP1 in Ewing sarcoma (EWS) cell survival
in response to endogenous replication stress. EWS::FLI1 oncogenic transcription
factor drives most EWS, a pediatric bone cancer. EWS cells display elevated
levels of R-loops and replication stress. The mechanism by which EWS cells
override activation of apoptosis or cellular senescence in response to increased
replication stress is not known. We show that USP1 is overexpressed in EWS and
EWS::FLI1 regulates USP1 transcript levels. USP1 knockdown or inhibition arrests
EWS cell growth and induces cell death by apoptosis. Mechanistically, USP1
regulates Survivin (BIRC5/API4) protein stability and the activation of
caspase-9 and caspase-3/7 in response to endogenous replication stress. Notably,
USP1 inhibition sensitizes cells to doxorubicin and etoposide treatment.
Together, our study demonstrates that USP1 is regulated by EWS::FLI1, the
USP1-Survivin axis promotes EWS cell survival, and USP1 inhibition sensitizes
cells to standard of care chemotherapy.
IMPLICATIONS: High USP1 and replication stress levels driven by EWS::FLI1
transcription factor in EWS are vulnerabilities that can be exploited to improve
existing treatment avenues and overcome drug resistance.

©2023 The Authors; Published by the American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-23-0323
PMCID: PMC10618738
PMID: 37478161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
