---
reference_id: "PMID:37091525"
title: "VCP-related myopathy: a case series and a review of literature."
authors:
- Iannibelli E
- Gibertini S
- Cheli M
- Blasevich F
- Cavaliere A
- Riolo G
- Ruggieri A
- Maggi L
journal: Acta Myol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.36185/2532-1900-244
keywords:
- Humans
- Valosin Containing Protein/genetics
- "Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Muscular Diseases/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- "Frontotemporal Dementia/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/pathology"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# VCP-related myopathy: a case series and a review of literature.
**Authors:** Iannibelli E, Gibertini S, Cheli M, Blasevich F, Cavaliere A, Riolo G, Ruggieri A, Maggi L
**Journal:** Acta Myol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.36185/2532-1900-244](https://doi.org/10.36185/2532-1900-244)

## Content

1. Acta Myol. 2023 Mar 31;42(1):2-13. doi: 10.36185/2532-1900-244. eCollection
2023.

VCP-related myopathy: a case series and a review of literature.

Iannibelli E(1), Gibertini S(1), Cheli M(1), Blasevich F(1), Cavaliere A(2),
Riolo G(1), Ruggieri A(1), Maggi L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroimmunology and Neuromuscular Diseases, Fondazione IRCCS
Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics and Neurogenetics, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto
Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy.

The valosin-containing protein (VCP), a widely expressed protein, controls the
ubiquitin-proteasome system, endolysosomal sorting, and autophagy to maintain
cellular proteostasis. Frontotemporal dementia (FTD), inclusion body myopathy,
and Paget's disease of the bone (PDB) are all caused by dominant missense
mutations in the VCP gene, which interfere with these mechanisms and cause a
multisystem proteinopathy. We describe phenotypic and genetic findings of five
patients with four different mutations in VCP gene (NM_007126): c.278G > A
(p.R93H), c.463C > T (p.R155C), c.410C > T (p.P137L), c.464G > A (p.R155H),
c.410C > T (p.P137L). We analysed the patient' biopsies, all characterized by a
muscular phenotype, and we executed immunofluorescence staining to evaluate the
presence of proteins: p62, VCP, desmin, myotilin, TDP-43. Eventually we
performed a brief literature review to compare our cases with those already
reported. Our report strongly suggest that VCP gene mutations can be related
with a predominant skeletal muscle phenotype without any central nervous system
involvement, as occasionally reported in the literature. Particularly, our
patient with R93H shows only myopathic involvement while this mutation has been
described once associated only to Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia. Further study
will be necessary to understand such a broad and different clinical spectrum.

©2023 Gaetano Conte Academy - Mediterranean Society of Myology, Naples, Italy.

DOI: 10.36185/2532-1900-244
PMCID: PMC10115396
PMID: 37091525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The Authors declare no conflict of interest.
