---
reference_id: "PMID:39904110"
title: "IL-17A, IL-23R, FCGR3A are associated with neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus susceptibility in pediatric patients with lupus nephritis."
authors:
- Ye C
- Chen L
- Zhang L
- Zheng Y
- Liu X
- Huang Z
- Tang K
- Jiang X
- Chen P
journal: Cytokine
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2025.156874
keywords:
- Humans
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide/genetics"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Female
- Child
- Male
- Lupus Nephritis/genetics
- Case-Control Studies
- "Receptors, Interleukin/genetics"
- "Lupus Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/genetics"
- Linkage Disequilibrium/genetics
- Adolescent
- Interleukin-17/genetics
- Haplotypes/genetics
- "Receptors, IgG/genetics"
- Gene Frequency/genetics
- Genotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IL-17A, IL-23R, FCGR3A are associated with neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus susceptibility in pediatric patients with lupus nephritis.
**Authors:** Ye C, Chen L, Zhang L, Zheng Y, Liu X, Huang Z, Tang K, Jiang X, Chen P
**Journal:** Cytokine (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cyto.2025.156874](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cyto.2025.156874)

## Content

1. Cytokine. 2025 Apr;188:156874. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2025.156874. Epub 2025 Feb
3.

IL-17A, IL-23R, FCGR3A are associated with neuropsychiatric systemic lupus
erythematosus susceptibility in pediatric patients with lupus nephritis.

Ye C(1), Chen L(2), Zhang L(1), Zheng Y(3), Liu X(2), Huang Z(2), Tang K(4),
Jiang X(5), Chen P(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, the First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China; Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Pediatric Nephrology and Rheumatology, the First Affiliated
Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)College of Pharmacy, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, United States.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, the First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China.
(5)Department of Pediatric Nephrology and Rheumatology, the First Affiliated
Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address:
jxiaoy@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(6)Department of Pharmacy, the First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: Chenp73@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To comprehensively investigate the impact of candidate loci on the
susceptibility to neuropsychiatric systemic lupus erythematosus (NPSLE) in a
cohort of Chinese children with lupus nephritis (LN).
METHODS: This case-control study included sixty-two patients. And the case group
consisted of 12 LN patients appearing NPSLE, while the control group consisted
of 50 LN patients. A total of fifty-four single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
across twenty genes were genotyped using the Agena Bioscience MassArray iPLEX
platform. The associations between susceptibility to NPSLE and candidate SNPs
were assessed using SNPStats online software. We evaluated the influence of
candidate SNPs on the risk of NPSLE through odds ratios (OR) and 95 % confidence
intervals (CI). Additionally, linkage disequilibrium (LD) and coefficient (D'
and r2) for haplotypes and their frequencies were performed using the genetic
statistical online software SHEsis.
RESULTS: Three significant SNPs were identified: IL17RA rs2895332, IL23R
rs10889677, and FCGR3A rs396991. AA genotype of FCGR3A rs396991, GG genotype of
IL17RA rs2895332 and AA genotype of IL23R rs10889677 exhibited a decreased risk
of NPSLE compared to CA and CC genotypes, GA and AA genotypes, and CA and CC
genotypes (rs396991 AA vs. CA-CC, OR 5.00, 95 %CI 0.99-25.17, P = 0.029;
rs2895332 GG vs. GA-AA, OR 7.83, 95 %CI 1.47-41.79, P = 0.017; rs10889677 AA vs.
CA-CC, OR 4.50, 95 %CI 1.08-18.69, P = 0.027). Furthermore, the haplotype A-T-G
(STAT4 rs13426947, rs1551443 and rs3024866) appeared to confer protection
against the development of NPSLE. The multivariate logistic regression analysis
indicated that two specific SNPs were significantly associated with an increased
risk of NPSLE: [FCGR3A rs396991 (OR = 6.444, 95 %CI = 1.1-37.736, P = 0.039),
IL17RA rs2895332 (OR = 0.128, 95 %CI = 0.017-0.963, P = 0.046)]. Notably, the
RegulomeDB score of them reached 1 f. Using HaploReg, these loci were in strong
LD (r2>0.8) with several SNPs.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that the polymorphisms IL17RA rs2895332, IL23R
rs10889677, and FCGR3A rs396991 are significantly associated with the risk of
NPSLE in childhood-onset LN.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cyto.2025.156874
PMID: 39904110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
