---
reference_id: "PMID:34331125"
title: "Genetics, pathogenesis and therapeutic developments for Usher syndrome type 2."
authors:
- Stemerdink M
- García-Bohórquez B
- Schellens R
- Garcia-Garcia G
- Van Wijk E
- Millan JM
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-021-02324-w
keywords:
- Animals
- "Extracellular Matrix Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Mutation
- Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics
- Sperm Motility
- "Usher Syndromes/genetics, metabolism, therapy"
- "Zebrafish/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics, pathogenesis and therapeutic developments for Usher syndrome type 2.
**Authors:** Stemerdink M, García-Bohórquez B, Schellens R, Garcia-Garcia G, Van Wijk E, Millan JM
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-021-02324-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-021-02324-w)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2022 Apr;141(3-4):737-758. doi: 10.1007/s00439-021-02324-w. Epub
2021  Jul 30.

Genetics, pathogenesis and therapeutic developments for Usher syndrome type 2.

Stemerdink M(#)(1), García-Bohórquez B(#)(2)(3), Schellens R(#)(1), 
Garcia-Garcia G(#)(2)(3), Van Wijk E(#)(1), Millan JM(#)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, 6525 GA, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Grupo de Investigación en Biomedicina Molecular, Celular y Genómica Health 
Research Institute La Fe, Valencia, Spain.
(3)CIBERER, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Grupo de Investigación en Biomedicina Molecular, Celular y Genómica Health 
Research Institute La Fe, Valencia, Spain. millan_jos@gva.es.
(5)CIBERER, Madrid, Spain. millan_jos@gva.es.
(#)Contributed equally

Usher syndrome (USH) is a rare, autosomal recessively inherited disorder 
resulting in a combination of sensorineural hearing loss and a progressive loss 
of vision resulting from retinitis pigmentosa (RP), occasionally accompanied by 
an altered vestibular function. More and more evidence is building up indicating 
that also sleep deprivation, olfactory dysfunction, deficits in tactile 
perception and reduced sperm motility are part of the disease etiology. USH can 
be clinically classified into three different types, of which Usher syndrome 
type 2 (USH2) is the most prevalent. In this review, we, therefore, assess the 
genetic and clinical aspects, available models and therapeutic developments for 
USH2. Mutations in USH2A, ADGRV1 and WHRN have been described to be responsible 
for USH2, with USH2A being the most frequently mutated USH-associated gene, 
explaining 50% of all cases. The proteins encoded by the USH2 genes together 
function in a dynamic protein complex that, among others, is found at the 
photoreceptor periciliary membrane and at the base of the hair bundles of inner 
ear hair cells. To unravel the pathogenic mechanisms underlying USH2, 
patient-derived cellular models and animal models including mouse, zebrafish and 
drosophila, have been generated that all in part mimic the USH phenotype. 
Multiple cellular and genetic therapeutic approaches are currently under 
development for USH2, mainly focused on preserving or partially restoring the 
visual function of which one is already in the clinical phase. These 
developments are opening a new gate towards a possible treatment for USH2 
patients.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-021-02324-w
PMID: 34331125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]