---
reference_id: "PMID:7671968"
title: "Defective galactosylation in galactosemia: is low cell UDPgalactose an explanation?"
authors:
- Segal S
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1007/BF02143806
keywords:
- Galactose/metabolism
- "Galactosemias/blood, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Uridine Diphosphate Galactose/blood, metabolism"
- "Uridine Diphosphate Glucose/blood, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defective galactosylation in galactosemia: is low cell UDPgalactose an explanation?
**Authors:** Segal S
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF02143806](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02143806)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 1995;154(7 Suppl 2):S65-71. doi: 10.1007/BF02143806.

Defective galactosylation in galactosemia: is low cell UDPgalactose an 
explanation?

Segal S(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biochemical Development and Molecular Diseases, Children's 
Hospital of Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

There is circumstantial evidence that defective galactosylation of complex 
glycoconjugates exists in tissues from galactosemic patients. Whether this is an 
etiologic factor in the long-term complications of the disorder is not known. 
Also not evident is the basis for the impaired galactosylation. The hypothesis 
that abnormally low cellular uridine diphosphate galactose (UDPgal) content is 
responsible has not been established. There is a tendency for galactosemic red 
cell UDPgal to be in the low normal range with a high uridine diphosphate 
glucose to UDP-gal ratio. This may reflect an inability of red cell 
UDPgal-4'-epimerase to maintain a normal ratio and consequently higher levels of 
UDPgal. In the more complex white blood cells and cultured fibroblasts, the 
UDPgal content and the uridine diphosphate glucose to UDPgal ratio of 
galactosemics are normal. Therefore, defective galactosylation observed in 
galactosemic fibroblasts must result from a defect in the transfer of galactose 
from UDPgal to these moieties.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02143806
PMID: 7671968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]