---
reference_id: "PMID:25052897"
title: "Plasma cardiotrophin-1 levels are associated with hypertensive heart disease: a meta-analysis."
authors:
- Song K
- Wang S
- Huang B
- Luciano A
- Srivastava R
- Mani A
journal: J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich)
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1111/jch.12376
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Plasma cardiotrophin-1 levels are associated with hypertensive heart disease: a meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Song K, Wang S, Huang B, Luciano A, Srivastava R, Mani A
**Journal:** J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich) (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jch.12376](https://doi.org/10.1111/jch.12376)

## Content

1. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich). 2014 Sep;16(9):686-92. doi: 10.1111/jch.12376. 
Epub 2014 Jul 23.

Plasma cardiotrophin-1 levels are associated with hypertensive heart disease: a 
meta-analysis.

Song K(1), Wang S, Huang B, Luciano A, Srivastava R, Mani A.

Author information:
(1)Yale Cardiovascular Research Center, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale 
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT; The Cardiology Department, Chinese 
Peoples' Liberation Army General Hospital, Beijing, China.

Cardiotrophin-1 (CT-1) is a member of the interleukin 6 cytokine superfamily. 
Plasma CT-1 levels have been associated with heart failure and hypertension in 
small independent studies. Whether plasma CT-1 levels are associated with 
progression of hypertensive heart disease is poorly understood. The authors 
carried out a meta-analysis using published studies and electronic databases. 
Relevant data were extracted using standardized algorithms. Additional data were 
obtained directly from investigators when indicated. A total of 18 studies were 
included that reported on association between CT-1 level and hypertension (n=8), 
cardiac hypertrophy (n=9), and heart failure (HF) (n=10). The serum levels of 
CT-1 were significantly higher in patients with hypertension (standard mean 
difference [SMD], 0.85; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.64-1.06 fmol/mL), left 
ventricular hypertrophy (SMD, 0.88; 95% CI 0.60-1.17 fmol/mL), or HF (SMD, 0.66; 
95% CI, 0.51-0.80 fmol/mL) compared with controls. Subgroup analysis revealed 
CT-1 levels to be highest in patients with hypertension-induced hypertrophy with 
HF, followed by patients with hypertension-induced left ventricular hypertrophy 
without HF (SMD, 0.52; 95% CI, 0.30-0.75 fmol/mL), patients with hypertension 
without left ventricular hypertrophy (SMD, 0.67; 95% CI, 0.46-0.88 fmol/mL) as 
compared with normotensive patients (SMD, 0.74; 95% CI, 10.45-1.04 fmol/mL). 
Increased plasma CT-1 levels are associated with risk for HF in hypertensive 
patients. CT-1 may serve as a novel biomarker in determining prognosis in 
hypertensive patients.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/jch.12376
PMCID: PMC4159421
PMID: 25052897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]