---
reference_id: "PMID:20301451"
title: Mucopolysaccharidosis Type II.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Scarpa M
- Lampe C
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mucopolysaccharidosis Type II.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Scarpa M, Lampe C

## Content

1. Mucopolysaccharidosis Type II.

Scarpa M(1), Lampe C(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2007 Nov 6 [updated 2026 Apr 28].

Author information:
(1)Regional Coordinating Center for Rare Diseases, University Hospital of Udine,
Udine Italy
(2)Center for Rare Diseases, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Muscular
Diseases and Social Pediatrics, University of Giessen, Giessen, Germany

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Mucopolysaccharidosis type II (MPS II; also known as
Hunter syndrome) is an X-linked multisystem disorder characterized by
glycosaminoglycan (GAG) accumulation. The vast majority of affected individuals
are male; on rare occasion heterozygous females manifest findings. Age of onset,
disease severity, and rate of progression vary significantly among affected
males. In those with the neuronopathic phenotype, central nervous system (CNS)
involvement (manifesting primarily as progressive cognitive deterioration),
progressive airway disease, and cardiac disease usually results in death in the
first or second decade of life. In those with the non-neuronopathic phenotype,
the CNS is minimally or not affected. However, the effect of GAG accumulation on
other organ systems can be severe. Survival into the early adult years with
normal intelligence is common in the non-neuronopathic phenotype. Additional
findings in neuronopathic and non-neuronopathic MPS II include: short stature,
macrocephaly with or without communicating hydrocephalus, macroglossia, hoarse
voice, conductive and sensorineural hearing loss, dysostosis multiplex, spinal
stenosis, carpal tunnel syndrome, and hepatosplenomegaly.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of MPS II is established in a male proband by
identification of absent or reduced iduronate 2-sulfatase (I2S) enzyme activity
in leukocytes, fibroblasts, or plasma in the presence of normal activity of at
least one other sulfatase; or of a hemizygous pathogenic variant in IDS by
molecular genetic testing. The diagnosis of MPS II is usually established in a
female proband with suggestive clinical features by identification of a
heterozygous IDS pathogenic variant by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapies: Weekly enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) with
infusions of idursulfase, a recombinant form of human I2S, or tividenofusp
alfa-eknm, a CNS-penetrant ERT, are approved for individuals with MPS II.
Pretreatment with anti-inflammatory drugs or antihistamines may be needed for
mild or moderate infusion reactions. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
(HSCT) could provide sufficient enzyme activity to slow or stop the progression
of the disease; however, no controlled clinical studies have been conducted in
individuals with MPS II. Supportive care: Treatment of ocular manifestations by
ophthalmologist with experience in MPS; tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy as
needed; early and aggressive treatment of ear infections including
pressure-equalizing tubes; hearing aids may be helpful; hip replacement as
needed; physiotherapy; positive pressure ventilation (CPAP) as needed; CT
examination of the trachea to assess airway issues; tracheostomy only as needed;
anesthesia is best administered in centers familiar with the potential
complications in persons with MPS II; umbilical and inguinal hernia repair as
needed; treatment of cardiovascular manifestations per cardiologist with
medications and/or cardiac valve replacement; developmental and educational
support; occupational and physical therapy; shunting for hydrocephalus as
needed; carpal tunnel release as needed; treatment of spinal stenosis per
neurosurgeon/orthopedist; standard management of behavioral problems and
seizures; melatonin may be beneficial for sleep problems; transitional care
plan; family and social work support. Surveillance: Assess growth every six to
12 months throughout childhood; ophthalmology examination annually or as needed;
assess feeding and swallowing at each visit or at least every six to 12 months
in those with neuronopathic MPS II; assess for adenoid and tonsil hypertrophy at
least annually; dental evaluation every six months; audiogram at least annually;
annual orthopedic evaluation; annual pulmonology evaluation including pulmonary
function testing; sleep study as needed and prior to surgery; assess for
umbilical and inguinal hernia, chronic diarrhea, and liver and spleen size
annually or as needed; cardiology assessment with echocardiogram annually or per
cardiologist; EKG annually in adults or more frequently as needed; annual
developmental, cognitive, behavioral, and neurologic assessment including
assessment for seizures and manifestations of spinal stenosis; head and neck MRI
to assess ventricular size and for cervical medullary narrowing as needed;
assess opening pressure on lumbar puncture as needed; nerve conduction study for
carpal tunnel syndrome annually; assess family needs at each visit. Evaluation
of relatives at risk: I2S biochemical testing and/or IDS molecular genetic
testing of at-risk male family members allows early diagnosis and prompt
initiation of treatment; the importance of prompt initiation of treatment has
been demonstrated in studies involving affected sibs who were diagnosed and
treated at different ages.
GENETIC COUNSELING: MPS II is inherited in an X-linked manner. The risk to sibs
depends on the genetic status of the mother. If the mother of the proband has an
IDS pathogenic variant, the chance of transmitting it in each pregnancy is 50%.
Males who inherit the pathogenic variant will be affected; females who inherit
the pathogenic variant will be carriers and will typically be asymptomatic.
Affected males transmit the pathogenic variant to all of their daughters and
none of their sons. Once the IDS pathogenic variant has been identified in an
affected family member, molecular genetic carrier testing for at-risk female
relatives and prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing for pregnancies at
increased risk are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301451
