---
reference_id: "PMID:36688177"
title: Pityriasis Lichenoides Following SARS-CoV-2 Infection/Vaccination.
authors:
- Feschuk AM
- Green M
- Kashetsky N
- Maibach HI
journal: Curr Dermatol Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s13671-023-00380-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pityriasis Lichenoides Following SARS-CoV-2 Infection/Vaccination.
**Authors:** Feschuk AM, Green M, Kashetsky N, Maibach HI
**Journal:** Curr Dermatol Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13671-023-00380-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13671-023-00380-1)

## Content

1. Curr Dermatol Rep. 2023;12(1):27-32. doi: 10.1007/s13671-023-00380-1. Epub
2023  Jan 17.

Pityriasis Lichenoides Following SARS-CoV-2 Infection/Vaccination.

Feschuk AM(1), Green M(2), Kashetsky N(1), Maibach HI(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University of Newfoundland, 300 Prince Philip 
Dr.Newfoundland & Labrador, St. John's, A1B 3V6 Canada.
(2)Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA USA.
(3)Department of Dermatology, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Pityriasis lichenoides (PL) is a spectrum of dermatological 
conditions involving polymorphous lesions. Natural history of the condition 
ranges from acute to chronic. Cases of PL following SARS-CoV-2 
infection/vaccination have been reported, but not yet comprehensively reviewed. 
Hence, the objective of this article is to review and summarize cases of PL 
following SARS-CoV-2 infection/vaccination in order to guide clinicians in its 
diagnosis and management.
RECENT FINDINGS: PubMed, Embase, and Web of Science were searched for relevant 
articles. Thirteen articles, consisting of 14 cases of PL following SARS-CoV-2 
infection/vaccination, were identified. Males represented 64.3% of cases, and 
the average age of those affected was 41.4 years. The majority of cases (N = 9, 
64.3%) were following SARS-CoV-2 vaccination, the most commonly implicated being 
Pfizer-BioNTech (n = 8/10, 80%), while four (28.6) followed infection. The 
overall latency period ranged from 5 days to 1 month. Treatments varied greatly. 
However, at the time of follow-up, 12/14 patients (85.7%) had either marked 
improvement or complete resolution of lesions.
SUMMARY: This review cannot determine causality. However, a temporal association 
was observed with the case reports, and one case of PL followed SARS-CoV-2 
infection and recurred with subsequent vaccination, suggesting an association. 
Nevertheless, risk of developing PL following SARS-CoV-2 infection/vaccination 
is likely extremely low. There is also the possibility these cases are purely 
coincidental. Still, clinicians should be aware of this possible etiology when 
diagnosing a new or exacerbated case of PL. Finally, given that the majority of 
patients had marked improvement or complete resolution of lesions at the time of 
follow-up, clinicians should provide reassurance to their affected patients.

© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, 
LLC, part of Springer Nature 2023, Springer Nature or its licensor (e.g. a 
society or other partner) holds exclusive rights to this article under a 
publishing agreement with the author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author 
self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article is solely 
governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.

DOI: 10.1007/s13671-023-00380-1
PMCID: PMC9844164
PMID: 36688177

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of InterestThe authors have no 
financial or non-financial competing interests to disclose.