---
reference_id: "PMID:38014644"
title: Assessing type I collagen expression and quality in cellular models of osteogenesis imperfecta.
authors:
- Udupa P
- Shrikondawar AN
- Ranjan A
- Ghosh DK
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/cge.14463
keywords:
- Humans
- Collagen Type I/genetics
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Mutation
- Vesicular Transport Proteins/genetics
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Assessing type I collagen expression and quality in cellular models of osteogenesis imperfecta.
**Authors:** Udupa P, Shrikondawar AN, Ranjan A, Ghosh DK
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.14463](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.14463)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2024 Mar;105(3):329-334. doi: 10.1111/cge.14463. Epub 2023 Nov 28.

Assessing type I collagen expression and quality in cellular models of 
osteogenesis imperfecta.

Udupa P(1), Shrikondawar AN(2), Ranjan A(2), Ghosh DK(1).

Author information:
(1)Kasturba Medical College, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, 
Karnataka, India.
(2)Computational and Functional Genomics Group, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting 
and Diagnostics, Hyderabad, Telangana, India.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a group of genetic disorders of bone formation 
characterized by soft and shorter brittle bones in affected individuals. OI is 
generally considered a collagenopathy resulting from abnormal expression of type 
I collagen. As assay system to detect the cellular level and quality of type I 
collagen would help in rapid and correct detection of OI from the diagnostic 
perspectives. Here, we report an immunofluorescence assay for detection of type 
I collagen in fibroblast models of OI and represented them into two broad 
categories based on the expression level and aggregation characteristics of 
pro-α1(I). Cell phenotypic assays of pro-α1(I) in OI-related gene knocked down 
fibroblasts revealed aggregates of pro-α1(I) in conditions with knockdown of 
SERPINF1, CRTAP, P3H1, PPIB, SERPINH1, FKBP10, TMEM38B, MESD, and KDELR2, 
whereas pro-α1(I) expression was very low in fibroblasts which had knockdown of 
IFITM5, SP7, BMP1, WNT1, CREB3L1, MBTPS2, and CCDC134. The expression of 
pro-α1(I) showed abundant and non-aggregated distribution in the fibroblasts 
with knockdown of non-OI skeletal disorder-related genes (RAB33B and IFT52). The 
in vitro assay accurately detected abnormally expressed pro-α1(I) levels in 
cellular models of various types of OI. Thus, this procedure represents a 
promising point-of-detection assay for potential diagnosis and therapeutic 
decisions in OI.

© 2023 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.14463
PMID: 38014644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]