---
reference_id: "PMID:33474589"
title: "Neurological features and outcomes of Wilson's disease: a single-center experience."
authors:
- Samanci B
- Sahin E
- Bilgic B
- Tufekcioglu Z
- Gurvit H
- Emre M
- Demir K
- Hanagasi HA
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s10072-020-05013-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurological features and outcomes of Wilson's disease: a single-center experience.
**Authors:** Samanci B, Sahin E, Bilgic B, Tufekcioglu Z, Gurvit H, Emre M, Demir K, Hanagasi HA
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10072-020-05013-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-020-05013-0)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2021 Sep;42(9):3829-3834. doi: 10.1007/s10072-020-05013-0. Epub
2021  Jan 21.

Neurological features and outcomes of Wilson's disease: a single-center 
experience.

Samanci B(1), Sahin E(2), Bilgic B(2), Tufekcioglu Z(2), Gurvit H(2), Emre M(2), 
Demir K(3), Hanagasi HA(2).

Author information:
(1)Behavioral Neurology and Movement Disorders Unit, Department of Neurology, 
Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Capa-Fatih/Istanbul, Turkey. 
bediasamanci@gmail.com.
(2)Behavioral Neurology and Movement Disorders Unit, Department of Neurology, 
Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Capa-Fatih/Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Division of Gastroenterohepatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Istanbul 
Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Capa-Fatih/Istanbul, Turkey.

Wilson's disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive genetic disorder of copper 
metabolism, and WD patients can present with neurologic symptoms. We aimed to 
report the general characteristics and prognosis of a Turkish series of WD 
patients with neurological manifestations. A total of 12,352 patients were 
screened from the patient database, and 53 WD patients were included. Patients 
were classified based on the predominant neurological syndrome type including 
tremor, dystonia, parkinsonism, or discrete neurological signs and were 
classified as having "good outcome," "stable," and "poor outcome" according to 
their treatment response. There were 32 male and 21 female patients, aged 20-66 
years. The mean follow-up was 11.3 ± 4.56 years. Sixty-two percent of patients 
presented predominantly with neurological symptoms. Neurological WD diagnosis 
was established after a mean time delay of 2.3 years from the WD diagnosis. The 
most common neurological manifestation was dystonia, followed by tremor and 
parkinsonism. Fifteen patients had a family history of WD. Consanguinity was 
present in 20 patients. Patients were treated with D-penicillamine, trientine, 
zinc salts, or their combinations. Besides the main treatments, 41 patients were 
on symptomatic treatment for neurologic symptoms. Thirty-six patients had a 
"good outcome," five patients were stable, and six patients had "poor outcome." 
Post-chelation neurological worsening was observed in 11 patients. WD should be 
considered in differential diagnosis in any patient with unexplained neurologic 
symptoms. Early diagnosis is important, and appropriate treatment should be 
promptly initiated to prevent progressive and irreversible damage, with good 
prognosis and stable disease in the majority of the patients with treatment 
compliance.

© 2021. Fondazione Società Italiana di Neurologia.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-020-05013-0
PMID: 33474589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]