---
reference_id: "PMID:12105244"
title: "Meta-analysis of genotype-phenotype correlation in X-linked Alport syndrome: impact on clinical counselling."
authors:
- Gross O
- Netzer KO
- Lambrecht R
- Seibold S
- Weber M
journal: Nephrol Dial Transplant
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1093/ndt/17.7.1218
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- "Chromosomes, Human, X"
- "Codon, Terminator"
- Collagen/genetics
- Europe
- Genetic Counseling
- Humans
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/genetics"
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/genetics"
- Surveys and Questionnaires
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Meta-analysis of genotype-phenotype correlation in X-linked Alport syndrome: impact on clinical counselling.
**Authors:** Gross O, Netzer KO, Lambrecht R, Seibold S, Weber M
**Journal:** Nephrol Dial Transplant (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ndt/17.7.1218](https://doi.org/10.1093/ndt/17.7.1218)

## Content

1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2002 Jul;17(7):1218-27. doi: 10.1093/ndt/17.7.1218.

Meta-analysis of genotype-phenotype correlation in X-linked Alport syndrome: 
impact on clinical counselling.

Gross O(1), Netzer KO, Lambrecht R, Seibold S, Weber M.

Author information:
(1)Medical Clinic I, Cologne City Hospital, Cologne-Merheim, Germany. 
oliver.gross@uni-koeln.de

BACKGROUND: Alport syndrome (AS) is a hereditary nephropathy characterized by 
progressive renal failure, hearing loss and ocular lesions. Numerous mutations 
of the COL4A5 gene encoding the alpha 5-chain of type IV collagen have been 
described, establishing the molecular cause of AS. The goal of the present study 
was to identify the genotype-phenotype correlations that are helpful in clinical 
counseling. COL4A5-mutations (n=267) in males were analysed including 23 German 
Alport families.
METHODS: Exons of the COL4A5 gene were PCR-amplified and screened by Southern 
blot, direct sequencing or denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Phenotypes 
were obtained by questionnaires or extracted from 44 publications in the 
literature. Data were analysed by Kaplan-Meier statistics, chi(2) and 
Kruskal-Wallis tests.
RESULTS: Genotype-phenotype data for 23 German Alport families are reported. 
Analysis of these data and of mutations published in the literature showed the 
type of mutation being a significant predictor of end-stage renal failure (ESRF) 
age. The patients' renal phenotypes could be grouped into three cohorts: (1) 
large rearrangements, frame shift, nonsense, and splice donor mutations had a 
mean ESRF age of 19.8+/-5.7 years; (2) non-glycine- or 3' glycine-missense 
mutations, in-frame deletions/insertions and splice acceptor mutations had a 
mean ESRF age of 25.7+/-7.2 years and fewer extrarenal symptoms; (3) 5' glycine 
substitutions had an even later onset of ESRF at 30.1+/-7.2 years. 
Glycine-substitutions occurred less commonly de novo than all other mutations 
(5.5% vs 13.9%). However, due to the evolutionary advantage of their moderate 
phenotype, they were the most common mutations. The intrafamilial phenotype of 
an individual mutation was found to be very consistent with regards to the 
manifestation of deafness, lenticonus and the time point of onset of ESRF.
CONCLUSIONS: Knowledge of the mutation adds significant information about the 
progress of renal and extrarenal disease in males with X-linked AS. We suggest 
that the considerable prognostic relevance of a patient's genotype should be 
included in the classification of the Alport phenotype.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/17.7.1218
PMID: 12105244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]