---
reference_id: "PMID:31273487"
title: Genetic and genomic basis of the mismatch repair system involved in Lynch syndrome.
authors:
- Tamura K
- Kaneda M
- Futagawa M
- Takeshita M
- Kim S
- Nakama M
- Kawashita N
- Tatsumi-Miyajima J
journal: Int J Clin Oncol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s10147-019-01494-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic and genomic basis of the mismatch repair system involved in Lynch syndrome.
**Authors:** Tamura K, Kaneda M, Futagawa M, Takeshita M, Kim S, Nakama M, Kawashita N, Tatsumi-Miyajima J
**Journal:** Int J Clin Oncol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10147-019-01494-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10147-019-01494-y)

## Content

1. Int J Clin Oncol. 2019 Sep;24(9):999-1011. doi: 10.1007/s10147-019-01494-y.
Epub  2019 Jul 4.

Genetic and genomic basis of the mismatch repair system involved in Lynch 
syndrome.

Tamura K(1), Kaneda M(2), Futagawa M(2), Takeshita M(2), Kim S(2), Nakama M(3), 
Kawashita N(2), Tatsumi-Miyajima J(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Master of Science, Graduate School of Science 
and Engineering Research, Kindai University, Higashiosaka, Japan. 
tamura@life.kindai.ac.jp.
(2)Division of Medical Genetics, Master of Science, Graduate School of Science 
and Engineering Research, Kindai University, Higashiosaka, Japan.
(3)Division of Clinical Genetics, Gifu University Hospital, Gifu, Japan.

Erratum in
    Int J Clin Oncol. 2019 Sep;24(9):1012. doi: 10.1007/s10147-019-01515-w.

Lynch syndrome is a cancer-predisposing syndrome inherited in an 
autosomal-dominant manner, wherein colon cancer and endometrial cancer develop 
frequently in the family, it results from a loss-of-function mutation in one of 
four different genes (MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2) encoding mismatch repair 
proteins. Being located immediately upstream of the MSH2 gene, EPCAM 
abnormalities can affect MSH2 and cause Lynch syndrome. Mismatch repair proteins 
are involved in repairing of incorrect pairing (point mutations and 
deletion/insertion of simple repetitive sequences, so-called microsatellites) 
that can arise during DNA replication. MSH2 forms heterodimers with MSH6 or MSH3 
(MutSα, MutSβ, respectively) and is involved in mismatch-pair recognition and 
initiation of repair. MLH1 forms a complex with PMS2, and functions as an 
endonuclease. If the mismatch repair system is thoroughly working, genome 
integrity is maintained completely. Lynch syndrome is a state of mismatch repair 
deficiency due to a monoallelic abnormality of any mismatch repair genes. The 
phenotype indicating the mismatch repair deficiency can be frequently shown as a 
microsatellite instability in tumors. Children with germline biallelic mismatch 
repair gene abnormalities were reported to develop conditions such as 
gastrointestinal polyposis, colorectal cancer, brain cancer, leukemia, etc., and 
so on, demonstrating the need to respond with new concepts in genetic 
counseling. In promoting cancer genome medicine in a new era, such as by 
utilizing immune checkpoints, it is important to understand the genetic and 
genomic molecular background, including the status of mismatch repair 
deficiency.

DOI: 10.1007/s10147-019-01494-y
PMID: 31273487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]