---
reference_id: "PMID:36361640"
title: "Pediatric Multisystem Syndrome Associated with SARS-CoV-2 (MIS-C): The Interplay of Oxidative Stress and Inflammation."
authors:
- Perrone S
- Cannavò L
- Manti S
- Rulli I
- Buonocore G
- Esposito SMR
- Gitto E
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms232112836
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric Multisystem Syndrome Associated with SARS-CoV-2 (MIS-C): The Interplay of Oxidative Stress and Inflammation.
**Authors:** Perrone S, Cannavò L, Manti S, Rulli I, Buonocore G, Esposito SMR, Gitto E
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms232112836](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms232112836)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Oct 25;23(21):12836. doi: 10.3390/ijms232112836.

Pediatric Multisystem Syndrome Associated with SARS-CoV-2 (MIS-C): The Interplay 
of Oxidative Stress and Inflammation.

Perrone S(1), Cannavò L(2), Manti S(2), Rulli I(2), Buonocore G(3), Esposito 
SMR(1), Gitto E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Parma, Viale Antonio 
Gramsci, 14, 43126 Parma, Italy.
(2)Department of Human Pathology in Adult and Developmental Age "Gaetano 
Barresi", University of Messina, Via Consolare Valeria 1, 98125 Messina, Italy.
(3)Department of Molecular and Developmental Medicine, University of Siena, 
Viale Bracci, 36, 53100 Siena, Italy.

Pediatric inflammatory multisystem syndrome temporally associated with 
SARS-CoV-2 (MIS-C) is characterized by persistent fever and evidence of single 
or multiorgan dysfunction, and laboratory evidence of inflammation, elevated 
neutrophils, reduced lymphocytes, and low albumin. The pathophysiological 
mechanisms of MIS-C are still unknown. Proinflammatory mediators, including 
reactive oxygen species and decreased antioxidant enzymes, seems to play a 
central role. Virus entry activates NOXs and inhibits Nrf-2 antioxidant response 
inducing free radicals. The biological functions of nonphagocytic NOXs are still 
under study and appear to include: defense of epithelia, intracellular signaling 
mechanisms for growth regulation and cell differentiation, and 
post-translational modifications of proteins. This educational review has the 
aim of analyzing the newest evidence on the role of oxidative stress (OS) in 
MIS-C. Only by relating inflammatory mediators to OS evaluation in children 
following SARS-CoV-2 infection will it be possible to achieve a better 
understanding of these mechanisms and to reduce long-term morbidity. The link 
between inflammation and OS is key to developing effective prevention strategies 
with antioxidants to protect children.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms232112836
PMCID: PMC9657970
PMID: 36361640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.