---
reference_id: "PMID:20940415"
title: "Mantle cell lymphoma: biology, pathogenesis, and the molecular basis of treatment in the genomic era."
authors:
- Pérez-Galán P
- Dreyling M
- Wiestner A
journal: Blood
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-04-189977
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Cyclin D1/genetics
- Genomics
- Humans
- "Lymphoma, Mantle-Cell/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology, genetics"
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mantle cell lymphoma: biology, pathogenesis, and the molecular basis of treatment in the genomic era.
**Authors:** Pérez-Galán P, Dreyling M, Wiestner A
**Journal:** Blood (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2010-04-189977](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2010-04-189977)

## Content

1. Blood. 2011 Jan 6;117(1):26-38. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-04-189977. Epub 2010
Oct  12.

Mantle cell lymphoma: biology, pathogenesis, and the molecular basis of 
treatment in the genomic era.

Pérez-Galán P(1), Dreyling M, Wiestner A.

Author information:
(1)Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Bethesda, MD 
20892-1202, USA.

Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is a B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma of which at least a 
subset arises from antigen-experienced B cells. However, what role antigen 
stimulation plays in its pathogenesis remains ill defined. The genetic hallmark 
is the chromosomal translocation t(11;14) resulting in aberrant expression of 
cyclin D1. Secondary genetic events increase the oncogenic potential of cyclin 
D1 and frequently inactivate DNA damage response pathways. In combination these 
changes drive cell-cycle progression and give rise to pronounced genetic 
instability. Several signaling pathways contribute to MCL pathogenesis, 
including the often constitutively activated PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway, which 
promotes tumor proliferation and survival. WNT, Hedgehog, and NF-κB pathways 
also appear to be important. Although MCL typically responds to frontline 
chemotherapy, it remains incurable with standard approaches. Proteasome 
inhibitors (bortezomib), mTOR inhibitors (temsirolimus), and immunomodulatory 
drugs (lenalidomide) have recently been added to the treatment options in MCL. 
The molecular basis for the antitumor activity of these agents is an area of 
intense study that hopefully will lead to further improvements in the near 
future. Given its unique biology, relative rarity, and the difficulty in 
achieving long-lasting remissions with conventional approaches, patients with 
MCL should be encouraged to participate in clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2010-04-189977
PMCID: PMC3037747
PMID: 20940415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]