---
reference_id: "PMID:29493257"
title: "Seeing cilia: imaging modalities for ciliary motion and clinical connections."
authors:
- Peabody JE
- Shei RJ
- Bermingham BM
- Phillips SE
- Turner B
- Rowe SM
- Solomon GM
journal: Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1152/ajplung.00556.2017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Seeing cilia: imaging modalities for ciliary motion and clinical connections.
**Authors:** Peabody JE, Shei RJ, Bermingham BM, Phillips SE, Turner B, Rowe SM, Solomon GM
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajplung.00556.2017](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajplung.00556.2017)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2018 Jun 1;314(6):L909-L921. doi: 
10.1152/ajplung.00556.2017. Epub 2018 Mar 1.

Seeing cilia: imaging modalities for ciliary motion and clinical connections.

Peabody JE(1)(2), Shei RJ(1)(2), Bermingham BM(1), Phillips SE(1), Turner B(3), 
Rowe SM(1)(3)(2), Solomon GM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Alabama.
(2)Gregory Fleming James Cystic Fibrosis Research Center, University of Alabama 
at Birmingham , Birmingham, Alabama.
(3)Departments of Pediatrics and Cell Developmental and Integrative Biology, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Alabama.

The respiratory tract is lined with multiciliated epithelial cells that function 
to move mucus and trapped particles via the mucociliary transport apparatus. 
Genetic and acquired ciliopathies result in diminished mucociliary clearance, 
contributing to disease pathogenesis. Recent innovations in imaging technology 
have advanced our understanding of ciliary motion in health and disease states. 
Application of imaging modalities including transmission electron microscopy, 
high-speed video microscopy, and micron-optical coherence tomography could 
improve diagnostics and be applied for precision medicine. In this review, we 
provide an overview of ciliary motion, imaging modalities, and ciliopathic 
diseases of the respiratory system including primary ciliary dyskinesia, cystic 
fibrosis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and idiopathic pulmonary 
fibrosis.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplung.00556.2017
PMCID: PMC6032069
PMID: 29493257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]