---
reference_id: "PMID:10407462"
title: "Hyperostosis frontalis interna: an anthropological perspective."
authors:
- Hershkovitz I
- Greenwald C
- Rothschild BM
- Latimer B
- Dutour O
- Jellema LM
- Wish-Baratz S
journal: Am J Phys Anthropol
year: '1999'
doi: "10.1002/(SICI)1096-8644(199907)109:3<303::AID-AJPA3>3.0.CO;2-I"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hyperostosis frontalis interna: an anthropological perspective.
**Authors:** Hershkovitz I, Greenwald C, Rothschild BM, Latimer B, Dutour O, Jellema LM, Wish-Baratz S
**Journal:** Am J Phys Anthropol (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1002/(SICI)1096-8644(199907)109:3<303::AID-AJPA3>3.0.CO;2-I](https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1096-8644(199907)109:3<303::AID-AJPA3>3.0.CO;2-I)

## Content

1. Am J Phys Anthropol. 1999 Jul;109(3):303-25. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1096-8644(199907)109:3<303::AID-AJPA3>3.0.CO;2-I.

Hyperostosis frontalis interna: an anthropological perspective.

Hershkovitz I(1), Greenwald C, Rothschild BM, Latimer B, Dutour O, Jellema LM, 
Wish-Baratz S.

Author information:
(1)Cleveland Museum of Natural History, Ohio 44106-1767, USA. 
anatom2@post.tau.ac.il

Hyperostosis frontalis interna (HFI) is manifested by the accretion of bone on 
the inner table of the frontal bone. Despite the vast literature on HFI, 
ambiguity exists as to its etiology, osteogenesis, demography, and history. This 
stimulated the present broad-scale study of HFI which included the evaluation of 
1,706 early 20th century skulls (1,007 males and 699 females) from the 
Hamann-Todd and Terry human osteological collections, as well as 2,019 pre-19th 
century East-Mediterranean, Amerindian, and Central European skulls. In 
addition, 72 cadavers were dissected for gross inspection and histology. Special 
attention was paid to the relationship of the brain and meninges to endocranial 
lesions. HFI is an independent condition, not a symptom of a more generalized 
syndrome as suggested in the past. It can appear in a variety of forms but each 
is the result of the same process and probably of the same etiology. 
Investigators' previous failure to recognize the mild stages of HFI (types A and 
B) as an early form of the general HFI process led to erroneous statistics and 
interpretations of observations. HFI should also be considered a phenomenon 
separate from HCI, hyperostosis cranialis diffusa (HCD), and other endostoses, 
even when it appears in association with them. To avoid ambiguity and facilitate 
the description of cranial hyperostoses, uniform nomenclature (HFI, HCD) has 
been recommended. HFI is rarely seen in historic populations, regardless of 
geographical origin. It is most commonly found among females and is believed to 
be associated with prolonged estrogen stimulation. While its magnitude of 
manifestation and frequency are much higher in females, HFI is not a purely 
female phenomenon. Males with hormonal disturbances such as atrophic testis were 
found to manifest HFI type D. HFI is associated with age insofar as it is much 
less frequent in females under 40 years of age. Although advanced cases of HFI 
(types C and D) have been observed in individuals as young as 40 years of age, 
it is more frequently found after age 60. The frequency of HFI type D will not 
increase from age 60. Type-predicted analysis by cohort reveals significant 
ethnic differences. Changes in African American (AA) females appear earlier in 
life and progress more rapidly than in European American (EA) females. Analysis 
of radiographs shows a discrepancy between the anatomic prevalence of HFI and 
its radiological recognition, which is very poor for mild cases. This apparently 
resulted in the misconceptions that HFI is entirely an old-age phenomenon, and 
that it is exclusively female. Histological analysis shows that the inner table 
along with the closely attached dural layer play a major role in the 
osteogenesis of HFI. Contrary to previous models, no evidence for diploe or 
ectocranial plate involvement was found. Cadaver study suggests that the 
predilection for the frontal area may be related to an altered blood supply 
and/or vascular stretching.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1096-8644(199907)109:3<303::AID-AJPA3>3.0.CO;2-I
PMID: 10407462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]