---
reference_id: "PMID:33830353"
title: Stochastic models of infectious diseases in a periodic environment with application to cholera epidemics.
authors:
- Allen LJS
- Wang X
journal: J Math Biol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00285-021-01603-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stochastic models of infectious diseases in a periodic environment with application to cholera epidemics.
**Authors:** Allen LJS, Wang X
**Journal:** J Math Biol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00285-021-01603-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00285-021-01603-4)

## Content

1. J Math Biol. 2021 Apr 8;82(6):48. doi: 10.1007/s00285-021-01603-4.

Stochastic models of infectious diseases in a periodic environment with 
application to cholera epidemics.

Allen LJS(1), Wang X(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX, 
79409, USA.
(2)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Washington State University, 
Pullman, WA, 99164, USA. xueying@math.wsu.edu.

Seasonal variation affects the dynamics of many infectious diseases including 
influenza, cholera and malaria. The time when infectious individuals are first 
introduced into a population is crucial in predicting whether a major disease 
outbreak occurs. In this investigation, we apply a time-nonhomogeneous 
stochastic process for a cholera epidemic with seasonal periodicity and a 
multitype branching process approximation to obtain an analytical estimate for 
the probability of an outbreak. In particular, an analytic estimate of the 
probability of disease extinction is shown to satisfy a system of ordinary 
differential equations which follows from the backward Kolmogorov differential 
equation. An explicit expression for the mean (resp. variance) of the first 
extinction time given an extinction occurs is derived based on the analytic 
estimate for the extinction probability. Our results indicate that the 
probability of a disease outbreak, and mean and standard derivation of the first 
time to disease extinction are periodic in time and depend on the time when the 
infectious individuals or free-living pathogens are introduced. Numerical 
simulations are then carried out to validate the analytical predictions using 
two examples of the general cholera model. At the end, the developed theoretical 
results are extended to more general models of infectious diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/s00285-021-01603-4
PMID: 33830353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]