---
reference_id: "PMID:25213377"
title: Immune dysregulation in human subjects with heterozygous germline mutations in CTLA4.
authors:
- Kuehn HS
- Ouyang W
- Lo B
- Deenick EK
- Niemela JE
- Avery DT
- Schickel JN
- Tran DQ
- Stoddard J
- Zhang Y
- Frucht DM
- Dumitriu B
- Scheinberg P
- Folio LR
- Frein CA
- Price S
- Koh C
- Heller T
- Seroogy CM
- Huttenlocher A
- Rao VK
- Su HC
- Kleiner D
- Notarangelo LD
- Rampertaap Y
- Olivier KN
- McElwee J
- Hughes J
- Pittaluga S
- Oliveira JB
- Meffre E
- Fleisher TA
- Holland SM
- Lenardo MJ
- Tangye SG
- Uzel G
journal: Science
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1126/science.1255904
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Immune dysregulation in human subjects with heterozygous germline mutations in CTLA4.
**Authors:** Kuehn HS, Ouyang W, Lo B, Deenick EK, Niemela JE, Avery DT, Schickel JN, Tran DQ, Stoddard J, Zhang Y, Frucht DM, Dumitriu B, Scheinberg P, Folio LR, Frein CA, Price S, Koh C, Heller T, Seroogy CM, Huttenlocher A, Rao VK, Su HC, Kleiner D, Notarangelo LD, Rampertaap Y, Olivier KN, McElwee J, Hughes J, Pittaluga S, Oliveira JB, Meffre E, Fleisher TA, Holland SM, Lenardo MJ, Tangye SG, Uzel G
**Journal:** Science (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1255904](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1255904)

## Content

1. Science. 2014 Sep 26;345(6204):1623-1627. doi: 10.1126/science.1255904. Epub 
2014 Sep 11.

Immune dysregulation in human subjects with heterozygous germline mutations in 
CTLA4.

Kuehn HS(#)(1), Ouyang W(#)(2), Lo B(#)(3)(4), Deenick EK(5)(6), Niemela JE(1), 
Avery DT(5), Schickel JN(7), Tran DQ(8), Stoddard J(1), Zhang Y(4)(9), Frucht 
DM(2), Dumitriu B(10), Scheinberg P(10), Folio LR(11), Frein CA(12), Price 
S(3)(4), Koh C(13), Heller T(13), Seroogy CM(14), Huttenlocher A(14)(15), Rao 
VK(3)(4), Su HC(4)(9), Kleiner D(16), Notarangelo LD(17), Rampertaap Y(18), 
Olivier KN(18), McElwee J(19), Hughes J(19), Pittaluga S(16), Oliveira JB(20), 
Meffre E(7), Fleisher TA(1), Holland SM(4)(18), Lenardo MJ(3)(4), Tangye 
SG(5)(6), Uzel G(18).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Clinical Center, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Cell Biology, Division of Monoclonal Antibodies, Office of 
Biotechnology Products, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(3)Molecular Development of the Immune System Section, Laboratory of Immunology, 
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(4)NIAID Clinical Genomics Program, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious 
Diseases, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(5)Immunology and Immunodeficiency Group, Immunology Division, Garvan Institute 
of Medical Research, Sydney, NSW 2010, Australia.
(6)St. Vincent's Clinical School Faculty of Medicine, University of New South 
Wales, Sydney, NSW 2010, Australia.
(7)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
CT 06511, USA.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Medical School, Houston, TX 
77030, USA.
(9)Immunological Diseases Unit, Laboratory of Host Defenses, National Institute 
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(10)Hematology Branch, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA.
(11)Radiology and Imaging and Sciences, Clinical Center, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(12)Clinical Research Directorate, Clinical Monitoring Research Program, Leidos 
Biomedical Research Inc., Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, 
Frederick, MD 21702, USA.
(13)Liver Diseases Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and 
Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA.
(15)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Wisconsin, 
Madison, WI 53706, USA.
(16)Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(17)Division of Immunology and Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, 
Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 10217, USA.
(18)Laboratory of Clinical Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Allergy 
and Infectious Diseases, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(19)Merck Research Laboratories, Merck & Co., Boston, MA 02130, USA.
(20)Instituto de Medicina Integral Prof. Fernando Figueira-IMIP, 50070 
Recife-PE, Brazil.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Science. 2014 Sep 26;345(6204):1560-1. doi: 10.1126/science.1260791.
    Immunity. 2014 Nov 20;41(5):682-4. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.11.005.

Cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen-4 (CTLA-4) is an inhibitory receptor found on 
immune cells. The consequences of mutations in CTLA4 in humans are unknown. We 
identified germline heterozygous mutations in CTLA4 in subjects with severe 
immune dysregulation from four unrelated families. Whereas Ctla4 heterozygous 
mice have no obvious phenotype, human CTLA4 haploinsufficiency caused 
dysregulation of FoxP3(+) regulatory T (Treg) cells, hyperactivation of effector 
T cells, and lymphocytic infiltration of target organs. Patients also exhibited 
progressive loss of circulating B cells, associated with an increase of 
predominantly autoreactive CD21(lo) B cells and accumulation of B cells in 
nonlymphoid organs. Inherited human CTLA4 haploinsufficiency demonstrates a 
critical quantitative role for CTLA-4 in governing T and B lymphocyte 
homeostasis.

Copyright © 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1255904
PMCID: PMC4371526
PMID: 25213377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Immune tolerance is controlled by multiple mechanisms (1, 2), including regulatory T (Treg) cells (3–5) and inhibitory receptors (6, 7). Treg cells constitutively express the inhibitory receptor CTLA-4, which confers suppressive functions (8, 9). CTLA-4, also known as CD152, is also expressed by activated T cells and, upon ligation, inhibits their proliferation (10). Homo-zygous deficiency of Ctla4 in mice causes fatal multiorgan lymphocytic infiltration and destruction (11–13); hence, CTLA-4 functions at a key “checkpoint” in immune tolerance. CTLA-4– immunoglobulin (Ig) fusion protein and neutralizing CTLA-4 antibody are used to modulate immunity in autoimmune and cancer patients (14, 15), respectively. Studies have given conflicting results regarding the association of CTLA4 single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) with organ-specific autoimmunity (16). The consequences of genetic CTLA-4 deficiency in humans are unknown.

Our index patient—a 22-year-old female (A.II.1)—developed brain, gastrointestinal (GI), and lung lymphocytic infiltrates, autoimmune thrombocytopenia, and hypogammaglobulinemia in early childhood (Fig. 1A and table S1). Her 43-year-old father (A.I.1) manifested lung and GI infiltrates, hypogammaglobulinemia, and clonally expanded γδ-CD8+ T cells infiltrating and suppressing the bone marrow (fig. S1A). Four additional cases from three unrelated families (families B, C, and D) (fig. S1 and table S1) were identified among a cohort of 23 patients with autoimmune cytopenias, hypogammaglobulinemia, CD4 T cell lymphopenia, and lymphocytic infiltration of nonlymphoid organs. Patient B.I.1, previously diagnosed with common variable immunodeficiency (CVID), had hepatosplenomegaly, autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA), autoimmune thrombocytopenia, pulmonary nodules, and cerebral infiltrative lesions. C.II.1, a 19-year-old male, had childhood-onset EBV+ Hodgkin's lymphoma and developed diffuse lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, AIHA, autoimmune thrombocytopenia, and enteropathy. His mother (C.I.1), asymptomatic and considered unaffected, consented to genomic studies only. Patient D.II.1 is a 46-year-old male with psoriasis, lymphadenopathy, AIHA, and manifested GI and lung lymphocytic infiltrates. His mother (D.I.1) was unaffected, and his brother (D.II.2) was reportedly healthy but not clinically evaluated; however, his 11-year-old son (D.III.1) had lymphadenopathy, severe AIHA, and lymphocytic brain infiltration. In most patients, GI biopsies revealed histopathology similar to that caused by CTLA-4 blocking antibody treatment in melanoma patients (17, 18).

Both patients in family A had low CD4+ T cells with depleted CD45RA+CD62L+ naïve cells, increased expression of the exhaustion marker PD-1, and a progressive loss of circulating mature B cells (Fig. 1B and table S1). Similar and overlapping immune phenotypes were detected in the additional families (Fig. 1, B to D, and table S1).

We performed whole-exome sequencing using DNA from A.II.1 and identified a heterozygous, nonsense c.151C>T (p.R51X) mutation in CTLA4. This was confirmed by Sanger sequencing in the proband and A.I.1 (Fig. 1C). cDNA analyses from A.I.1 T cells showed that the mutant allele mRNA was degraded >95%, consistent with nonsense-mediated decay (table S2). CTLA4 sequencing in B.I.1 revealed a frameshift deletion (c.75delG; p.L28Ffs*44) (Fig. 1C) that introduced a stop codon in exon 2. Families C and D had mutations in introns 2 and 3 (458–1G>C and 567+5G>C) (Fig. 1C) disrupting the acceptor and donor sites of the second or third introns, respectively. These mutations generated a CTLA4 mRNA lacking the third exon, putatively encoding a soluble form of CTLA4 (fig. S2A). Full-length CTLA4 mRNA, encoding the membrane-bound form, was reduced. Serum-soluble CTLA-4 was comparable in patients and healthy individuals. In an extended cohort, de novo mutants were not identified; however, because B.I.1's parental genotypes are unknown, his mutation could be de novo.

Affected patients had reduced CTLA-4 protein and mRNA expression in sorted Treg cells relative to healthy donors; this reduction persisted after activation (Fig. 1D and fig. S2, A and B). Deletion of Ctla4 in mice impairs Treg cell suppressive function, causing severe autoimmune disease and early lethality despite normal Foxp3 levels (11, 12). We found that patients had normal percentages of FoxP3+ Treg cells with a CD127–CD45RO+Helios+ phenotype (fig. S3, A and B), but overall expressed significantly less FoxP3 and CD25 [interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptor a subunit and a marker of Treg cells] than Treg cells from healthy donors, and a large proportion of their Tregs were CD25– (Fig. 2, A and B). FOXP3 mRNA was also reduced in patient Treg cells (fig. S3C). Next, we tested the function of healthy donor or patient Treg cells and found that patient Tregs poorly suppressed proliferation of cocultured activated autologous or allogeneic T responder cells (Fig. 2C and fig. S3D).

Among the nine subjects harboring CTLA4 mutations, three relatives were reportedly healthy (C.I.1, D.I.1, and D.II.2). Only one of these unaffected healthy relatives (D.I.1) could be evaluated in detail, and she had no clinical findings similar to CTLA-4–deficient patients. Her Treg cells showed higher expression of CTLA-4 and normal levels of FoxP3 and CD25 (fig. S4, A and B), whereas her effector T cells displayed the same in vitro hyperproliferation observed in affected patients (fig. S4C); these findings suggest that Treg cell dysfunction might be essential for the full disease phenotype.

Consistent with the results of studies in mice (11–13), CTLA-4–deficient patient T cells were hyperproliferative, with an increased percentage expressing CD25 in response to T cell receptor stimulation (Fig. 3A and fig. S5A). To test whether patient T cell hyperproliferation resulted from reduced CTLA4 expression, we used small interfering RNA (siRNA) to inhibit CTLA4 expression in normal peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). A factor of ~3 reduction in CTLA4 recapitulated the hyperproliferative T cell pheno-type (Fig. 3B). Moreover, overexpression of wild-type CTLA-4 in patient T cells suppressed the hyperproliferation (Fig. 3C and fig. S5, B and C), indicating that quantitative variations in CTLA-4 controlled the proliferative potential of T cells. CTLA-4–Ig fusion protein also suppressed patient T cell proliferation in vitro (Fig. 3D). Despite hyperproliferation of patient T cells in culture, the patients were lymphopenic. This may be explained by increased FAS (CD95) expression, caspase activity, and apoptosis of patient T cells, or by organ sequestration (fig. S6).

CTLA-4 function in B cells has been investigated, but its role remains unclear (8, 12, 19). We found that CTLA-4 expression was significantly reduced on activated B cells from patients (fig. S7A). The reduced frequencies of CD27+ class-switched memory B cells and progressive B cell lymphopenia (Fig. 4, A and B), together with known B cell abnormalities in human auto-immune diseases (20), prompted us to further investigate B cell maturation and function.

In inflammatory conditions such as systemic lupuserythematosus,rheumatoidarthritis, Sjogren's syndrome, CVID with autoimmunity and lymphoproliferation, and certain chronic infections, a population of B cells expressing reduced levels of CD21 (termed CD21lo B cells) has been identified (21–23). CD21lo B cells have been viewed as anergic or “exhausted” cells on the basis of observations such as enrichment of self-reactive B cell receptors (BCRs), an activated phenotype, reduced responsiveness to BCR engagement, and increased apoptosis (22–25). We found that the frequency of CD21lo B cells was greatly elevated in patients’ peripheral blood (Fig. 4B) (15 to 90% of B cells in CTLA-4–deficient patients versus <5% in controls). This subset progressively accumulated in patient A.I.1 from 41.5% to >95% of peripheral blood B cells over 3 years. Consistent with the anergic/exhausted state of CD21lo B cells (22), we observed heightened apoptosis in patient B cells (fig. S7, B and C) and poor BCR-induced proliferation relative to controls (Fig. 4C). The CD21lo B cells in CTLA-4–deficient patients were CD19hiCD20hiCD38lo, distinguishing them from transitional (CD19+CD20hiCD38hi) cells. Flow cyto-metric analysis revealed that these cells were phenotypically similar to the CD21lo B cell subset in other immune dysregulation disorders (fig. S8A) (21, 25). Accordingly, autoreactive IgG may be produced by the CD21lo B cells, as a greater proportion were IgG+CD27– cells, relative to the corresponding cells in healthy donors. Functional analysis in vitro indicated that naïve B cells from CTLA-4–deficient patients secreted IgM and underwent class switching to secrete IgG and IgA robustly (fig. S8B). However, patient CD21lo B cells secreted less Ig than those of healthy donors (fig. S8B). The propensity of CD21lo B cells to exhibit more apoptosis ex vivo (fig. S7C) and their constitutive expression of CD95 (fig. S8A) could explain peripheral B cell lymphopenia and hypogammaglobulinemia in most CTLA-4–deficient patients. Increased frequencies of autoreactive mature naïve B cells have been demonstrated in the blood of patients with immunodysregulation polyendocrinopathy enteropathy X-linked syndrome (IPEX), which is a primary Treg cell defect (26); this suggests a role for Treg cells in preventing the accumulation of autore-active B cells in the periphery. Thus, CTLA-4 haploinsufficiency decreases B cell tolerance and survival either intrinsically or extrinsically because of Treg dysfunction (26).

Our data indicate that germline CTLA4 haploinsufficiency causes lymphoproliferation, lymphocytic infiltration of nonlymphoid organs, autoimmune cytopenias, and B cell abnormalities with an accumulation of CD21lo B cells. These cells may account for antibody-mediated auto-immunity in our patients. In contrast, heterozygous Ctla4 deficiency in mice shows no obvious phenotype (12, 13). Interestingly, patient D.I.1, who has a CTLA4 splicing mutation with no apparent somatic reversions or leakiness, is clinically healthy (table S2). This incomplete penetrance in disease may result from other genetic differences between family members. This is analogous to that in autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome, a human genetic immune disorder with only 60% penetrance among family members harboring the same heterozygous gene mutation (27). Contrary to genetic deficiencies in inbred strains of mice, phenotypic variability is commonly observed in human single-gene disorders (28). This may explain why D.I.1 has a CTLA4 mutation, yet is asymptomatic. C.I.1 and D.II.2 are apparently healthy because of incomplete penetrance; however, further immunological testing is required to confirm this assumption. We did not identify any common genetic modifiers in this study, as proven by our cohort analysis (see supplementary text). Also, our analysis of nonsynonymous SNVs in the CTLA4 coding region showed that CTLA-4 expression and T cell function are comparable to those of wild-type controls (table S3 and figs. S9 and S10). Nonetheless, our findings show that the mutations reported here result in quantitative reductions in CTLA-4 expression, which contribute to a severe loss of tolerance and infiltrative auto-immune disease.

Our results show the spectrum of clinical complications that can be anticipated from CTLA-4–blocking drugs. Consistent with these findings, treatment with the CTLA-4 mimetic, CTLA-4–Ig, suppressed patient T cell hyper-proliferation in vitro (Fig. 3D) and could be a potential therapeutic intervention for CTLA-4– deficient patients. Taken together, our results show that heterozygous CTLA4 mutations in humans are associated with a severe immunoregula-tory disorder, which we term CTLA-4 haploinsufficiency with autoimmune infiltration (CHAI) disease.