---
reference_id: "PMID:25451152"
title: Mechanisms of aberrant organization of growth plates in conditional transgenic mouse model of spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia associated with the R992C substitution in collagen II.
authors:
- Arita M
- Fertala J
- Hou C
- Steplewski A
- Fertala A
journal: Am J Pathol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2014.09.003
keywords:
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Animals
- Cartilage/metabolism
- Cell Proliferation
- Chondrocytes/cytology
- Cilia/metabolism
- "Collagen Type II/genetics, metabolism"
- "Crosses, Genetic"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress
- Genetic Variation
- Genotype
- "Growth Plate/abnormalities, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Mutation
- Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics
- Transgenes
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms of aberrant organization of growth plates in conditional transgenic mouse model of spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia associated with the R992C substitution in collagen II.
**Authors:** Arita M, Fertala J, Hou C, Steplewski A, Fertala A
**Journal:** Am J Pathol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajpath.2014.09.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajpath.2014.09.003)

## Content

1. Am J Pathol. 2015 Jan;185(1):214-29. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2014.09.003. Epub 
2014 Oct 29.

Mechanisms of aberrant organization of growth plates in conditional transgenic 
mouse model of spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia associated with the R992C 
substitution in collagen II.

Arita M(1), Fertala J(1), Hou C(1), Steplewski A(1), Fertala A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Sidney Kimmel Medical College, Thomas 
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Sidney Kimmel Medical College, Thomas 
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Electronic address: 
andrzej.fertala@jefferson.edu.

Mutations in collagen II, a main structural protein of cartilage, are associated 
with various forms of spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia (SED), whose main features 
include aberrations of linear growth. Here, we analyzed the pathomechanisms 
responsible for growth alterations in transgenic mice with conditional 
expression of the R992C collagen II mutation. Specifically, we studied the 
alterations of the growth plates of mutant mice in which chondrocytes lacked 
their typical columnar arrangement. Our studies demonstrated that chondrocytes 
expressing the thermolabile R992C mutant collagen II molecules endured 
endoplasmic reticulum stress, had atypical polarization, and had reduced 
proliferation. Moreover, we demonstrated aberrant organization and morphology of 
primary cilia. Analyses of the extracellular collagenous deposits in mice 
expressing the R992C mutant collagen II molecules indicated their poor formation 
and distribution. By contrast, transgenic mice expressing wild-type collagen II 
and mice in which the expression of the transgene encoding the R992C collagen II 
was switched off were characterized by normal growth, and the morphology of 
their growth plates was correct. Our study with the use of a conditional mouse 
SED model not only indicates a direct relation between the observed aberration 
of skeletal tissues and the presence of mutant collagen II, but also identifies 
cellular and matrix elements of the pathomechanism of SED.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2014.09.003
PMID: 25451152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]