---
reference_id: "PMID:30547349"
title: A review of filamin A mutations and associated interstitial lung disease.
authors:
- Sasaki E
- Byrne AT
- Phelan E
- Cox DW
- Reardon W
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s00431-018-3301-0
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Filamins/genetics
- Humans
- Infant
- Lung/pathology
- "Lung Diseases, Interstitial/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Mutation
- Periventricular Nodular Heterotopia/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- "Ultrasonography, Doppler, Transcranial"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A review of filamin A mutations and associated interstitial lung disease.
**Authors:** Sasaki E, Byrne AT, Phelan E, Cox DW, Reardon W
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00431-018-3301-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00431-018-3301-0)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 2019 Feb;178(2):121-129. doi: 10.1007/s00431-018-3301-0. Epub 
2018 Dec 13.

A review of filamin A mutations and associated interstitial lung disease.

Sasaki E(1), Byrne AT(2), Phelan E(2), Cox DW(3)(4), Reardon W(5).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Genetics Department, Our Lady's Children's Hospital, Dublin, 
Ireland. sasakierina06@gmail.com.
(2)Paediatric Radiology Department, Our Lady's Children's Hospital, Dublin, 
Ireland.
(3)Paediatric Respiratory Department, Our Lady's Children's Hospital, Dublin, 
Ireland.
(4)School of Medicine, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(5)Clinical Genetics Department, Our Lady's Children's Hospital, Dublin, 
Ireland.

The filamin A gene (FLNA) on Xq28 encodes the filamin A protein. Mutation in 
FLNA causes a wide spectrum of disease including skeletal dysplasia, neuronal 
migration abnormality, cardiovascular malformation, intellectual disability and 
intestinal obstruction. Recently, childhood-onset interstitial lung disease 
associated with a range of FLNA mutations has been recognised and reported. We 
document our personal experience of this emerging disorder and compile a 
comprehensive overview of clinical features and molecular changes in all 
identifiable published cases. Reviewing the emerging dataset, we underline this 
unanticipated phenotypic consequence of pathogenic FLNA mutation-associated 
pulmonary disease.Conclusion: From the emerging data, we suggest that while 
reviewing complex cases with a sustained oxygen requirement against a clincial 
background of cardiac concerns or intestinal obstruction to have a high index of 
suspicion for FLNA related pathology and to instigate early MRI brain scan and 
FLNA mutation analysis. What is Known: • FLNA gene on Xq28 encodes the filamin A 
protein and mutation therein is associated with variable phenotypes depending on 
its nature of mutation. • Loss-of-function mutation of filamin A is associated 
with X-linked inherited form of periventricular nodular heterotopia with or 
without epilepsy with most individuals affected being female. There is a 
recently recognised associated respiratory phenotype. What is New: • The 
respiratory phenotype in the form of childhood interstitial lung disease is a 
recently recognised clinical consequence of loss-of-function FLNA mutation. • 
Rare male patients with loss-of-function FLNA mutation-associated lung disease 
with residual protein function can survive into infancy with a severe form of 
the phenotype.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-018-3301-0
PMID: 30547349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]