---
reference_id: "PMID:8817767"
title: Mucosal immune responses to intestinal bacterial pathogens.
authors:
- Bloom PD
- Boedeker EC
journal: Semin Gastrointest Dis
year: '1996'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mucosal immune responses to intestinal bacterial pathogens.
**Authors:** Bloom PD, Boedeker EC
**Journal:** Semin Gastrointest Dis (1996)

## Content

1. Semin Gastrointest Dis. 1996 Jul;7(3):151-66.

Mucosal immune responses to intestinal bacterial pathogens.

Bloom PD(1), Boedeker EC.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastrenterology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD 21201, 
USA.

Current advances in the study of gut mucosal immunology and molecular biology 
have enhanced our ability to understand the pathogenesis of enteric bacterial 
infections as well as the role of the immune system in mediating both tissue 
injury and protection. In this article, we review the immunopathogenesis and the 
protective immune response to three enteric pathogens, Vibrio cholerae, 
Shigella, and Salmonella. Each of these pathogens has a distinctive mechanism by 
which it causes disease, ie, epithelial attachment, epithelial invasion, and 
epithelial invasion with systemic dissemination. Pathogenicity and immune 
response can be conceptualized in terms of the interaction of these enteric 
pathogens with the gut epithelial compartment, immune inductive sites (Peyer's 
patch of the small intestine and lymphoid follicles of the colon), and a common 
immune effector compartment in the laimina propria where protective antibody is 
secreted. V cholerae, the representative noninvasive pathogen, has fimbrial 
adhesins that mediate attachment and colonization of the luminal surface of 
epithelial cells where organisms secrete cholera toxin (CT), a potent 
enterotoxin that induces a voluminous diarrhea via adenylate cyclase-dependent 
chloride secretion. Protective immunity is based on secretory (s) immunoglobulin 
A directed against whole-cell components that prevent attachment to gut 
epithelial cells and is enhanced by CT, an immunogen with potent adjuvant 
activity. Shigella, an enteric pathogen that locally invades gut epithelium, 
subverts the usual mechanism of immune sampling by initially invading via M 
cells overlying inductive sites. Subsequent macrophage invasion induces 
apoptosis and the release of interleukin-1, a proinflammatory cytokine. This 
seems to be a critical initiating event in immune-mediated tissue injury. 
Protective immunity is serotype specific. Infection caused by Salmonella is 
characterized by mucosal invasion and systemic spread mediated by the organisms 
ability to survive within macrophages. Both antibody and cell-mediated immunity 
are important for protection against Salmonella.

PMID: 8817767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]