---
reference_id: "PMID:8446170"
title: Mutations in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase gene are associated with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
authors:
- Rosen DR
- Siddique T
- Patterson D
- Figlewicz DA
- Sapp P
- Hentati A
- Donaldson D
- Goto J
- "O'Regan JP"
- Deng HX
journal: Nature
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1038/362059a0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase gene are associated with familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
**Authors:** Rosen DR, Siddique T, Patterson D, Figlewicz DA, Sapp P, Hentati A, Donaldson D, Goto J, O'Regan JP, Deng HX
**Journal:** Nature (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1038/362059a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/362059a0)

## Content

1. Nature. 1993 Mar 4;362(6415):59-62. doi: 10.1038/362059a0.

Mutations in Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase gene are associated with familial 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Rosen DR(1), Siddique T, Patterson D, Figlewicz DA, Sapp P, Hentati A, Donaldson 
D, Goto J, O'Regan JP, Deng HX, et al.

Author information:
(1)Day Neuromuscular Research Laboratory, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Charlestown 02129.

Erratum in
    Nature. 1993 Jul 22;364(6435):362. doi: 10.1038/364362c0.

Comment in
    Nature. 1993 Mar 4;362(6415):20-1. doi: 10.1038/362020a0.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a degenerative disorder of motor neurons 
in the cortex, brainstem and spinal cord. Its cause is unknown and it is 
uniformly fatal, typically within five years. About 10% of cases are inherited 
as an autosomal dominant trait, with high penetrance after the sixth decade. In 
most instances, sporadic and autosomal dominant familial ALS (FALS) are 
clinically similar. We have previously shown that in some but not all FALS 
pedigrees the disease is linked to a genetic defect on chromosome 21q (refs 8, 
9). Here we report tight genetic linkage between FALS and a gene that encodes a 
cytosolic, Cu/Zn-binding superoxide dismutase (SOD1), a homodimeric 
metalloenzyme that catalyzes the dismutation of the toxic superoxide anion O2.- 
to O2 and H2O2 (ref. 10). Given this linkage and the potential role of free 
radical toxicity in other neurodenegerative disorders, we investigated SOD1 as a 
candidate gene in FALS. We identified 11 different SOD1 missense mutations in 13 
different FALS families.

DOI: 10.1038/362059a0
PMID: 8446170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]