---
reference_id: "PMID:28882145"
title: Expanding the clinical and mutational spectrum of B4GALT7-spondylodysplastic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
authors:
- Ritelli M
- Dordoni C
- Cinquina V
- Venturini M
- Calzavara-Pinton P
- Colombi M
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-017-0704-3
keywords:
- Adult
- Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome/genetics
- Female
- Galactosyltransferases/genetics
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Muscle Hypotonia/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanding the clinical and mutational spectrum of B4GALT7-spondylodysplastic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
**Authors:** Ritelli M, Dordoni C, Cinquina V, Venturini M, Calzavara-Pinton P, Colombi M
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-017-0704-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-017-0704-3)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2017 Sep 7;12(1):153. doi: 10.1186/s13023-017-0704-3.

Expanding the clinical and mutational spectrum of B4GALT7-spondylodysplastic 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.

Ritelli M(1), Dordoni C(1), Cinquina V(1), Venturini M(2), Calzavara-Pinton 
P(2), Colombi M(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biology and Genetics, Department of Molecular and Translational 
Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Brescia, Viale Europa 11, 25123, 
Brescia, Italy.
(2)Division of Dermatology, Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, 
Spedali Civili University Hospital, Brescia, Italy.
(3)Division of Biology and Genetics, Department of Molecular and Translational 
Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Brescia, Viale Europa 11, 25123, 
Brescia, Italy. marina.colombi@unibs.it.

BACKGROUND: Spondylodysplastic EDS (spEDS) is a rare connective tissue disorder 
that groups the phenotypes caused by biallelic B4GALT7, B3GALT6, and SLC39A13 
mutations. In the 2017 EDS nosology, minimal criteria (general and 
gene-specific) for a clinical suspicion of spEDS have been proposed, but 
molecular analysis is required to reach a definite diagnosis. The majority of 
spEDS patients presented with short stature, skin hyperextensibility, facial 
dysmorphisms, peculiar radiological findings, muscle hypotonia and joint laxity 
and/or its complications. To date only 7 patients with β4GALT7-deficiency 
(spEDS-B4GALT7) have been described and their clinical data suggested that, in 
addition to short stature and muscle hypotonia, radioulnar synostosis, 
hypermetropia, and delayed cognitive development might be a hallmark of this 
specific type of spEDS. Additional 22 patients affected with an overlapping 
phenotype, i.e., Larsen of Reunion Island syndrome, all carrying a homozygous 
B4GALT7 mutation, are also recognized.
RESULTS: Herein, we report on a 30-year-old Moroccan woman who fitted the 
minimal criteria to suspect spEDS, but lacked radioulnar synostosis and 
intellectual disability and presented with neurosensorial hearing loss and limb 
edema of lymphatic origin. Sanger sequencing of B4GALT7 was performed since the 
evaluation of the spEDS gene-specific minor criteria suggested this specific 
subtype. Mutational screening revealed the homozygous c.829G>T, p.Glu277* 
pathogenetic variant leading to aberrant splicing.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings expand both the clinical and mutational spectrum of 
this ultrarare connective tissue disorder. The comparison of the patient's 
features with those of the other spEDS and Larsen of Reunion Island syndrome 
patients reported up to now offers future perspectives for spEDS nosology and 
clinical research in this field.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-017-0704-3
PMCID: PMC5590203
PMID: 28882145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: This 
study follows the Helsinki Declaration’s principles and was carried out from 
routine diagnostic activity; formal ethics review was therefore not requested by 
our institutional ethical committee (“Comitato Etico ASST Spedali Civili di 
Brescia, Italy”). CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: The patient and her parents provided 
written informed consent for genetic testing and publication of clinical data 
and photographs according to the Italian bioethics laws. COMPETING INTERESTS: 
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.