---
reference_id: "PMID:23040360"
title: Eosinophilic fasciitis (Shulman disease).
authors:
- Lebeaux D
- Sène D
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.berh.2012.08.001
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- Churg-Strauss Syndrome/diagnosis
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Edema/diagnosis
- "Eosinophilia/diagnosis, drug therapy, pathology"
- Eosinophilia-Myalgia Syndrome/diagnosis
- "Fasciitis/diagnosis, drug therapy, pathology"
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Methotrexate/therapeutic use
- "Rare Diseases/diagnosis, drug therapy, pathology"
- "Scleroderma, Localized/diagnosis"
- "Scleroderma, Systemic/diagnosis"
- Skin Diseases/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Eosinophilic fasciitis (Shulman disease).
**Authors:** Lebeaux D, Sène D
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.berh.2012.08.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.berh.2012.08.001)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Rheumatol. 2012 Aug;26(4):449-58. doi: 
10.1016/j.berh.2012.08.001.

Eosinophilic fasciitis (Shulman disease).

Lebeaux D(1), Sène D.

Author information:
(1)Paris Diderot (Paris VII) University, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Saint-Louis Lariboisière Fernand Widal Hospital Group, Paris, France.

The eosinophilic fasciitis (EF) is a rare connective tissue disease 
characterized by symmetrical and painful swelling with a progressive induration 
and thickening of the skin and soft tissues. The diagnosis of EF is often based 
on the association of characteristic skin or subcutaneous abnormalities and a 
thickened fascia with an inflammatory infiltration, mostly composed of 
lymphocytes and eosinophils. A peripheral eosinophilia is frequently present, 
but is not mandatory for the EF diagnosis. The diagnosis might be helped by a 
muscle magnetic resonance imaging which typically may evidence an increased 
signal intensity within the fascia and marked fascia enhancement after 
gadolinium administration at the acute phase of the disease. Differential 
diagnoses should be ruled out, including eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome (EMS) 
after L-tryprophane ingestion, hypereosinophilic syndromes (HES), systemic 
sclerosis, Churg-Strauss syndrome, and/or peripheral T cell lymphomas with 
cutaneous involvement. Due to the scarcity of the EF disease, there is no 
consensual therapeutic strategy. However, oral corticosteroids remain the 
mainstay treatment and may be associated to an immunosuppressive drug such as 
methotrexate in patients with morphea-like lesions or an unsatisfactory response 
to corticosteroids alone.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.berh.2012.08.001
PMID: 23040360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]