---
reference_id: "PMID:28833207"
title: Semicircular canal dehiscence among idiopathic intracranial hypertension patients.
authors:
- Kuo P
- Bagwell KA
- Mongelluzzo G
- Schutt CA
- Malhotra A
- Khokhar B
- Kveton JF
journal: Laryngoscope
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/lary.26795
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Pilot Projects
- Pseudotumor Cerebri/complications
- Retrospective Studies
- "Semicircular Canals/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Semicircular canal dehiscence among idiopathic intracranial hypertension patients.
**Authors:** Kuo P, Bagwell KA, Mongelluzzo G, Schutt CA, Malhotra A, Khokhar B, Kveton JF
**Journal:** Laryngoscope (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/lary.26795](https://doi.org/10.1002/lary.26795)

## Content

1. Laryngoscope. 2018 May;128(5):1196-1199. doi: 10.1002/lary.26795. Epub 2017
Aug  22.

Semicircular canal dehiscence among idiopathic intracranial hypertension 
patients.

Kuo P(1), Bagwell KA(1), Mongelluzzo G(2), Schutt CA(3), Malhotra A(4), Khokhar 
B(5), Kveton JF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery-Otolaryngology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut, U.S.A.
(2)Department of Radiology, Geisinger Medical Center, Danville, Pennsylvania, 
U.S.A.
(3)Michigan Ear Institute, Farmington Hills, Michigan, U.S.A.
(4)Department of Radiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, 
U.S.A.
(5)Department of Neurology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, 
U.S.A.

OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: The cause of superior semicircular canal dehiscence 
(SSCD) is unknown. Because of a demonstrated association with tegmental defects 
and obesity, some have suggested idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH) 
could contribute by eroding the bone over the canal and resulting in SSCD. 
However, an association between IIH and SSCD has not previously been evaluated. 
Our objective was to evaluate an association between IIH and SSCD.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective cohort.
METHODS: A retrospective study was performed of opening pressures for 
consecutive patients presenting at a lumbar puncture clinic between August 2012 
and October 2015. Imaging for patients who also had thin-sectioned computed 
tomography (CT) imaging was reviewed for the presence of radiographic SSCD. 
Association between IIH and SSCD was evaluated using the Student t test and 
multivariate logistic regression.
RESULTS: One hundred twenty-one patients had both a lumbar puncture performed 
and thin-sectioned CT imaging available, of which 24 patients (19.8%) met the 
criteria for IIH with an opening pressure >25 cm H2 O. The remaining 97 patients 
(80.2%) did not have elevated opening pressures and served as the control 
cohort. None of the 24 patients with IIH had radiographic SSCD, whereas eight of 
the 97 patients (8.2%) without IIH had radiographic SSCD. The average opening 
pressure in patients without radiographic SSCD was 20.2 cm H2 O compared to 19.3 
cm H2 O in patients with radiographic SSCD (P = .521). In multivariate logistic 
regression controlling for age, body mass index, gender, and comorbidities 
(hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia), opening pressure was not a significant 
predictor of radiographic SSCD.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this retrospective pilot study do not suggest an 
association between IIH and SSCD.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 3b. Laryngoscope, 128:1196-1199, 2018.

© 2017 The American Laryngological, Rhinological and Otological Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.26795
PMID: 28833207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]