---
reference_id: "PMID:21827906"
title: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 5.
authors:
- Dick KA
- Ikeda Y
- Day JW
- Ranum LP
journal: Handb Clin Neurol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-51892-7.00028-0
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Americas/epidemiology
- Animals
- Child
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 5"
- Family Health
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Middle Aged
- Mutation/genetics
- Neuroimaging
- Spectrin/genetics
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, pathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinocerebellar ataxia type 5.
**Authors:** Dick KA, Ikeda Y, Day JW, Ranum LP
**Journal:** Handb Clin Neurol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/B978-0-444-51892-7.00028-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-51892-7.00028-0)

## Content

1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2012;103:451-9. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-51892-7.00028-0.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 5.

Dick KA(1), Ikeda Y, Day JW, Ranum LP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Development, University of 
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.

In 1994, Ranum and colleagues identified a ten-generation American kindred with 
a relatively mild autosomal dominant form of spinocerebellar ataxia (Ranum et 
al., 1994). The mutation was mapped to the centromeric region of chromosome 11, 
and the disorder designated SCA5 (Ranum et al., 1994). Using a multifaceted 
mapping approach, Ikeda et al. (2006) discovered that β-III spectrin (SPTBN2) 
mutations cause spinocerebellar ataxia type 5 (SCA5) in the American kindred and 
two additional independently reported SCA5 families. The American and French 
families have separate in-frame deletions of 39 and 15 bp, respectively, in the 
third of 17 spectrin repeat motifs. A third mutation, found in a German family, 
is located in the second calponin homology domain, a region known to bind actin 
and Arp1. Consistent with Purkinje cell degeneration in SCA5, β-III spectrin is 
highly expressed in cerebellar Purkinje cells. TIRF microscopy performed on cell 
lines transiently transfected with mutant or wild-type spectrin shows that 
mutant β-III spectrin fails to stabilize the glutamate transporter EAAT4 at the 
plasma membrane. Additionally, marked differences in EAAT4 and GluRδ2 were found 
by protein blot and cell fractionation in SCA5 autopsy tissue. This review 
summarizes data showing that β-III spectrin mutations are a novel cause of 
neurodegenerative disease, which may affect the stabilization or trafficking of 
membrane proteins.

2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-444-51892-7.00028-0
PMID: 21827906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]