---
reference_id: "PMID:27426273"
title: Genetics of enteric neuropathies.
authors:
- Brosens E
- Burns AJ
- Brooks AS
- Matera I
- Borrego S
- Ceccherini I
- Tam PK
- García-Barceló MM
- Thapar N
- Benninga MA
- Hofstra RM
- Alves MM
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.07.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics of enteric neuropathies.
**Authors:** Brosens E, Burns AJ, Brooks AS, Matera I, Borrego S, Ceccherini I, Tam PK, García-Barceló MM, Thapar N, Benninga MA, Hofstra RM, Alves MM
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.07.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.07.008)

## Content

1. Dev Biol. 2016 Sep 15;417(2):198-208. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.07.008. Epub 
2016 Jul 15.

Genetics of enteric neuropathies.

Brosens E(1), Burns AJ(2), Brooks AS(3), Matera I(4), Borrego S(5), Ceccherini 
I(4), Tam PK(6), García-Barceló MM(7), Thapar N(8), Benninga MA(9), Hofstra 
RM(2), Alves MM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Centre - Sophia 
Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
e.brosens@erasmusmc.nl.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Centre - Sophia 
Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands; Stem Cells and Regenerative 
Medicine, Birth Defects Research Centre, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, 
UK.
(3)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Centre - Sophia 
Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)UOC Medical Genetics, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy.
(5)Department of Genetics, Reproduction and Fetal Medicine, Institute of 
Biomedicine of Seville (IBIS), Seville, Spain; Centre for Biomedical Network 
Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Seville, Spain.
(6)Division of Paediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, Li Ka Shing Faculty of 
Medicine of the University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(7)State Key Laboratory of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Li Ka Shing Faculty of 
Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China; Centre for 
Reproduction, Development, and Growth, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(8)Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine, Birth Defects Research Centre, UCL 
Institute of Child Health, London, UK.
(9)Pediatric Gastroenterology, Emma Children's Hospital/Academic Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Abnormal development or disturbed functioning of the enteric nervous system 
(ENS), the intrinsic innervation of the gastrointestinal tract, is associated 
with the development of neuropathic gastrointestinal motility disorders. Here, 
we review the underlying molecular basis of these disorders and hypothesize that 
many of them have a common defective biological mechanism. Genetic burden and 
environmental components affecting this common mechanism are ultimately 
responsible for disease severity and symptom heterogeneity. We believe that they 
act together as the fulcrum in a seesaw balanced with harmful and protective 
factors, and are responsible for a continuum of symptoms ranging from neuronal 
hyperplasia to absence of neurons.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.07.008
PMID: 27426273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]