---
reference_id: "PMID:18470895"
title: "Autosomal dominant spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome: phenotypic homogeneity and genetic heterogeneity"
authors:
- Isidor B
- Cormier-Daire V
- Le Merrer M
- Lefrancois T
- Hamel A
- Le Caignec C
- David A
- Jacquemont S
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32217
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal dominant spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome: phenotypic homogeneity and genetic heterogeneity
**Authors:** Isidor B, Cormier-Daire V, Le Merrer M, Lefrancois T, Hamel A, Le Caignec C, David A, Jacquemont S
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.32217](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.32217)

## Content

Autosomal dominant spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome: phenotypic
homogeneity and genetic heterogeneity.

Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Jun 15;146A(12):1593-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32217.

Spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome (SCT) (OMIM 272460), originally thought
to be a failure of normal spine segmentation, is characterized by progressive
fusion of vertebras and associates unsegmented bars, scoliosis, short stature,
carpal and tarsal synostosis. Cleft palate, sensorineural or mixed hearing
loss, joint limitation, clinodactyly, and dental enamel hypoplasia are variable
manifestations. Twenty-five patients have been reported.

Thirteen affected individuals were siblings from six families and four of these
families were consanguineous. In four of those families, Krakow et al. found
homozygosity or compound heterozygosity for mutations in the gene encoding FLNB.
This confirmed autosomal recessive inheritance of the disorder. We report on
two new patients (a mother and her son) representing the first case of
autosomal dominant inheritance.

