---
reference_id: "PMID:17186472"
title: Leigh syndrome with nephropathy and CoQ10 deficiency due to decaprenyl diphosphate synthase subunit 2 (PDSS2) mutations.
authors:
- López LC
- Schuelke M
- Quinzii CM
- Kanki T
- Rodenburg RJ
- Naini A
- Dimauro S
- Hirano M
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1086/510023
keywords:
- "Alkyl and Aryl Transferases/genetics, metabolism"
- Biotin/therapeutic use
- Carnitine/therapeutic use
- Case-Control Studies
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Coenzymes
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Humans
- Infant
- "Kidney Diseases/drug therapy, etiology, genetics"
- "Leigh Disease/complications, drug therapy, genetics"
- Muscle Hypotonia/genetics
- Mutation
- Protein Subunits
- Riboflavin/therapeutic use
- Thiamine/therapeutic use
- "Ubiquinone/analogs & derivatives, biosynthesis, deficiency"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Leigh syndrome with nephropathy and CoQ10 deficiency due to decaprenyl diphosphate synthase subunit 2 (PDSS2) mutations.
**Authors:** López LC, Schuelke M, Quinzii CM, Kanki T, Rodenburg RJ, Naini A, Dimauro S, Hirano M
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1086/510023](https://doi.org/10.1086/510023)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Dec;79(6):1125-9. doi: 10.1086/510023. Epub 2006 Oct 27.

Leigh syndrome with nephropathy and CoQ10 deficiency due to decaprenyl 
diphosphate synthase subunit 2 (PDSS2) mutations.

López LC(1), Schuelke M, Quinzii CM, Kanki T, Rodenburg RJ, Naini A, Dimauro S, 
Hirano M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Columbia University College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Coenzyme Q(10) (CoQ(10)) is a vital lipophilic molecule that transfers electrons 
from mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes I and II to complex III. 
Deficiency of CoQ(10) has been associated with diverse clinical phenotypes, but, 
in most patients, the molecular cause is unknown. The first defect in a CoQ(10) 
biosynthetic gene, COQ2, was identified in a child with encephalomyopathy and 
nephrotic syndrome and in a younger sibling with only nephropathy. Here, we 
describe an infant with severe Leigh syndrome, nephrotic syndrome, and CoQ(10) 
deficiency in muscle and fibroblasts and compound heterozygous mutations in the 
PDSS2 gene, which encodes a subunit of decaprenyl diphosphate synthase, the 
first enzyme of the CoQ(10) biosynthetic pathway. Biochemical assays with 
radiolabeled substrates indicated a severe defect in decaprenyl diphosphate 
synthase in the patient's fibroblasts. This is the first description of 
pathogenic mutations in PDSS2 and confirms the molecular and clinical 
heterogeneity of primary CoQ(10) deficiency.

DOI: 10.1086/510023
PMCID: PMC1698707
PMID: 17186472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]