---
reference_id: "PMID:19370768"
title: Molecular mechanisms of classical Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS).
authors:
- Mitchell AL
- Schwarze U
- Jennings JF
- Byers PH
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1002/humu.21000
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular mechanisms of classical Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS).
**Authors:** Mitchell AL, Schwarze U, Jennings JF, Byers PH
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.21000](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.21000)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2009 Jun;30(6):995-1002. doi: 10.1002/humu.21000.

Molecular mechanisms of classical Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS).

Mitchell AL(1), Schwarze U, Jennings JF, Byers PH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA. alm43@case.edu

Classical Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a heritable disorder characterized by 
joint hypermobility, skin hyperextensibility, and abnormal wound healing. The 
majority of affected individuals have alterations in 1 of the 2 type V collagen 
genes, COL5A1 and COL5A2. The most common mechanism is COL5A1 haploinsufficiency 
due to instability of the transcript of one allele. In dermal fibroblasts from 
our population of 76 individuals with clinical features of classical EDS, there 
were 21 (29.5%) with decreased expression of one COL5A1 allele, consistent with 
published estimates of the frequency of null alleles. We identified the 
causative mutation in nine of these cell strains (mutations for seven others had 
been previously described), and found two nonsense mutations, five splice 
mutations, and two insertion/deletions. The same type of genomic change at 
splice sites can have different effects at the RNA level and the outcome could 
not be predicted from the primary genomic DNA alteration.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.21000
PMCID: PMC3827857
PMID: 19370768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]