---
reference_id: "PMID:37478804"
title: Advances in vaccine development for cancer prevention and treatment in Lynch Syndrome.
authors:
- Bolivar AM
- Duzagac F
- Sinha KM
- Vilar E
journal: Mol Aspects Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.mam.2023.101204
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Advances in vaccine development for cancer prevention and treatment in Lynch Syndrome.
**Authors:** Bolivar AM, Duzagac F, Sinha KM, Vilar E
**Journal:** Mol Aspects Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mam.2023.101204](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mam.2023.101204)

## Content

1. Mol Aspects Med. 2023 Oct;93:101204. doi: 10.1016/j.mam.2023.101204. Epub 2023
 Jul 19.

Advances in vaccine development for cancer prevention and treatment in Lynch 
Syndrome.

Bolivar AM(1), Duzagac F(1), Sinha KM(1), Vilar E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Cancer Prevention, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(2)Department of Clinical Cancer Prevention, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA; Clinical Cancer Genetics Program, The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. Electronic 
address: EVilar@mdanderson.org.

Lynch Syndrome (LS) is one of the most common hereditary cancer syndromes, and 
is caused by mutations in one of the four DNA mismatch repair (MMR) genes, 
namely MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2. Tumors developed by LS carriers display high 
levels of microsatellite instability, which leads to the accumulation of large 
numbers of mutations, among which frameshift insertion/deletions (indels) within 
microsatellite (MS) loci are the most common. As a result, MMR-deficient (MMRd) 
cells generate increased rates of tumor-specific neoantigens (neoAgs) that can 
be recognized by the immune system to activate cancer cell killing. In this 
context, LS is an ideal disease to leverage immune-interception strategies. 
Therefore, the identification of these neoAgs is an ongoing effort for the 
development of LS cancer preventive vaccines. In this review, we summarize the 
computational methods used for in silico neoAg prediction, including their 
challenges, and the experimental techniques used for in vitro validation of 
their immunogenicity. In addition, we outline results from past and on-going 
vaccine clinical trials and highlight avenues for improvement and future 
directions.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mam.2023.101204
PMCID: PMC10528439
PMID: 37478804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]