---
reference_id: "PMID:37841253"
title: "Teriflunomide and Epstein-Barr virus in a Spanish multiple sclerosis cohort: in vivo antiviral activity and clinical response."
authors:
- Domínguez-Mozo MI
- González-Suárez I
- Villar LM
- Costa-Frossard L
- Villarrubia N
- Aladro Y
- Pilo B
- Montalbán X
- Comabella M
- Casanova-Peño I
- Martínez-Ginés ML
- García-Domínguez JM
- García-Martínez MÁ
- Arroyo R
- Álvarez-Lafuente R
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1248182
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Teriflunomide and Epstein-Barr virus in a Spanish multiple sclerosis cohort: in vivo antiviral activity and clinical response.
**Authors:** Domínguez-Mozo MI, González-Suárez I, Villar LM, Costa-Frossard L, Villarrubia N, Aladro Y, Pilo B, Montalbán X, Comabella M, Casanova-Peño I, Martínez-Ginés ML, García-Domínguez JM, García-Martínez MÁ, Arroyo R, Álvarez-Lafuente R
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2023.1248182](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1248182)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2023 Sep 29;14:1248182. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1248182. 
eCollection 2023.

Teriflunomide and Epstein-Barr virus in a Spanish multiple sclerosis cohort: in 
vivo antiviral activity and clinical response.

Domínguez-Mozo MI(1), González-Suárez I(2), Villar LM(3), Costa-Frossard L(4), 
Villarrubia N(3), Aladro Y(5), Pilo B(5), Montalbán X(6), Comabella M(6), 
Casanova-Peño I(7), Martínez-Ginés ML(8), García-Domínguez JM(8), 
García-Martínez MÁ(1), Arroyo R(9), Álvarez-Lafuente R(1).

Author information:
(1)Grupo de Investigación de Factores ambientales en enfermedades degenerativas, 
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Hospital Clínico San Carlos (IdISSC), 
Red de Enfermedades Inflamatorias (REI), Madrid, Spain.
(2)Unidad de Enfermedades Desmielinizantes, Hospital Álvaro Cunqueiro, Red de 
Enfermedades Inflamatorias (REI), Vigo, Spain.
(3)Servicio de Inmunología, Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, Red de 
Enfermedades Inflamatorias (REI), Madrid, Spain.
(4)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, Red de 
Enfermedades Inflamatorias (REI), Madrid, Spain.
(5)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Universitario de Getafe, Getafe, Spain.
(6)Servei de Neurologia-Neuroimmunologia, Centre d'Esclerosi Múltiple de 
Catalunya (Cemcat), Institut de Recerca Vall d'Hebron (VHIR), Hospital 
Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Universitario de Torrejón, Torrejón de 
Ardoz, Spain.
(8)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón/Red 
de Enfermedades Inflamatorias (REI), Madrid, Spain.
(9)Departamento de Neurología, Hospital Universitario Quironsalud Madrid, 
Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) and human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6) have been 
associated with multiple sclerosis (MS). Teriflunomide is an oral 
disease-modifying therapy approved for treatment of relapsing forms of MS. In 
the preclinical Theiler's murine encephalitis virus model of MS, the drug 
demonstrated an increased rate of viral clearance versus the vehicle placebo. 
Furthermore, teriflunomide inhibits lytic EBV infection in vitro.
OBJECTIVE: 1. To evaluate the humoral response against EBV and HHV-6 prior to 
teriflunomide treatment and 6 months later. 2. To correlate the variation in the 
humoral response against EBV and HHV-6 with the clinical and radiological 
response after 24 months of treatment with teriflunomide. 3. To analyze the 
utility of different demographic, clinical, radiological, and environmental data 
to identify early biomarkers of response to teriflunomide.
METHODS: A total of 101 MS patients (62 women; mean age: 43.4 years) with one 
serum prior to teriflunomide onset and another serum sample 6 months later were 
recruited. A total of 80 had been treated for at least 24 months, 13 had stopped 
teriflunomide before 24 months, and 8 were currently under teriflunomide therapy 
but with less than 24 months of follow-up. We analyzed the levels of the viral 
antibodies titers abovementioned in serum samples with ELISA commercial kits, 
and the levels of serum neurofilament light chain (Nf-L).
RESULTS: Antiviral antibody titers decreased for EBNA-1 IgG (74.3%), VCA IgG 
(69%), HHV-6 IgG (60.4%), and HHV-6 IgM (73.3%) after 6 months of teriflunomide. 
VCA IgG titers at baseline correlated with Nf-L levels measured at the same time 
(r = 0.221; p = 0.028) and 6 months later (r = 0.240; p = 0.017). We found that 
higher EBNA-1 titers (p = 0.001) and a higher age (p = 0.04) at baseline were 
associated with NEDA-3 conditions. Thus, 77.8% of patients with EBNA-1 >23.0 AU 
and >42.8 years (P50 values) were NEDA-3.
CONCLUSION: Treatment with teriflunomide was associated with a reduction of the 
levels of IgG antibody titers against EBV and HHV-6. Furthermore, higher EBNA-1 
IgG titers prior to teriflunomide initiation were associated with a better 
clinical response.

Copyright © 2023 Domínguez-Mozo, González-Suárez, Villar, Costa-Frossard, 
Villarrubia, Aladro, Pilo, Montalbán, Comabella, Casanova-Peño, Martínez-Ginés, 
García-Domínguez, García-Martínez, Arroyo and Álvarez-Lafuente.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1248182
PMCID: PMC10570817
PMID: 37841253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: IG-S: reports compensation for consulting 
services and speaker honoraria from Biogen, Janssen, Merck-Serono, Novartis, 
Sanofi, and Roche. LV: has served at scientific advisory boards, participated in 
meetings sponsored by and received speaking honoraria or travel funding or 
research grants from Roche, Sanofi, Merck, Biogen, Bristol Myers, and Novartis. 
LC-F: reports compensation for consulting services and speaker honoraria from 
Biogen, Bristol Myers Squibb, Janssen, Merck-Serono, Novartis, Sanofi, Roche, 
and Teva. BP: has received speaker honoraria by Novartis and Almirall, travel 
honoraria by Merck, and training honoraria by Sanofi and Merck. XM: speaking 
honoraria and travel expenses for scientific meetings, has been a steering 
committee member of clinical trials or participated in advisory boards of 
clinical trials in the past 3 years with Actelion, Alexion, Biogen, Celgene, EMD 
Serono, Genzyme, Immunic, MedDay, Merck, Mylan, Novartis, Roche, Sanofi-Genzyme, 
and Teva Pharmaceutical. MC: compensation for consulting services and speaking 
honoraria from Bayer Schering Pharma, Merk Serono, Biogen-Idec, Teva 
Pharmaceuticals, Sanofi-Aventis, Genzyme, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Novartis. 
IC-P: having received payments as speaker, and support for attending meetings 
from Bayern, Biogen, Merck, Novartis, Roche Sanofi, and Teva. MM-G: has received 
compensation for consulting services and speaking fees from Merck, Biogen, 
Novartis, Sanofi-Genzyme, Almirall, ROCHE, BMS, and TEVA. JG-D: honoraria as 
speaker, advisor or researcher from Almirall, Bristol-Myers-Squibb, Biogen, 
Janssen, Merck, Novartis, Roche, Teva, and Sanofi. RA: has been a speaker or has 
participated in the advisory board of Novartis, Teva, Roche, Bristol, Janssen, 
Biogen, Merck, and Sanofi-Genzyme. RA-L: has received support for attending 
meetings from Biogen, Novartis, and Sanofi-Genzyme. The remaining authors 
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or 
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.