---
reference_id: "PMID:22983386"
title: "Toward systems neuroscience of ADHD: a meta-analysis of 55 fMRI studies."
authors:
- Cortese S
- Kelly C
- Chabernaud C
- Proal E
- Di Martino A
- Milham MP
- Castellanos FX
journal: Am J Psychiatry
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2012.11101521
keywords:
- Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/physiopathology
- Brain/physiopathology
- Case-Control Studies
- "Functional Neuroimaging/psychology, statistics & numerical data"
- Humans
- "Magnetic Resonance Imaging/psychology, statistics & numerical data"
- Neural Pathways/physiopathology
- "Neuropsychological Tests/statistics & numerical data"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Toward systems neuroscience of ADHD: a meta-analysis of 55 fMRI studies.
**Authors:** Cortese S, Kelly C, Chabernaud C, Proal E, Di Martino A, Milham MP, Castellanos FX
**Journal:** Am J Psychiatry (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1176/appi.ajp.2012.11101521](https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2012.11101521)

## Content

1. Am J Psychiatry. 2012 Oct;169(10):1038-55. doi:
10.1176/appi.ajp.2012.11101521.

Toward systems neuroscience of ADHD: a meta-analysis of 55 fMRI studies.

Cortese S(1), Kelly C, Chabernaud C, Proal E, Di Martino A, Milham MP,
Castellanos FX.

Author information:
(1)Phyllis Green and Randolph Cowen Institute for Pediatric Neuroscience, Child
Study Center of the NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The authors performed a comprehensive meta-analysis of task-based
functional MRI studies of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
METHOD: The authors searched PubMed, Ovid, EMBASE, Web of Science, ERIC,
CINAHAL, and NeuroSynth for studies published through June 30, 2011. Significant
differences in brain region activation between individuals with ADHD and
comparison subjects were detected using activation likelihood estimation
meta-analysis. Dysfunctional regions in ADHD were related to seven reference
neuronal systems. The authors performed a set of meta-analyses focused on age
groups (children and adults), clinical characteristics (history of stimulant
treatment and presence of psychiatric comorbidities), and specific
neuropsychological tasks (inhibition, working memory, and vigilance/attention).
RESULTS: Fifty-five studies were included (39 for children and 16 for adults).
In children, hypoactivation in ADHD relative to comparison subjects was observed
mostly in systems involved in executive function (frontoparietal network) and
attention (ventral attentional network). Significant hyperactivation in ADHD
relative to comparison subjects was observed predominantly in the default,
ventral attention, and somatomotor networks. In adults, ADHD-related
hypoactivation was predominant in the frontoparietal system, while ADHD-related
hyperactivation was present in the visual, dorsal attention, and default
networks. Significant ADHD-related dysfunction largely reflected task features
and was detected even in the absence of comorbid mental disorders or a history
of stimulant treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: A growing literature provides evidence of ADHD-related dysfunction
in multiple neuronal systems involved in higher-level cognitive functions but
also in sensorimotor processes, including the visual system, and in the default
network. This meta-analytic evidence extends early models of ADHD
pathophysiology that were focused on prefrontal-striatal circuits.

DOI: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2012.11101521
PMCID: PMC3879048
PMID: 22983386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential conflicts of interest: Dr. Cortese
received financial support to attend medical meetings from Eli Lilly and Company
(2007–9) and Shire Pharmaceuticals (2009–10), and was a co-investigator in
studies sponsored by GlaxoSmithKline (2006), Eli Lilly and Company (2007–8), and
Genopharm (2008). He served as a consultant for Shire Pharmaceuticals (2009–10).
Dr. Cortese has no current relationships with pharmaceutical companies. The
other co-authors report no competing interests.
