---
reference_id: "PMID:35704248"
title: Transmission Dynamics of Tuberculosis with Age-specific Disease Progression.
authors:
- Mu Y
- Chan TL
- Yuan HY
- Lo WC
journal: Bull Math Biol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s11538-022-01032-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transmission Dynamics of Tuberculosis with Age-specific Disease Progression.
**Authors:** Mu Y, Chan TL, Yuan HY, Lo WC
**Journal:** Bull Math Biol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11538-022-01032-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11538-022-01032-4)

## Content

1. Bull Math Biol. 2022 Jun 15;84(7):73. doi: 10.1007/s11538-022-01032-4.

Transmission Dynamics of Tuberculosis with Age-specific Disease Progression.

Mu Y(1), Chan TL(2), Yuan HY(3), Lo WC(4).

Author information:
(1)College of Mathematics and Statistics, Chongqing Jiaotong University, 
Chongqing, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Mathematics, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, People's 
Republic of China.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 
People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Mathematics, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, People's 
Republic of China. wingclo@cityu.edu.hk.

Demographic structure and latent phenomenon are two essential factors 
determining the rate of tuberculosis transmission. However, only a few 
mathematical models considered age structure coupling with disease stages of 
infectious individuals. This paper develops a system of delay partial 
differential equations to model tuberculosis transmission in a heterogeneous 
population. The system considers demographic structure coupling with the 
continuous development of disease stage, which is crucial for studying how aging 
affects tuberculosis dynamics and disease progression. Here, we determine the 
basic reproduction number, and several numerical simulations are used to 
investigate the influence of various progression rates on tuberculosis dynamics. 
Our results support that the aging effect on the disease progression rate 
contributes to tuberculosis permanence.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Society for Mathematical 
Biology.

DOI: 10.1007/s11538-022-01032-4
PMID: 35704248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]