---
reference_id: "PMID:29135867"
title: Analysis of Otologic Features of Patients With Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia.
authors:
- Takeuchi K
- Kitano M
- Sakaida H
- Usui S
- Masuda S
- Ogawa S
- Ikejiri M
- Nagao M
- Fujisawa T
- Nakatani K
journal: Otol Neurotol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000001599
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of Otologic Features of Patients With Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia.
**Authors:** Takeuchi K, Kitano M, Sakaida H, Usui S, Masuda S, Ogawa S, Ikejiri M, Nagao M, Fujisawa T, Nakatani K
**Journal:** Otol Neurotol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MAO.0000000000001599](https://doi.org/10.1097/MAO.0000000000001599)

## Content

1. Otol Neurotol. 2017 Dec;38(10):e451-e456. doi: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000001599.

Analysis of Otologic Features of Patients With Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia.

Takeuchi K(1), Kitano M, Sakaida H, Usui S, Masuda S, Ogawa S, Ikejiri M, Nagao 
M, Fujisawa T, Nakatani K.

Author information:
(1)*Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Mie University 
Graduate School of Medicine †Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Mie National 
Hospital ‡Electron Microscopy Research Center §Central Clinical Laboratories, 
Mie University Graduate School of Medicine ||Institute for Clinical Research, 
Mie National Hospital ¶Division of Personalized Medicine, Mie University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Tsu, Mie, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate otologic features of primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD), 
especially eardrum features, audiometric findings, and clinical course.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective patient review.
SETTING: Tertiary referral center.
PATIENTS: Fifteen patients (mean age, 16.9 years [range, 1-32 yr]; 8 males and 7 
females) diagnosed with PCD at our university hospital in the last 12 years.
INTERVENTION: Diagnostic.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Electron microscopy of nasal cilia, gene mutation 
analysis, endoscopy of 30 eardrums, pure-tone audiometry, and tympanometry.
RESULTS: All 15 patients showed ciliary ultrastructural abnormalities on 
electron microscopy and/or biallelic mutations in genes associated with ciliary 
function or structure. All 30 eardrums examined showed certain abnormalities. 
Fourteen patients had otitis media with effusion or its sequelae. The remaining 
patient had chronic otitis media. Pure-tone audiometry revealed the mean air 
conduction thresholds to be 25.0 and 26.4 dB in the right and left ears, 
respectively. In the ears with better hearing and worse hearing, the mean air 
conduction thresholds were 22.3 and 29.0 dB respectively.
CONCLUSION: Otologic disease among patients with PCD essentially comprised 
otitis media with effusion, and the patients' eardrums showed a variety of 
findings. Knowledge of these otologic features may lead to the early detection 
of PCD.

DOI: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000001599
PMID: 29135867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]