---
reference_id: "PMID:34420499"
title: "Perceptions of ebola virus disease among the bambuti hunter group: a mixed-methods study."
authors:
- Forgie EME
- Masumbuko Claude K
- Hawkes MT
journal: Pathog Glob Health
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/20477724.2021.1970909
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Perceptions of ebola virus disease among the bambuti hunter group: a mixed-methods study.
**Authors:** Forgie EME, Masumbuko Claude K, Hawkes MT
**Journal:** Pathog Glob Health (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/20477724.2021.1970909](https://doi.org/10.1080/20477724.2021.1970909)

## Content

1. Pathog Glob Health. 2022 Jun;116(4):244-253. doi:
10.1080/20477724.2021.1970909.  Epub 2021 Aug 22.

Perceptions of ebola virus disease among the bambuti hunter group: a 
mixed-methods study.

Forgie EME(1), Masumbuko Claude K(2)(3), Hawkes MT(3)(4)(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anthropology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
(2)Department of Medicine, Université Catholique Du Graben, Butembo, Democratic 
Republic of the Congo.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Canada.
(5)Department of Global Health, School of Public Health, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Canada.
(6)Distinguished Researcher, Stollery Science Lab, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Canada.
(7)Member, Women and Children's Research Institute, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Canada.

The second largest Ebola virus disease (EVD) epidemic occurred in the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo (DRC) from 2018-20. The Bambuti, a hunter population in 
the Ituri Forest of the DRC, may be vulnerable to the zoonotic spread of EVD due 
to their frequent handling of forest animals. We conducted five focus group 
discussions and surveyed 113 Bambuti and 91 Bantu (control group), to discern 
how the Bambuti perceived and responded to EVD. Thematic analysis of focus group 
discussions revealed three major themes: (1) deprivation and discrimination; (2) 
mistrust; and (3) epistemic dissonance with public health messages emphasizing 
risks posed by forest animals. In surveys, 98% of Bambuti were deprived using 
the multidimensional poverty index (versus 78% of Bantu controls, p < 0.0001) 
and 77% had no formal education (versus 29% of controls, p < 0.0001). Bambuti 
were more dependent on wild meat for survival (51% versus 32% of controls, p 
= 0.008) and more frequently opposed the implementation of a bushmeat ban (48% 
versus 19% of controls, p < 0.0001). Trust in government was similar among 
Bambuti and Bantu. Comprehensive EVD knowledge was poor overall, and lower among 
the Bambuti (2% versus 8% of controls, p = 0.041). Compliance with public health 
measures was associated with higher levels of education and trust in government 
but did not differ between Bambuti and Bantu survey respondents. Together, our 
findings point to a particular vulnerability of the Bambuti to the effects of 
EVD, attributable at least in part to multidimensional poverty.

DOI: 10.1080/20477724.2021.1970909
PMCID: PMC9132422
PMID: 34420499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).