---
reference_id: "PMID:39110273"
title: Epidermodysplasia Verruciformis and Vδ2 γδ T-cell Expansion in STK4 Deficiency.
authors:
- Ying W
- Long X
- Vandergriff T
- Karnati H
- Heberton M
- Chen M
- Wang X
- Wysocki C
- Kong XF
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-024-01780-z
keywords:
- Humans
- "Epidermodysplasia Verruciformis/genetics, diagnosis"
- Male
- "Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics, deficiency"
- Adult
- "Receptors, Antigen, T-Cell, gamma-delta/genetics"
- "Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics, deficiency"
- "Lymphoma, Large B-Cell, Diffuse/genetics, etiology, immunology, diagnosis"
- Mutation/genetics
- "Epstein-Barr Virus Infections/immunology, genetics, complications"
- Intraepithelial Lymphocytes/immunology
- Consanguinity
- Hippo Kinases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidermodysplasia Verruciformis and Vδ2 γδ T-cell Expansion in STK4 Deficiency.
**Authors:** Ying W, Long X, Vandergriff T, Karnati H, Heberton M, Chen M, Wang X, Wysocki C, Kong XF
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-024-01780-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-024-01780-z)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2024 Aug 7;44(8):172. doi: 10.1007/s10875-024-01780-z.

Epidermodysplasia Verruciformis and Vδ2 γδ T-cell Expansion in STK4 Deficiency.

Ying W(1)(2), Long X(1)(3), Vandergriff T(4), Karnati H(1), Heberton M(5), Chen 
M(6), Wang X(2), Wysocki C(7), Kong XF(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Digestive and Liver Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, UT 
Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Suite J5.136, Dallas, TX, 
75390-9151, USA.
(2)Department of Clinical Immunology, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, 
National Children's Medical Center, Shanghai, 201102, China.
(3)Hepatic Surgery Center, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430030, China.
(4)Departments of Dermatology and Pathology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, 75390, USA.
(5)Department of Dermatology and Dermatopathology, Harold C. Simmons 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, 75390, 
USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, Harold C. Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center, UT 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, 75390, USA.
(7)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Internal Medicine, UT 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, 75390, USA.
(8)Division of Digestive and Liver Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, UT 
Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Suite J5.136, Dallas, TX, 
75390-9151, USA. Xiao-Fei.Kong@utsouthwestern.edu.
(9)McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development, UT Southwestern Medical 
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Suite J5.136, Dallas, TX, 75390-9151, USA. 
Xiao-Fei.Kong@utsouthwestern.edu.

The clinical penetrance of infectious diseases varies considerably among 
patients with inborn errors of immunity (IEI), even for identical genetic 
defects. This variability is influenced by pathogen exposure, healthcare access 
and host-environment interactions. We describe here a patient in his thirties 
who presented with epidermodysplasia verruciformis (EV) due to infection with a 
weakly virulent beta-papillomavirus (HPV38) and CD4+ T-cell lymphopenia. The 
patient was born to consanguineous parents living in the United States. Exome 
sequencing identified a previously unknown biallelic STK4 stop-gain mutation 
(p.Trp425X). The patient had no relevant history of infectious disease during 
childhood other than mild wart-like lesion on the skin, but he developed diffuse 
large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and EBV viremia with a low viral load in his 
thirties. Despite his low CD4+ T-cell count, the patient had normal counts of 
CD3+ cells, predominantly double-negative T cells (67.4%), which turned out to 
be Vδ2+ γδ T cells. γδ T-cell expansion has frequently been observed in the 33 
reported cases with STK4 deficiency. The Vδ2 γδ T cells of this STK4-deficient 
patient are mostly CD45RA-CD27+CCR7+ central memory γδT cells, and their ability 
to proliferate in response to T-cell activation was impaired, as was that of 
CD4+ T cells. In conclusion, γδ T-cell expansion may act as a compensatory 
mechanism to combat viral infection, providing immune protection in 
immunocompromised individuals.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-024-01780-z
PMCID: PMC11306306
PMID: 39110273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.