---
reference_id: "PMID:20301601"
title: Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinoses Overview.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Malik K
- Santucci K
- Sremba L
- Steenari M
- Miele A
- Demarest S
- Whiteman I
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinoses Overview.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Malik K, Santucci K, Sremba L, Steenari M, Miele A, Demarest S, Whiteman I

## Content

1. Neuronal Ceroid Lipofuscinoses Overview.

Malik K(1), Santucci K(1), Sremba L(2), Steenari M(3), Miele A(4), Demarest
S(5), Whiteman I(6)(7)(8).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2001 Oct 10 [updated 2025 May 29].

Author information:
(1)University of Colorado School of Medicine;, Children's Hospital Colorado,
Aurora, Colorado
(2)Section of Genetics and Metabolism, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical
Campus, Aurora, Colorado
(3)Division of Neurology, CHOC Children's;, Department of Pediatrics and
Neurology, University of California Irvine, Orange, California
(4)Section of Pediatrics/Neurology, University of Colorado School of Medicine;,
Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, Colorado
(5)Section of Pediatrics and Neurology, University of Colorado School of
Medicine;, Precision Medicine Institute, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora,
Colorado
(6)Batten Disease Support, Research and Advocacy (BDSRA) Foundation, Columbus,
Ohio
(7)BDSRA Australia, Shelly Beach, New South Wales, Australia
(8)Beyond Batten Disease Foundation, Austin, Texas

The purpose of this overview is to: 1.. Briefly describe the clinical
characteristics of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses; 2.. Review the genetic causes
of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses; 3.. Provide an evaluation strategy to
identify the genetic cause of a neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis in a proband; 4..
Review management of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses; 5.. Inform genetic
counseling of family members of an individual with a neuronal ceroid
lipofuscinosis.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301601
