---
reference_id: "PMID:11677662"
title: "Histopathological analysis of Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis: disordered growth plate."
authors:
- Munns CF
- Glass IA
- LaBrom R
- Hayes M
- Flanagan S
- Berry M
- Hyland VJ
- Batch JA
- Philips GE
- Vickers D
journal: Hand Surg
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1142/s0218810401000424
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Body Height
- Child
- Chromosome Aberrations
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Growth Plate/pathology
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics, pathology, surgery"
- "Radius/abnormalities, surgery"
- "Range of Motion, Articular"
- Short Stature Homeobox Protein
- Treatment Outcome
- Wrist Joint/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Histopathological analysis of Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis: disordered growth plate.
**Authors:** Munns CF, Glass IA, LaBrom R, Hayes M, Flanagan S, Berry M, Hyland VJ, Batch JA, Philips GE, Vickers D
**Journal:** Hand Surg (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1142/s0218810401000424](https://doi.org/10.1142/s0218810401000424)

## Content

1. Hand Surg. 2001 Jul;6(1):13-23. doi: 10.1142/s0218810401000424.

Histopathological analysis of Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis: disordered growth 
plate.

Munns CF(1), Glass IA, LaBrom R, Hayes M, Flanagan S, Berry M, Hyland VJ, Batch 
JA, Philips GE, Vickers D.

Author information:
(1)Endocrine Research Unit, Royal Children's Hospital Foundation Research 
Centre, Royal Children's Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. 
Craig_Munns@health.qld.gov.au

Leri-Weill syndrome (LWS) is a dominant (pseudoautosomal) skeletal dysplasia 
with mesomelic short stature and bilateral Madelung deformity, due to 
dyschondrosteosis of the distal radius. It results from the loss of one copy of 
the Short Stature Homeobox Gene (SHOX) from the tip of the short arm of the X or 
Y chromosome. SHOX molecular testing enabled us to evaluate the histopathology 
of the radial physis in LWS patients with a documented SHOX abnormality. A 
widespread disorganisation of physeal anatomy was revealed with disruption of 
the normal parallel columnar arrangement of chondrocytes. Tandem stacking of 
maturing chondrocytes within columns was replaced by a side-by-side arrangement. 
The presence of hypertrophic osteoid with micro-enchondromata in the radial 
metaphysis suggests abnormal endochondral ossification. The Vickers' ligament 
was confirmed to blend with the triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC). This 
histopathological study demonstrates that the zone of dyschondrosteosis in LWS 
is characterised by marked disruption of normal physeal chondrocyte processes 
and that a generalised physeal abnormality is present.

DOI: 10.1142/s0218810401000424
PMID: 11677662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]