---
reference_id: "PMID:30479073"
title: Mechanisms by Which Atopic Dermatitis Predisposes to Food Allergy and the Atopic March.
authors:
- Tham EH
- Leung DY
journal: Allergy Asthma Immunol Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.4168/aair.2019.11.1.4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms by Which Atopic Dermatitis Predisposes to Food Allergy and the Atopic March.
**Authors:** Tham EH, Leung DY
**Journal:** Allergy Asthma Immunol Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.4168/aair.2019.11.1.4](https://doi.org/10.4168/aair.2019.11.1.4)

## Content

1. Allergy Asthma Immunol Res. 2019 Jan;11(1):4-15. doi:
10.4168/aair.2019.11.1.4.

Mechanisms by Which Atopic Dermatitis Predisposes to Food Allergy and the Atopic 
March.

Tham EH(1)(2)(3), Leung DY(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore.
(2)Khoo Teck Puat-National University Children's Medical Institute, National 
University Hospital, National University Health System, Singapore.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado at Denver Health Sciences 
Center, Aurora, CO, USA. LeungD@njhealth.org.

The Atopic march denotes the progression from atopic dermatitis (AD) to the 
development of other allergic disorders such as immunoglobulin (Ig) E-mediated 
food allergy, allergic rhinitis and asthma in later childhood. There is 
increasing evidence from prospective birth cohort studies that early-onset AD is 
a risk factor for other allergic diseases or is found in strong association with 
them. Animal studies now provide mechanistic insights into the pathways that may 
be responsible for triggering the progression from the skin barrier dysfunction 
seen in AD to epicutaneous sensitization, food allergy and allergic airway 
disorders. Recent large randomized controlled trials have demonstrated the 
efficacy of early interventions targeted at AD and food allergy prevention. 
These show great promise for research into future strategies aimed at prevention 
of the atopic march.

Copyright © 2019 The Korean Academy of Asthma, Allergy and Clinical Immunology · 
The Korean Academy of Pediatric Allergy and Respiratory Disease.

DOI: 10.4168/aair.2019.11.1.4
PMCID: PMC6267189
PMID: 30479073

Conflict of interest statement: There are no financial or other issues that 
might lead to conflict of interest.