---
reference_id: "PMID:25383859"
title: New insights into acute annular outer retinopathy.
authors:
- Seetharam SS
- Jampol LM
- Gill MK
journal: Retin Cases Brief Rep
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1097/ICB.0000000000000070
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Adult
- Female
- Fluorescein Angiography
- Humans
- Retinal Diseases/pathology
- Retrospective Studies
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New insights into acute annular outer retinopathy.
**Authors:** Seetharam SS, Jampol LM, Gill MK
**Journal:** Retin Cases Brief Rep (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1097/ICB.0000000000000070](https://doi.org/10.1097/ICB.0000000000000070)

## Content

1. Retin Cases Brief Rep. 2015 Winter;9(1):1-6. doi:
10.1097/ICB.0000000000000070.

New insights into acute annular outer retinopathy.

Seetharam SS(1), Jampol LM, Gill MK.

Author information:
(1)*Arizona Retina and Vitreous Consultants, Phoenix, Arizona; and †Department 
of Ophthalmology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, 
Illinois.

PURPOSE: Acute annular outer retinopathy is a rare entity. There are only a few 
cases in the world's literature. Our study is the first to describe the spectral 
domain optical coherence tomography (OCT) findings in the acute presentation of 
this disease and to follow the disease in convalescence.
METHODS: This article is a descriptive case report. We used Spectralis OCT to 
image the transient intraretinal whitening that is initially seen in this 
disorder, and the OCT changes during follow-up.
RESULTS: Our article provides additional information about the natural history 
of this uncommon disease, and its varied presentation and prognosis. We were 
able to document the initial white line seen in the acute phase of the disease 
and correlate it anatomically by using OCT. We found hyperreflectivity in the 
outer nuclear layer and the Henle fiber layer along with marked atrophy of the 
outer retina within the white ring. We documented restoration of foveal 
photoreceptors, which corresponded with visual recovery. We also noted 
progressive atrophy in areas where the white ring was previously visible.
CONCLUSION: We describe a single case of acute annular outer retinopathy with 
the corresponding spectral domain OCT findings during the acute phase of the 
disease and during subsequent follow-up demonstrating progressive atrophy of the 
outer retina. This may shed insight into possible causation for this rare 
disease.

DOI: 10.1097/ICB.0000000000000070
PMID: 25383859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]