---
reference_id: "PMID:33143829"
title: Spectrum of Addison's Disease in Children.
authors:
- Laghari TM
- Ibrahim MN
- Khoso Z
- Hanif MI
- Meher-Un-Nisa
- Raza J
journal: J Coll Physicians Surg Pak
year: '2020'
doi: 10.29271/jcpsp.2020.10.1086
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spectrum of Addison's Disease in Children.
**Authors:** Laghari TM, Ibrahim MN, Khoso Z, Hanif MI, Meher-Un-Nisa, Raza J
**Journal:** J Coll Physicians Surg Pak (2020)
**DOI:** [10.29271/jcpsp.2020.10.1086](https://doi.org/10.29271/jcpsp.2020.10.1086)

## Content

1. J Coll Physicians Surg Pak. 2020 Oct;30(10):1086-1089. doi: 
10.29271/jcpsp.2020.10.1086.

Spectrum of Addison's Disease in Children.

Laghari TM(1), Ibrahim MN(1), Khoso Z(1), Hanif MI(1), Meher-Un-Nisa(1), Raza 
J(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Paediatrics, National 
Institute of Child Health, Karachi, Pakistan.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the clinical presentation of Addison's disease in order 
to increase the awareness of presentation in Pakistani children.
STUDY DESIGN: Observational study.
PLACE AND DURATION OF STUDY: Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology, National 
Institute of Child Health, Karachi, Pakistan, from 2015 to 2019.
METHODOLOGY: Sixty-three children of Addison's disease were enrolled in the 
study, who have visited and facilitated from the services of National Institute 
of Child Health from urban and rural region of the Sindh province. Diagnosis 
were made through biochemical analysis and detailed examination of acute and 
chronic symptoms. Study was initiated after taking the approval from 
Institutional Review Board. Moreover, written informed consents were also taken 
from each of the study participant.
RESULTS: There were 36 boys and 27 girls with a mean age at diagnosis of 3.92 
and 4.96 years, respectively. Twelve patients were presented with an adrenal 
crisis following an acute illness. All of them had hyponatraemia; however, 10 
had a hyperkalaemia and 8 had been reported with hypoglycaemia. Increased skin 
pigmentation was observed in 45 children with other identifiable features 
including weight loss, lethargy, and poor response in activities. Moreover 15 of 
them were identified with associated disorder (autoimmune polyendocrinopattay 
syndrome (APS), Allgrove or triple A syndrome, and adrenoleukodystrophy).  
Conclusion: Typical and atypical presentations of Addison's disease in children 
of Pakistani population are defined in this study which may assist in better 
management of Addison's patients. Key Words: Adrenal crisis, Hyponatremia, 
Hyperkalemia, APS, Allgrove, Adrenoleukodystrophy.

DOI: 10.29271/jcpsp.2020.10.1086
PMID: 33143829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]