---
reference_id: "PMID:33465815"
title: "Response of the ENPP1-Deficient Skeletal Phenotype to Oral Phosphate Supplementation and/or Enzyme Replacement Therapy: Comparative Studies in Humans and Mice."
authors:
- Ferreira CR
- Kavanagh D
- Oheim R
- Zimmerman K
- Stürznickel J
- Li X
- Stabach P
- Rettig RL
- Calderone L
- MacKichan C
- Wang A
- Hutchinson HA
- Nelson T
- Tommasini SM
- von Kroge S
- Fiedler IA
- Lester ER
- Moeckel GW
- Busse B
- Schinke T
- Carpenter TO
- Levine MA
- Horowitz MC
- Braddock DT
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.4254
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Animals
- Dietary Supplements
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy
- Humans
- Mice
- Phenotype
- Phosphates
- Phosphoric Diester Hydrolases/genetics
- Pyrophosphatases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Response of the ENPP1-Deficient Skeletal Phenotype to Oral Phosphate Supplementation and/or Enzyme Replacement Therapy: Comparative Studies in Humans and Mice.
**Authors:** Ferreira CR, Kavanagh D, Oheim R, Zimmerman K, Stürznickel J, Li X, Stabach P, Rettig RL, Calderone L, MacKichan C, Wang A, Hutchinson HA, Nelson T, Tommasini SM, von Kroge S, Fiedler IA, Lester ER, Moeckel GW, Busse B, Schinke T, Carpenter TO, Levine MA, Horowitz MC, Braddock DT
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.4254](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.4254)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2021 May;36(5):942-955. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.4254. Epub 2021
Feb  18.

Response of the ENPP1-Deficient Skeletal Phenotype to Oral Phosphate
Supplementation and/or Enzyme Replacement Therapy: Comparative Studies in Humans
and Mice.

Ferreira CR(1), Kavanagh D(2), Oheim R(3), Zimmerman K(2), Stürznickel J(3), Li
X(2), Stabach P(2), Rettig RL(2), Calderone L(2), MacKichan C(2), Wang A(2),
Hutchinson HA(2), Nelson T(4), Tommasini SM(4), von Kroge S(3), Fiedler IA(3),
Lester ER(2), Moeckel GW(2), Busse B(3), Schinke T(3), Carpenter TO(5), Levine
MA(6)(7), Horowitz MC(4), Braddock DT(2).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genomics and Metabolic Genetics Branch, National Human Genome
Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT,
USA.
(3)Department of Osteology and Biomechanics, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(4)Department of Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT,
USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania Perlman School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(7)Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes and Center for Bone Health, The
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Inactivating mutations in human ecto-nucleotide
pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase-1 (ENPP1) may result in early-onset
osteoporosis (EOOP) in haploinsufficiency and autosomal recessive
hypophosphatemic rickets (ARHR2) in homozygous deficiency. ARHR2 patients are
frequently treated with phosphate supplementation to ameliorate the rachitic
phenotype, but elevating plasma phosphorus concentrations in ARHR2 patients may
increase the risk of ectopic calcification without increasing bone mass. To
assess the risks and efficacy of conventional ARHR2 therapy, we performed
comprehensive evaluations of ARHR2 patients at two academic medical centers and
compared their skeletal and renal phenotypes with ENPP1-deficient Enpp1asj/asj
mice on an acceleration diet containing high phosphate treated with recombinant
murine Enpp1-Fc. ARHR2 patients treated with conventional therapy demonstrated
improvements in rickets, but all adults and one adolescent analyzed continued to
exhibit low bone mineral density (BMD). In addition, conventional therapy was
associated with the development of medullary nephrocalcinosis in half of the
treated patients. Similar to Enpp1asj/asj mice on normal chow and to patients
with mono- and biallelic ENPP1 mutations, 5-week-old Enpp1asj/asj mice on the
high-phosphate diet exhibited lower trabecular bone mass, reduced cortical bone
mass, and greater bone fragility. Treating the Enpp1asj/asj mice with
recombinant Enpp1-Fc protein between weeks 2 and 5 normalized trabecular bone
mass, normalized or improved bone biomechanical properties, and prevented the
development of nephrocalcinosis and renal failure. The data suggest that
conventional ARHR2 therapy does not address low BMD inherent in ENPP1
deficiency, and that ENPP1 enzyme replacement may be effective for correcting
low bone mass in ARHR2 patients without increasing the risk of nephrocalcinosis.
© 2021 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research (ASBMR).

© 2021 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research (ASBMR).

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.4254
PMCID: PMC8739051
PMID: 33465815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
