---
reference_id: "PMID:19906219"
title: Role of nutrients in the development of neonatal immune response.
authors:
- Cunningham-Rundles S
- Lin H
- Ho-Lin D
- Dnistrian A
- Cassileth BR
- Perlman JM
journal: Nutr Rev
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1111/j.1753-4887.2009.00236.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of nutrients in the development of neonatal immune response.
**Authors:** Cunningham-Rundles S, Lin H, Ho-Lin D, Dnistrian A, Cassileth BR, Perlman JM
**Journal:** Nutr Rev (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1753-4887.2009.00236.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1753-4887.2009.00236.x)

## Content

1. Nutr Rev. 2009 Nov;67 Suppl 2(0 2):S152-63. doi: 
10.1111/j.1753-4887.2009.00236.x.

Role of nutrients in the development of neonatal immune response.

Cunningham-Rundles S(1), Lin H, Ho-Lin D, Dnistrian A, Cassileth BR, Perlman JM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Host Defenses Program, Department of 
Pediatrics, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York, New York, 
USA. scrundle@mail.med.cornell.edu

Nutrients exert unique regulatory effects in the perinatal period that mold the 
developing immune system. The interactions of micronutrients and microbial and 
environmental antigens condition the post-birth maturation of the immune system, 
influencing reactions to allergens, fostering tolerance towards the emerging 
gastrointestinal flora and ingested antigens, and defining patterns of host 
defense against potential pathogens. The shared molecular structures that are 
present on microbes or certain plants, but not expressed by human cells, are 
recognized by neonatal innate immune receptors. Exposure to these activators in 
the environment through dietary intake in early life can modify the immune 
response to allergens and prime the adaptive immune response towards pathogens 
that express the corresponding molecular structures.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1753-4887.2009.00236.x
PMCID: PMC4566995
PMID: 19906219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interest. The authors have no 
relevant interests to declare.