---
reference_id: "PMID:22184118"
title: Type 1 diabetes-associated HLA-DQ8 transdimer accommodates a unique peptide repertoire.
authors:
- van Lummel M
- van Veelen PA
- Zaldumbide A
- de Ru A
- Janssen GM
- Moustakas AK
- Papadopoulos GK
- Drijfhout JW
- Roep BO
- Koning F
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.313940
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type 1 diabetes-associated HLA-DQ8 transdimer accommodates a unique peptide repertoire.
**Authors:** van Lummel M, van Veelen PA, Zaldumbide A, de Ru A, Janssen GM, Moustakas AK, Papadopoulos GK, Drijfhout JW, Roep BO, Koning F
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M111.313940](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M111.313940)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 16;287(12):9514-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.313940. Epub 
2011 Dec 19.

Type 1 diabetes-associated HLA-DQ8 transdimer accommodates a unique peptide 
repertoire.

van Lummel M(1), van Veelen PA, Zaldumbide A, de Ru A, Janssen GM, Moustakas AK, 
Papadopoulos GK, Drijfhout JW, Roep BO, Koning F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, Leiden University 
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

HLA-DQ2 and HLA-DQ8 are strongly predisposing haplotypes for type 1 diabetes 
(T1D). Yet HLA-DQ2/8 heterozygous individuals have a synergistically increased 
risk compared with HLA-DQ2 or HLA-DQ8 homozygote subjects that may result from 
the presence of a transdimer formed between the α-chain of HLA-DQ2 (DQA1*05:01) 
and the β-chain of HLA-DQ8 (DQB1*03:02). We generated cells exclusively 
expressing this transdimer (HLA-DQ8trans), characterized its peptide binding 
repertoire, and defined a unique transdimer-specific peptide binding motif that 
was found to be distinct from those of HLA-DQ2 and HLA-DQ8. This motif predicts 
an array of peptides of islet autoantigens as candidate T cell epitopes, many of 
which selectively bind to the HLA transdimer, whereas others bind to both 
HLA-DQ8 and transdimer with similar affinity. Our findings provide a molecular 
basis for the association between HLA-DQ transdimers and T1D and set the stage 
for rational testing of potential diabetogenic peptide epitopes.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.313940
PMCID: PMC3308765
PMID: 22184118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]