---
reference_id: "PMID:25711462"
title: Computational challenges of structure-based approaches applied to HIV.
authors:
- Forli S
- Olson AJ
journal: Curr Top Microbiol Immunol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/82_2015_432
keywords:
- Anti-HIV Agents/therapeutic use
- Computational Biology
- Computer Simulation
- Drug Design
- HIV Infections/drug therapy
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Computational challenges of structure-based approaches applied to HIV.
**Authors:** Forli S, Olson AJ
**Journal:** Curr Top Microbiol Immunol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/82_2015_432](https://doi.org/10.1007/82_2015_432)

## Content

1. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2015;389:31-51. doi: 10.1007/82_2015_432.

Computational challenges of structure-based approaches applied to HIV.

Forli S(1), Olson AJ.

Author information:
(1)MGL, Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology and HIV 
Interaction and Viral Evolution Center, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 N. 
Torrey Pines Rd., La Jolla, CA, 92037, USA.

Here, we review some of the opportunities and challenges that we face in 
computational modeling of HIV therapeutic targets and structural biology, both 
in terms of methodology development and structure-based drug design (SBDD). 
Computational methods have provided fundamental support to HIV research since 
the initial structural studies, helping to unravel details of HIV biology. 
Computational models have proved to be a powerful tool to analyze and understand 
the impact of mutations and to overcome their structural and functional 
influence in drug resistance. With the availability of structural data, in 
silico experiments have been instrumental in exploiting and improving 
interactions between drugs and viral targets, such as HIV protease, reverse 
transcriptase, and integrase. Issues such as viral target dynamics and 
mutational variability, as well as the role of water and estimates of binding 
free energy in characterizing ligand interactions, are areas of active 
computational research. Ever-increasing computational resources and theoretical 
and algorithmic advances have played a significant role in progress to date, and 
we envision a continually expanding role for computational methods in our 
understanding of HIV biology and SBDD in the future.

DOI: 10.1007/82_2015_432
PMID: 25711462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]