---
reference_id: "PMID:32227223"
title: "Narcolepsy type 1: what have we learned from immunology?"
authors:
- Kornum BR
journal: Sleep
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/sleep/zsaa055
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Narcolepsy type 1: what have we learned from immunology?
**Authors:** Kornum BR
**Journal:** Sleep (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/sleep/zsaa055](https://doi.org/10.1093/sleep/zsaa055)

## Content

1. Sleep. 2020 Oct 13;43(10):zsaa055. doi: 10.1093/sleep/zsaa055.

Narcolepsy type 1: what have we learned from immunology?

Kornum BR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Narcolepsy type 1 is hypothesized to be an autoimmune disease targeting the 
hypocretin/orexin neurons in the hypothalamus. Ample genetic and epidemiological 
evidence points in the direction of a pathogenesis involving the immune system, 
but this is not considered proof of autoimmunity. In fact, it remains a matter 
of debate how to prove that a given disease is indeed an autoimmune disease. In 
this review, a set of commonly used criteria for autoimmunity is described and 
applied to narcolepsy type 1. In favor of the autoimmune hypothesis are data 
showing that in narcolepsy type 1 a specific adaptive immune response is 
directed to hypocretin/orexin neurons. Autoreactive T cells and autoantibodies 
have been detected in blood samples from patients, but it remains to be seen if 
these T cells or antibodies are in fact present in the hypothalamus. It is also 
unclear if the autoreactive T cells and/or autoantibodies can transfer the 
disease to healthy individuals or animals or if immunization with the proposed 
autoantigens can induce the disease in animal models. Most importantly, it is 
still controversial whether suppression of the autoimmune response can prevent 
disease progression. In conclusion, narcolepsy type 1 does still not fully meet 
the criteria for being classified as a genuine autoimmune disease, but more and 
more results are pointing in that direction.

© Sleep Research Society 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of 
the Sleep Research Society. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/sleep/zsaa055
PMID: 32227223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]