---
reference_id: "PMID:20856114"
title: Infectious colitis.
authors:
- Navaneethan U
- Giannella RA
journal: Curr Opin Gastroenterol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1097/MOG.0b013e3283400755
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Infectious colitis.
**Authors:** Navaneethan U, Giannella RA
**Journal:** Curr Opin Gastroenterol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MOG.0b013e3283400755](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOG.0b013e3283400755)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Gastroenterol. 2011 Jan;27(1):66-71. doi: 
10.1097/MOG.0b013e3283400755.

Infectious colitis.

Navaneethan U(1), Giannella RA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Digestive Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, University 
of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The incidence of gastrointestinal infections continues to 
increase and infectious colitis contributes to significant morbidity and 
mortality worldwide. The purpose of this review is to highlight the recent 
advances in knowledge of pathogens causing infectious colitis. We describe the 
various pathogens and specifically focus on enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli 
(EHEC) O157:H7, Salmonella, Shigella, Campylobacter, and Entamoeba histolytica 
infections, and their impact on long-term effects, including postinfectious 
irritable bowel syndrome and inflammatory bowel disease.
RECENT FINDINGS: Salmonella, Campylobacter, and EHEC outbreaks continue to occur 
with disturbing regularity. Peanut butter and peppers were recently responsible 
for outbreaks of nontyphoid Salmonella. Recent research has identified 
Salmonella genes required for colonization of various hosts and 
transposon-mediated differential hybridization was recently used to identify 
genes required during infection in different animal models. A number of other 
strains of EHEC in addition to O157:H7 are emerging as serious threats to food 
safety in the USA. Campylobacter jejuni isolates are of interest because of 
absence of genes encoding for classical enterotoxins, and lack of plasmids 
encoding genes promoting bacterial invasion. Recent research has identified that 
the organism is able to invade and replicate in infected epithelia via Toll-like 
receptor (TLR)-2 and TLR-4. Also patients with infectious colitis, in particular 
Salmonella and Campylobacter, are at increased risk of postinfectious irritable 
bowel syndrome and inflammatory bowel disease on long-term follow-up. The 
paradigm of Entamoeba histolytica infection is changing with recent reports of 
detection of E. dispar deoxyribonucleic acid sequences, previously considered 
nonpathogenic.
SUMMARY: There has been an explosion in the understanding of the epidemiology, 
pathobiology, and mechanisms underlying infectious colitis. Additional studies 
to address prevention strategies and strict screening modalities for these 
infections are necessary.

DOI: 10.1097/MOG.0b013e3283400755
PMID: 20856114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]