---
reference_id: "PMID:23072720"
title: Neuropsychology of Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Peña-Casanova J
- Sánchez-Benavides G
- de Sola S
- Manero-Borrás RM
- Casals-Coll M
journal: Arch Med Res
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2012.08.015
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuropsychology of Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Peña-Casanova J, Sánchez-Benavides G, de Sola S, Manero-Borrás RM, Casals-Coll M
**Journal:** Arch Med Res (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.arcmed.2012.08.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arcmed.2012.08.015)

## Content

1. Arch Med Res. 2012 Nov;43(8):686-93. doi: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2012.08.015. Epub 
2012 Oct 13.

Neuropsychology of Alzheimer's disease.

Peña-Casanova J(1), Sánchez-Benavides G, de Sola S, Manero-Borrás RM, 
Casals-Coll M.

Author information:
(1)Section of Behavioral Neurology, Service of Neurology, Hospital del Mar, 
Barcelona, Spain. jpcasanova@hospitaldelmar.cat

The expression of neurodegenerative diseases can be categorized into three main 
symptomatic domains: neurological, cognitive and, neuropsychiatric. This review 
focuses on the cognitive profile and neuropsychological assessment of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). The topography and progression of brain neuropathology 
determines the cognitive expression of the disease. Thus, in accordance with the 
initial involvement of the medial temporal lobe, cognitive changes in AD start 
with specific difficulties in encoding and storage of new information. This 
particular memory deficit can be optimally detected with memory tests that 
enhance mnemonic retrieval by means of encoding specificity technique such as 
the Free and Cued Selective Reminding Test (FCSRT). Along the course of the 
disease, the neuropathology spreads to association cortices, and other 
neuropsychological deficits can be detected. A comprehensive neuropsychological 
examination encompassing several cognitive domains can provide a pattern of 
altered and preserved functions that is helpful to early detection, differential 
diagnosis and even prognosis of progression in predementia stages. The use of 
adapted and standardized instruments is necessary to properly estimate cognitive 
and functional performance in AD.

Copyright © 2012 IMSS. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2012.08.015
PMID: 23072720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]