---
reference_id: "PMID:31471949"
title: Collaborating to advance interdisciplinary care for individuals with arthrogryposis.
authors:
- Dahan-Oliel N
- Hall JG
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31741
keywords:
- Adult
- "Arthrogryposis/diagnosis, rehabilitation"
- Child
- Humans
- Intersectoral Collaboration
- Orthopedics/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Collaborating to advance interdisciplinary care for individuals with arthrogryposis.
**Authors:** Dahan-Oliel N, Hall JG
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.31741](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.31741)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2019 Sep;181(3):273-276. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.c.31741. Epub 2019 Aug 31.

Collaborating to advance interdisciplinary care for individuals with 
arthrogryposis.

Dahan-Oliel N(1)(2), Hall JG(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Shriners Hospitals for Children, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(2)School of Physical and Occupational Therapy, McGill University, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada.
(3)Pediatrics and Medical Genetics, Children's and Women's Health Centre of BC, 
UBC, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, BC Children's Hospital, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada.

This Special Issue on Interdisciplinary Care in Arthrogryposis highlights a 
collection of articles spanning topics in interdisciplinary care, genetic 
discoveries, and clinical research. An international group of clinicians and 
researchers from various backgrounds who attended the "3rd International 
Symposium on Arthrogryposis", held in Philadelphia, September 24-26, 2018, were 
invited to contribute to this issue. The goal of the 2018 Symposium and of this 
Special Issue is to provide momentum to advancing evidence-based practice and 
research in arthrogryposis, by working collaboratively with adults and families 
of children with arthrogryposis, clinicians, and researchers. The contents of 
this issue cover a range of topics from defining and classifying arthrogryposis 
multiplex congenita to early detection, rehabilitation, and orthopedic 
management, advances in genetic pathways, patient registries, autopsy 
guidelines, and research findings in the pediatric and adult populations with 
arthrogryposis. We hope that this issue provides an overview as well as new 
knowledge on arthrogryposis to generate more conversations at the international 
level, and advance care and research for individuals with arthrogryposis.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31741
PMID: 31471949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]