---
reference_id: "PMID:17365988"
title: Inherited, non-spherocytic haemolysis due to deficiency of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase.
authors:
- Ronquist G
- Theodorsson E
journal: Scand J Clin Lab Invest
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1080/00365510601047910
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inherited, non-spherocytic haemolysis due to deficiency of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase.
**Authors:** Ronquist G, Theodorsson E
**Journal:** Scand J Clin Lab Invest (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1080/00365510601047910](https://doi.org/10.1080/00365510601047910)

## Content

1. Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 2007;67(1):105-11. doi: 10.1080/00365510601047910.

Inherited, non-spherocytic haemolysis due to deficiency of glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase.

Ronquist G(1), Theodorsson E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital, 
Uppsala, Sweden.

The about 400 million individuals worldwide suffering from a hereditary 
deficiency of the enzyme glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) may experience 
different degrees of haemolytic anaemia. Haemoglobin is present in very high 
concentrations in the erythrocyte cytoplasm, at risk of falling out of solution 
if the internal environment or the haemoglobin itself is changed. G6PD is a 
crucial enzyme producing reduced glutathione in the erythrocyte cytoplasm for 
the purpose of protecting haemoglobin against oxidative damage. The presence of 
unopposed oxidizing agents leading to oxidation of the sulfhydryl bridges 
between parts of the haemoglobin molecule decrease the solubility of 
haemoglobin, leading to precipitations called Heinz bodies. The laboratory 
investigation of G6PD deficiency is commonly done by a quantitative 
spectrophotometric analysis or by a rapid fluorescent spot test detecting the 
generation of NADPH from NADP. Genetic tests based on polymerase chain reaction 
detect specific mutations and may be used for population screening, family 
studies, or prenatal diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1080/00365510601047910
PMID: 17365988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]