---
reference_id: "PMID:8599352"
title: Cardiac malformation in two infants with hypochondrogenesis.
authors:
- Potocki L
- Abuelo DN
- Oyer CE
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320590306
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- "Achondroplasia/classification, genetics, pathology"
- Cleft Palate/genetics
- "Collagen/deficiency, genetics, physiology"
- Fatal Outcome
- Female
- "Heart Septal Defects, Atrial/genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/classification, genetics, pathology"
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac malformation in two infants with hypochondrogenesis.
**Authors:** Potocki L, Abuelo DN, Oyer CE
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.1320590306](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.1320590306)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 1995 Nov 20;59(3):295-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320590306.

Cardiac malformation in two infants with hypochondrogenesis.

Potocki L(1), Abuelo DN, Oyer CE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Women and Infants' Hospital, Brown University, 
Providence, Rhode Island, USA.

Autopsy records from the Women and Infants' Hospital from January 1974 through 
January 1994 were reviewed to identify cardiac malformations in the presence of 
skeletal dysplasia. Of 24 cases of lethal fetal or neonatal 
osteochondrodysplasias, 4 were given diagnoses in which disorders of type II 
collagen are regarded as causative. These 4 were categorized in the 
spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia (SED) spectrum of disorders; specifically two 
patients with hypochondrogenesis and two with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia 
congenita were identified. Defects in cardiac septation were noted in the 2 
patients with hypochondrogenesis. No cardiovascular abnormalities were present 
in the remaining cases, which included thanatophoric dysplasia, osteogenesis 
imperfecta, and asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy. Although cardiovascular 
malformations have been described in other types of osteochondrodysplasias, 
e.g., short rib polydactyly syndrome type II and chondroectodermal (Ellis-van 
Creveld) dysplasia, congenital heart disease has not been described in 
hypochondrogenesis. Type II collagen, which has been found to be abnormal in 
some patients with hypochondrogenesis, is considered to have a limited tissue 
distribution, and has not been detected as yet in human myocardium. The findings 
presented here suggest that type II collagen may function in human 
cardiogenesis.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.1320590306
PMID: 8599352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]