---
reference_id: "PMID:20078116"
title: "Characterization of the intestinal absorption of arsenate, monomethylarsonic acid, and dimethylarsinic acid using the Caco-2 cell line."
authors:
- Calatayud M
- Gimeno J
- Vélez D
- Devesa V
- Montoro R
journal: Chem Res Toxicol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1021/tx900279e
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of the intestinal absorption of arsenate, monomethylarsonic acid, and dimethylarsinic acid using the Caco-2 cell line.
**Authors:** Calatayud M, Gimeno J, Vélez D, Devesa V, Montoro R
**Journal:** Chem Res Toxicol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1021/tx900279e](https://doi.org/10.1021/tx900279e)

## Content

1. Chem Res Toxicol. 2010 Mar 15;23(3):547-56. doi: 10.1021/tx900279e.

Characterization of the intestinal absorption of arsenate, monomethylarsonic 
acid, and dimethylarsinic acid using the Caco-2 cell line.

Calatayud M(1), Gimeno J, Vélez D, Devesa V, Montoro R.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Agroquimica y Tecnologia de Alimentos (CSIC), Apdo 73, 46100 
Burjassot, Valencia, Spain.

Many toxicological studies have been conducted with arsenic species in target 
organ cell lines. However, although epithelial gastrointestinal cells constitute 
the first barrier to the absorption of contaminants, studies using intestinal 
cells are scarce. The present study examines absorption through the intestinal 
epithelium of the pentavalent arsenic species most commonly found in foods 
[arsenate, As(V); monomethylarsonic acid, MMA(V); and dimethylarsinic acid, 
DMA(V)], using the Caco-2 cell line as a model. Different concentrations 
(1.3-667.6 microM) and culture conditions (media, pH, addition of phosphates, 
and treatment with ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid) were evaluated to 
characterize such transport. The apparent permeabilities indicate that the 
methylated species show low absorption, whereas As(V) is a compound with 
moderate absorption. The kinetic study shows only a saturable component for 
MMA(V) transport in the range of concentrations assayed. The existence of 
paracellular transport was shown for all of the species, with greater 
significance in the case of the methylated forms. As(V) absorption was inhibited 
by 10 mM phosphate, and a phosphate transporter therefore could take part in 
intestinal absorption. Acidification of the medium (pH 5.5) resulted in a marked 
increase in As(V) and DMA(V) permeability (4-8 times, respectively) but not in 
MMA(V) permeability. This makes it necessary to consider the possible existence 
of absorption in the proximal intestine and even in the stomach, where the 
environment is acidic; alternatively, an H(+)-dependent transporter may be 
involved. The results obtained constitute the basis for future research on the 
mechanisms involved in the intestinal absorption of arsenic and its species, a 
decisive step in relation to their toxic action.

DOI: 10.1021/tx900279e
PMID: 20078116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]