---
reference_id: "PMID:20633576"
title: Defective lipid transport and biosynthesis in recessive and dominant Stargardt macular degeneration.
authors:
- Molday RS
- Zhang K
journal: Prog Lipid Res
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.plipres.2010.07.002
keywords:
- "ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Chromosome Disorders/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 6/genetics"
- "Eye Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Lipid Metabolism
- "Macular Degeneration/congenital, genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Models, Biological"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Molecular Structure
- "Phosphatidylethanolamines/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Retina/cytology, metabolism, pathology"
- "Retinoids/chemistry, metabolism"
- Stargardt Disease
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defective lipid transport and biosynthesis in recessive and dominant Stargardt macular degeneration.
**Authors:** Molday RS, Zhang K
**Journal:** Prog Lipid Res (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.plipres.2010.07.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plipres.2010.07.002)

## Content

1. Prog Lipid Res. 2010 Oct;49(4):476-92. doi: 10.1016/j.plipres.2010.07.002.
Epub  2010 Jul 13.

Defective lipid transport and biosynthesis in recessive and dominant Stargardt 
macular degeneration.

Molday RS(1), Zhang K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Centre of Macular Research, 
University of British Columbia, 2350 Health Sciences Mall, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada. molday@interchange.ubc.ca

Stargardt disease is a common inherited macular degeneration characterized by a 
significant loss in central vision in the first or second decade of life, 
bilateral atrophic changes in the central retina associated with degeneration of 
photoreceptors and underlying retinal pigment epithelial cells, and the presence 
of yellow flecks extending from the macula. Autosomal recessive Stargardt 
disease, the most common macular dystrophy, is caused by mutations in the gene 
encoding ABCA4, a photoreceptor ATP binding cassette (ABC) transporter. 
Biochemical studies together with analysis of abca4 knockout mice and Stargardt 
patients have implicated ABCA4 as a lipid transporter that facilitates the 
removal of potentially toxic retinal compounds from photoreceptors following 
photoexcitation. An autosomal dominant form of Stargardt disease also known as 
Stargardt-like dystrophy is caused by mutations in a gene encoding ELOVL4, an 
enzyme that catalyzes the elongation of very long-chain fatty acids in 
photoreceptors and other tissues. This review focuses on the molecular 
characterization of ABCA4 and ELOVL4 and their role in photoreceptor cell 
biology and the pathogenesis of Stargardt disease.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.plipres.2010.07.002
PMCID: PMC2946192
PMID: 20633576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]