---
reference_id: "PMID:21668896"
title: Clinical and molecular analysis of UAE fibrochondrogenesis patients expands the phenotype and reveals two COL11A1 homozygous null mutations.
authors:
- Akawi NA
- Al-Gazali L
- Ali BR
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01734.x
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chondrodysplasia Punctata, Rhizomelic/diagnosis, genetics"
- Chromosome Mapping
- Collagen Type XI/genetics
- Consanguinity
- Family
- Female
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Life Expectancy
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- United Arab Emirates
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and molecular analysis of UAE fibrochondrogenesis patients expands the phenotype and reveals two COL11A1 homozygous null mutations.
**Authors:** Akawi NA, Al-Gazali L, Ali BR
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01734.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01734.x)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2012 Aug;82(2):147-56. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01734.x. Epub
 2011 Jul 18.

Clinical and molecular analysis of UAE fibrochondrogenesis patients expands the 
phenotype and reveals two COL11A1 homozygous null mutations.

Akawi NA(1), Al-Gazali L, Ali BR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, United Arab 
Emirates University, Al-Ain, Abu Dhabi, UAE.

Fibrochondrogenesis is documented to be a neonatally lethal rare recessively 
inherited disorder characterized by short-limbed skeletal dysplasia. Here we 
report two patients from two unrelated consanguineous Emirati families who have 
unexpectedly survived till the ages of 3 and 6 years. These patients show 
additional symptoms which include developmental delay, profound sensory-neural 
deafness, severe myopia and progressive severe skeletal abnormalities. Linkage 
of fibrochondrogenesis in the Emirati families to chromosome 1 has been 
established using homozygosity mapping confirming recent findings by Tompson et 
al. in 2010. Screening of the COL11A1 gene revealed two null homozygous 
mutations [c.4084C>T (p.R1362X) and c.3708+437T>G] in the aforementioned two 
families. The c.4084C>T mutation is predicted to introduce a stop codon at 
position Arg1362, whereas the c.3708+437T>G mutation causes the activation of an 
intronic pseudoexon between exons 48 and 49. This resulted in the insertion of 
50 nucleotides into the mRNA. The carriers of these mutations display ocular 
defects with normal hearing. In conclusion, our data shall improve the overall 
understanding of fibrochondrogenesis especially in surviving homozygous patients 
and, at least partly, explain the phenotypic variability associated with COL11A1 
gene mutations.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01734.x
PMID: 21668896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]