---
reference_id: "PMID:36442680"
title: Genotype-phenotype association of PITX2 and FOXC1 in Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.
authors:
- Zhou L
- Wang X
- An J
- Zhang Y
- He M
- Tang L
journal: Exp Eye Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2022.109307
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotype-phenotype association of PITX2 and FOXC1 in Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.
**Authors:** Zhou L, Wang X, An J, Zhang Y, He M, Tang L
**Journal:** Exp Eye Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.exer.2022.109307](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.exer.2022.109307)

## Content

1. Exp Eye Res. 2023 Jan;226:109307. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2022.109307. Epub 2022
Nov  25.

Genotype-phenotype association of PITX2 and FOXC1 in Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.

Zhou L(1), Wang X(2), An J(1), Zhang Y(1), He M(1), Tang L(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, 610041, China.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, 610041, China; Department of Ophthalmology, People's Hospital of 
Jianyang City, No. 180, the Road of Hospital, Jianyang, 641400, China.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, 610041, China. Electronic address: tangli-1a@wchscu.cn.

PITX2 and FOXC1 are the most common pathogenic genes associated with 
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS). In this study, we aimed to explore the variation 
spectrum of PITX2 and FOXC1 and their associated phenotype based on data from 
our study and previously reported literatures. Whole exome sequencing was 
performed on eight probands in our study. Multistep bioinformatic and 
co-segregation analyses were performed to detect pathogenic variants. 
Genotype-phenotype correlations of PITX2 and FOXC1 and the differences between 
them were determined. We detected three variants of FOXC1 and two variants of 
PITX2 in five unrelated families with ARS. Macular retinoschisis had been 
observed in AR1 with variant in PITX2 and it is not reported before. 
Additionally, a review of published literature and our study led to the 
identification of 593 families with variants of PITX2 or FOXC1, including 316 
families with heterozygous variants in FOXC1, 251 families with heterozygous 
variants in PITX2, 13 families with variants in double genes, seven families 
with homozygous or compound heterozygous variants in FOXC1, and six families 
with variants in ADAMTS17, PRDM5, COL4A1 or CYP1B1. Significant differences were 
observed between the prevalence of missense and in-frame, truncation, and large 
deletion variants in PITX2 (32.00%, 42.67%, and 25.33%, respectively) and FOXC1 
(34.49%, 35.13%, 30.38%, respectively) (p = 1.16E-43). Enrichment and frequency 
analyses revealed that missense variants were concentrated in the forkhead 
domain of FOXC1 (76.14%) and homeodomain of PITX2 (87.50%). The percentage of 
Caucasians with variants in FOXC1 was significantly higher than that of PITX2 
(p = 2.00E-2). Significant differences between PITX2 and FOXC1 were observed in 
glaucoma (p = 3.00E-2), corectopia (p = 3.050E-6), and polycoria (p = 5.21E-08). 
Additionally, we observed a significant difference in best-corrected visual 
acuity (BCVA) between FOXC1 and PITX2 (p = 3.80E-2). Among all the family 
members with PITX2 or FOXC1 variants, the prevalence of systemic abnormalities 
was significantly higher in PITX2 than in FOXC1 (89.16% vs. 58.77%, 
p = 5.44E-17). In conclusion, macular retinoschisis as a novel phenotype had 
been observed in patient with variant in PITX2. Significant differences were 
detected in phenotypes and genotypes between PITX2 and FOXC1.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exer.2022.109307
PMID: 36442680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest All authors 
listed in this study declare no conflicts of interest.