---
reference_id: "PMID:32407311"
title: Differences in splicing defects between the grey and white matter in myotonic dystrophy type 1 patients.
authors:
- Nishi M
- Kimura T
- Igeta M
- Furuta M
- Suenaga K
- Matsumura T
- Fujimura H
- Jinnai K
- Yoshikawa H
journal: PLoS One
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0224912
keywords:
- Adult
- Alternative Splicing
- Female
- Gray Matter/metabolism
- Humans
- Male
- Myotonic Dystrophy/genetics
- "RNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- White Matter/metabolism
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differences in splicing defects between the grey and white matter in myotonic dystrophy type 1 patients.
**Authors:** Nishi M, Kimura T, Igeta M, Furuta M, Suenaga K, Matsumura T, Fujimura H, Jinnai K, Yoshikawa H
**Journal:** PLoS One (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0224912](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0224912)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2020 May 14;15(5):e0224912. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0224912.
eCollection 2020.

Differences in splicing defects between the grey and white matter in myotonic
dystrophy type 1 patients.

Nishi M(1), Kimura T(1), Igeta M(2), Furuta M(3), Suenaga K(1)(4), Matsumura
T(5), Fujimura H(5), Jinnai K(6), Yoshikawa H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine Division of Neurology, Hyogo College of
Medicine, Nishinomiya, Japan.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology, Japan Organization of Occupational Health and Safety
Kan-sai Rosai Hospital, Osaka, Japan.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Japan Self Defense Force Hanshin Hospital,
Kawanishi, Japan.
(5)Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization Toneyama Hospital,
Toyonaka, Japan.
(6)Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization Hyogo-Chuo Hospital,
Sanda, Japan.

Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is a multi-system disorder caused by CTG repeats
in the myotonic dystrophy protein kinase (DMPK) gene. This leads to the
sequestration of splicing factors such as muscleblind-like 1/2 (MBNL1/2) and
aberrant splicing in the central nervous system. We investigated the splicing
patterns of MBNL1/2 and genes controlled by MBNL2 in several regions of the
brain and between the grey matter (GM) and white matter (WM) in DM1 patients
using RT-PCR. Compared with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS, as disease
controls), the percentage of spliced-in parameter (PSI) for most of the examined
exons were significantly altered in most of the brain regions of DM1 patients,
except for the cerebellum. The splicing of many genes was differently regulated
between the GM and WM in both DM1 and ALS. In 7 out of the 15 examined splicing
events, the level of PSI change between DM1 and ALS was significantly higher in
the GM than in the WM. The differences in alternative splicing between the GM
and WM may be related to the effect of DM1 on the WM of the brain.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0224912
PMCID: PMC7224547
PMID: 32407311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
