---
reference_id: "PMID:31720561"
title: Targeted therapies for ROS1-rearranged non-small cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Patil T
- Simons E
- Mushtaq R
- Pacheco JM
- Doebele RC
- Bowles DW
journal: Drugs Today (Barc)
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1358/dot.2019.55.10.3030646
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeted therapies for ROS1-rearranged non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Patil T, Simons E, Mushtaq R, Pacheco JM, Doebele RC, Bowles DW
**Journal:** Drugs Today (Barc) (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1358/dot.2019.55.10.3030646](https://doi.org/10.1358/dot.2019.55.10.3030646)

## Content

1. Drugs Today (Barc). 2019 Oct;55(10):641-652. doi: 
10.1358/dot.2019.55.10.3030646.

Targeted therapies for ROS1-rearranged non-small cell lung cancer.

Patil T(1), Simons E(2), Mushtaq R(1), Pacheco JM(1), Doebele RC(1), Bowles 
DW(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Colorado 
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(2)Division of General Internal Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(3)Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Colorado 
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado, USA. daniel.bowles@ucdenver.edu.

ROS1 gene fusions account for approximately 1-2% of all cases of non-small cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC). Similarly to anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-positive 
NSCLC, patients with ROS1+ NSCLC tend to have minimal smoking and be of the 
female sex. In most cases, adenocarcinoma is the dominant histology. The ROS1 
gene has homology to ALK and this structural similarity formed the basis for 
utilizing ALK inhibitors for ROS1+ NSCLC. On the basis of impressive 
progression-free survival of 19.2 months from the PROFILE 1001 trial, crizotinib 
obtained Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval as first-line therapy for 
treatment of ROS1+ NSCLC. Since then, there has been a growing appreciation of 
the incidence of brain metastases in ROS1+ NSCLC and rates of central nervous 
system progression on crizotinib. Additionally, appreciation of novel resistance 
mechanisms to crizotinib has led to the development of newer tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors (TKIs). In this review, we highlight known and emerging TKIs for the 
management of ROS1+ NSCLC.

Copyright 2019 Clarivate Analytics.

DOI: 10.1358/dot.2019.55.10.3030646
PMID: 31720561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]