---
reference_id: "PMID:33080033"
title: EWS-FLI1 regulates and cooperates with core regulatory circuitry in Ewing sarcoma.
authors:
- Shi X
- Zheng Y
- Jiang L
- Zhou B
- Yang W
- Li L
- Ding L
- Huang M
- Gery S
- Lin DC
- Koeffler HP
journal: Nucleic Acids Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa901
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Proliferation
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Gene Regulatory Networks
- Homeobox Protein Nkx-2.2
- "Homeodomain Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Kruppel-Like Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- Lipid Metabolism/genetics
- "Mice, Nude"
- Nuclear Proteins
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/metabolism, physiology"
- "Proto-Oncogene Protein c-fli-1/metabolism, physiology"
- "RNA-Binding Protein EWS/metabolism, physiology"
- "Sarcoma, Ewing/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Signal Transduction
- "Transcription Factor 4/genetics, metabolism"
- Transcription Factors
- "Zebrafish Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EWS-FLI1 regulates and cooperates with core regulatory circuitry in Ewing sarcoma.
**Authors:** Shi X, Zheng Y, Jiang L, Zhou B, Yang W, Li L, Ding L, Huang M, Gery S, Lin DC, Koeffler HP
**Journal:** Nucleic Acids Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/nar/gkaa901](https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkaa901)

## Content

1. Nucleic Acids Res. 2020 Nov 18;48(20):11434-11451. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa901.

EWS-FLI1 regulates and cooperates with core regulatory circuitry in Ewing
sarcoma.

Shi X(1)(2), Zheng Y(2), Jiang L(1), Zhou B(3), Yang W(3), Li L(2), Ding L(4),
Huang M(5), Gery S(2), Lin DC(2), Koeffler HP(2)(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)Guangzhou Municipal and Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Protein
Modification and Degradation; State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease;
Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University; Sino-French Hoffmann
institute, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Guangzhou Medical University,
Guangzhou 510120, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048,
USA.
(3)Departments of Surgery and Biomedical Sciences, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center,
Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.
(4)Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore,
Singapore 117600, Singapore.
(5)School of Biology and Basic Medical Sciences, Soochow University, Suzhou
215123, P.R. China.
(6)National University Cancer Institute, National University Hospital Singapore,
Singapore 119074, Singapore.

Core regulatory circuitry (CRC)-dependent transcriptional network is critical
for developmental tumors in children and adolescents carrying few gene
mutations. However, whether and how CRC contributes to transcription regulation
in Ewing sarcoma is unknown. Here, we identify and functionally validate a CRC
'trio' constituted by three transcription factors (TFs): KLF15, TCF4 and NKX2-2,
in Ewing sarcoma cells. Epigenomic analyses demonstrate that EWS-FLI1, the
primary fusion driver for this cancer, directly establishes super-enhancers of
each of these three TFs to activate their transcription. In turn, KLF15, TCF4
and NKX2-2 co-bind to their own and each other's super-enhancers and promoters,
forming an inter-connected auto-regulatory loop. Functionally, CRC factors
contribute significantly to cell proliferation of Ewing sarcoma both in vitro
and in vivo. Mechanistically, CRC factors exhibit prominent capacity of
co-regulating the epigenome in cooperation with EWS-FLI1, occupying 77.2% of
promoters and 55.6% of enhancers genome-wide. Downstream, CRC TFs coordinately
regulate gene expression networks in Ewing sarcoma, controlling important
signaling pathways for cancer, such as lipid metabolism pathway, PI3K/AKT and
MAPK signaling pathways. Together, molecular characterization of the oncogenic
CRC model advances our understanding of the biology of Ewing sarcoma. Moreover,
CRC-downstream genes and signaling pathways may contain potential therapeutic
targets for this malignancy.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkaa901
PMCID: PMC7672457
PMID: 33080033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
