---
reference_id: "PMID:34484217"
title: In Situ Overexpression of Matricellular Mechanical Proteins Demands Functional Immune Signature and Mitigates Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Progression.
authors:
- Yaegashi LB
- Baldavira CM
- Prieto TG
- Machado-Rugolo J
- Velosa APP
- da Silveira LKR
- Assato A
- Ab'Saber AM
- Falzoni R
- Takagaki T
- Silva PL
- Teodoro WR
- Capelozzi VL
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.714230
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In Situ Overexpression of Matricellular Mechanical Proteins Demands Functional Immune Signature and Mitigates Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Progression.
**Authors:** Yaegashi LB, Baldavira CM, Prieto TG, Machado-Rugolo J, Velosa APP, da Silveira LKR, Assato A, Ab'Saber AM, Falzoni R, Takagaki T, Silva PL, Teodoro WR, Capelozzi VL
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2021.714230](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2021.714230)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2021 Aug 16;12:714230. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.714230. 
eCollection 2021.

In Situ Overexpression of Matricellular Mechanical Proteins Demands Functional 
Immune Signature and Mitigates Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Progression.

Yaegashi LB(1), Baldavira CM(1), Prieto TG(1), Machado-Rugolo J(1)(2), Velosa 
APP(3), da Silveira LKR(3), Assato A(1), Ab'Saber AM(1), Falzoni R(1), Takagaki 
T(4), Silva PL(5)(6), Teodoro WR(3), Capelozzi VL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of São Paulo Medical School, São Paulo, 
Brazil.
(2)Health Technology Assessment Center (NATS), Clinical Hospital (HCFMB), 
Medical School of São Paulo State University (UNESP), Botucatu, Brazil.
(3)Rheumatology Division of the Hospital das Clinicas, University of São Paulo 
Medical School, São Paulo, Brazil.
(4)Division of Pneumology, Instituto do Coração (Incor), University of São Paulo 
Medical School (USP), São Paulo, Brazil.
(5)Laboratory of Pulmonary Investigation, Carlos Chagas Filho Biophysics 
Institute, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Centro de Ciências da Saúde, 
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(6)National Institute of Science and Technology for Regenerative Medicine, Rio 
de Janeiro, Brazil.

Non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) is a complex cancer biome composed of 
malignant cells embedded in a sophisticated tumor microenvironment (TME) 
combined with different initiating cell types, including immune cells and 
cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), and extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. 
However, little is known about these tumors' immune-matricellular relationship 
as functional and mechanical barriers. This study investigated 120 patients with 
NSCLC to describe the immune-matricellular phenotypes of their TME and their 
relationship with malignant cells. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed to 
characterize immune checkpoints (PD-L1, LAG-3, CTLA-4+, VISTA 1), T cells 
(CD3+), cytotoxic T cells (CD8+, Granzyme B), macrophages (CD68+), regulatory T 
cells (FOXP3+, CD4+), natural killer cells (CD57+), and B lymphocytes (CD20+), 
whereas CAFs and collagen types I, III, and V were characterized by 
immunofluorescence (IF). We observed two distinct functional immune-cellular 
barriers-the first of which showed proximity between malignant cells and 
cytotoxic T cells, and the second of which showed distant proximity between 
non-cohesive nests of malignant cells and regulatory T cells. We also identified 
three tumor-associated matricellular barriers: the first, with a localized 
increase in CAFs and a low deposition of Col V, the second with increased CAFs, 
Col III and Col I fibers, and the third with a high amount of Col fibers and 
CAFs bundled and aligned perpendicularly to the tumor border. The Cox regression 
analysis was designed in two steps. First, we investigated the relationship 
between the immune-matricellular components and tumor pathological stage (I, II, 
and IIIA), and better survival rates were seen in patients whose tumors 
expressed collagen type III > 24.89 fibers/mm². Then, we included patients who 
had progressed to pathological stage IV and found an association between poor 
survival and tumor VISTA 1 expression > 52.86 cells/mm² and CD3+ ≤ 278.5 
cells/mm². We thus concluded that differential patterns in the distribution of 
immune-matricellular phenotypes in the TME of NSCLC patients could be used in 
translational studies to predict new treatment strategies and improve patient 
outcome. These data raise the possibility that proteins with mechanical barrier 
function in NSCLC may be used by cancer cells to protect them from immune cell 
infiltration and immune-mediated destruction, which can otherwise be targeted 
effectively with immunotherapy or collagen therapy.

Copyright © 2021 Yaegashi, Baldavira, Prieto, Machado-Rugolo, Velosa, da 
Silveira, Assato, Ab’Saber, Falzoni, Takagaki, Silva, Teodoro and Capelozzi.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.714230
PMCID: PMC8415570
PMID: 34484217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.