---
reference_id: "PMID:39695132"
title: Targeting ERBB3 and AKT to overcome adaptive resistance in EML4-ALK-driven non-small cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Sampson J
- Ju HM
- Zhang N
- Yeoh S
- Choi J
- Bayliss R
journal: Cell Death Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41419-024-07272-7
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/genetics, pathology, drug therapy, metabolism"
- "Receptor, ErbB-3/metabolism, genetics"
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/metabolism, genetics"
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, pathology, drug therapy, metabolism"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt/metabolism
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/drug effects, genetics"
- Lactams/pharmacology
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology
- Aminopyridines/pharmacology
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- Pyrazoles/pharmacology
- "Neuregulin-1/metabolism, genetics"
- "Lactams, Macrocyclic/pharmacology"
- "Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/genetics, metabolism, antagonists & inhibitors"
- Apoptosis/drug effects
- "ErbB Receptors/metabolism, genetics, antagonists & inhibitors"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeting ERBB3 and AKT to overcome adaptive resistance in EML4-ALK-driven non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Sampson J, Ju HM, Zhang N, Yeoh S, Choi J, Bayliss R
**Journal:** Cell Death Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41419-024-07272-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41419-024-07272-7)

## Content

1. Cell Death Dis. 2024 Dec 18;15(12):912. doi: 10.1038/s41419-024-07272-7.

Targeting ERBB3 and AKT to overcome adaptive resistance in EML4-ALK-driven
non-small cell lung cancer.

Sampson J(1), Ju HM(2), Zhang N(3), Yeoh S(3), Choi J(4), Bayliss R(5).

Author information:
(1)Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology and School of Molecular and
Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds,
LS2 9JT, UK. i.sampson@leeds.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Pathology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, Seoul, 138-736, Korea.
(3)Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology and School of Molecular and
Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds,
LS2 9JT, UK.
(4)Department of Pathology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, Seoul, 138-736, Korea. jenec@amc.seoul.kr.
(5)Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology and School of Molecular and
Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds,
LS2 9JT, UK. r.w.bayliss@leeds.ac.uk.

The fusion event between EML4 and ALK drives a significant oncogenic activity in
5% of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Even though potent ALK-tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (ALK-TKIs) are successfully used for the treatment of
EML4-ALK-positive NSCLC patients, a subset of those patients eventually acquire
resistance during their therapy. Here, we investigate the kinase responses in
EML4-ALK V1 and V3-harbouring NSCLC cancer cells after acute inhibition with ALK
TKI, lorlatinib (LOR). Using phosphopeptide chip array and upstream kinase
prediction analysis, we identified a group of phosphorylated tyrosine peptides
including ERBB and AKT proteins that are upregulated upon ALK-TKI treatment in
EML4-ALK-positive NSCLC cell lines. Dual inhibition of ALK and ERBB receptors or
AKT disrupts RAS/MAPK and AKT/PI3K signalling pathways, and enhances apoptosis
in EML4-ALK + NSCLC cancer cells. Heregulin, an ERBB3 ligand, differentially
modulates the sensitivity of EML4-ALK cell lines to ALK inhibitors. We found
that EML4-ALK cells made resistant to LOR are sensitive to inhibition of ERBB
and AKT. These findings emphasize the important roles of AKT and ERBB3 to
regulate signalling after acute LOR treatment, identifying them as potential
targets that may be beneficial to prevent adaptive resistance to
EML4-ALK-targeted therapies in NSCLC.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-024-07272-7
PMCID: PMC11655848
PMID: 39695132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no
competing interests. Ethics approval and consent to participate: All methods
used in the study were in accordance with the relevant institutional guidelines
and regulations. This study did not involve human participants and, therefore,
did not require related ethical approval or consent to participate.
