---
reference_id: "PMID:33453943"
title: Activity-dependent neuroprotective protein (ADNP)-end-binding protein (EB) interactions regulate microtubule dynamics toward protection against tauopathy.
authors:
- Ivashko-Pachima Y
- Gozes I
journal: Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/bs.pmbts.2020.07.008
keywords:
- Activities of Daily Living
- Animals
- Carrier Proteins
- Homeodomain Proteins/metabolism
- Humans
- Mice
- Microtubules/metabolism
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/metabolism
- Tauopathies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Activity-dependent neuroprotective protein (ADNP)-end-binding protein (EB) interactions regulate microtubule dynamics toward protection against tauopathy.
**Authors:** Ivashko-Pachima Y, Gozes I
**Journal:** Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/bs.pmbts.2020.07.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.pmbts.2020.07.008)

## Content

1. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci. 2021;177:65-90. doi: 10.1016/bs.pmbts.2020.07.008. 
Epub 2020 Aug 14.

Activity-dependent neuroprotective protein (ADNP)-end-binding protein (EB) 
interactions regulate microtubule dynamics toward protection against tauopathy.

Ivashko-Pachima Y(1), Gozes I(2).

Author information:
(1)Dr. Diana and Zelman Elton (Elbaum) Laboratory for Molecular 
Neuroendocrinology, Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, 
Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Sagol School of Neuroscience and Adams Super Center 
for Brain Studies, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)Dr. Diana and Zelman Elton (Elbaum) Laboratory for Molecular 
Neuroendocrinology, Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, 
Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Sagol School of Neuroscience and Adams Super Center 
for Brain Studies, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. Electronic address: 
igozes@tauex.tau.ac.il.

The 1102-amino-acid activity-dependent neuroprotective protein (ADNP) was 
originally discovered by expression cloning through the immunological 
identification of its 8-amino-acid sequence NAPVSIPQ (NAP), constituting the 
smallest active neuroprotective fragment of the protein. ADNP expression is 
essential for brain formation and cognitive function and is dysregulated in a 
variety of neurodegenerative diseases (Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, 
and schizophrenia). ADNP has been found to be mutated in autism, with an 
estimated prevalence of 0.17% (together, these autism cases now constitute ADNP 
syndrome cases) and our recent results showed somatic mutations in ADNP in 
Alzheimer's disease brains correlating with tauopathy. Furthermore, Adnp 
haploinsufficiency in mice causes an age-dependent reduction in cognitive 
functions coupled with tauopathy-like features such as an increased formation of 
tangle-like structures, defective axonal transport, and Tau 
hyperphosphorylation. ADNP and its derived peptides, NAP and SKIP, directly 
interact with end-binding proteins (EBs), which decorate plus-tips of the 
growing axonal cytoskeleton-microtubules (MTs). Functionally, NAP and SKIP are 
neuroprotective and stimulate axonal transport. Clinical trials have suggested 
the potential efficacy of NAP (davunetide, CP201) for improving cognitive 
performance/functional activities of daily living in amnestic mild cognitive 
impairment (aMCI) and schizophrenia patients, respectively. However, NAP was not 
found to be an effective treatment (though well-tolerated) for progressive 
supranuclear palsy (PSP) patients. Here we review the molecular mechanism of NAP 
activity on MTs and how NAP modulates the MT-Tau-EBs crosstalk. We offer a 
molecular explanation for the different protective potency of NAP in selected 
tauopathies (aMCI vs. PSP) expressing different ratios/pathologies of the 
alternatively spliced Tau mRNA and its resulting protein (aMCI expressing 
similar quantities of the dynamic Tau 3-MT binding isoform (Tau3R) and the Tau 
4-MT binding isoform (Tau4R) and PSP enriched in Tau4R pathology). We reveal the 
direct effect of truncated ADNPs (resulting from de novo autism and newly 
discovered Alzheimer's disease-related somatic mutations) on MT dynamics. We 
show that the peptide SKIP affects MT dynamics and MT-Tau association. Since MT 
impairment is linked with neurodegenerative and neurodevelopmental conditions, 
the current study implicates a paucity/dysregulation of MT-interacting 
endogenous proteins, like ADNP, as a contributing mechanism and provides hope 
for NAP and SKIP as MT-modulating drug candidates.

© 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.pmbts.2020.07.008
PMID: 33453943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement Professor Illana 
Gozes serves as the Chief Scientific Officer of Coronis Neurosciences developing 
CP201 for the ADNP syndrome.