---
reference_id: "PMID:26427483"
title: "Contribution of Ion Channels in Calcium Signaling Regulating Phagocytosis: MaxiK, Cav1.3 and Bestrophin-1."
authors:
- Strauß O
- Reichhart N
- Gomez NM
- Müller C
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-17121-0_98
keywords:
- Animals
- Bestrophins
- Calcium/metabolism
- "Calcium Channels, L-Type/genetics, metabolism"
- Calcium Signaling/physiology
- "Eye Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Ion Channels/genetics, metabolism"
- "Large-Conductance Calcium-Activated Potassium Channel alpha Subunits/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation
- Phagocytosis/physiology
- RNA Interference
- Retinal Photoreceptor Cell Outer Segment/metabolism
- Retinal Pigment Epithelium/metabolism
- "Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Contribution of Ion Channels in Calcium Signaling Regulating Phagocytosis: MaxiK, Cav1.3 and Bestrophin-1.
**Authors:** Strauß O, Reichhart N, Gomez NM, Müller C
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-319-17121-0_98](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-17121-0_98)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2016;854:739-44. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-17121-0_98.

Contribution of Ion Channels in Calcium Signaling Regulating Phagocytosis:
MaxiK, Cav1.3 and Bestrophin-1.

Strauß O(1), Reichhart N(2), Gomez NM(3), Müller C(4).

Author information:
(1)Experimental Ophthalmology, Department of Ophthalmology, Charite University
Medicine Berlin, Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353, Berlin, Germany.
olaf.strauss@charite.de.
(2)Experimental Ophthalmology, Department of Ophthalmology, Charite University
Medicine Berlin, Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353, Berlin, Germany.
Nadine.reichhart@charite.de.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, School of Dental Medicine, University
of Pennsylvania, Augustenburger Platz 1, 240 South 40th Street, 19104-6030,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. tmspl77@yahoo.es.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, Center for Cancer, Genetic Diseases and
Gene Regulation, Fordham University Bronx, 10458, Bronx, NY, USA.
mueller_claudi@gmx.de.

Mutations in the BEST1 gene lead to a variety of retinal degenerations including
Best's vitelliforme macular degeneration. The BEST1 gene product, bestrophin-1,
is expressed in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). It is likely that mutant
bestrophin-1 impairs functions of the RPE which support photoreceptor function
and will thus lead to retinal degeneration. However, the RPE function which is
influenced by bestrophin-1 is so far not identified. Previously we showed that
bestrophin-1 interacts with L-type Ca²⁺ channels of the CaV1.3 subtype and that
the endogenously expressed bestrophin-1 is required for intracellular Ca²⁺
regulation. A hallmark of Best's disease is the fast lipofuscin accumulation
occurring already at young ages. Therefore, we addressed the hypothesis that
bestrophin-1 might influence phagocytosis of photoreceptor outer segments (POS)
by the RPE. Here, siRNA knock-down of bestrophin-1 expression as well as
inhibition of L-type Ca²⁺ channel activity modulated the POS phagocytosis in
vitro. In vivo CaV1.3 expression appeared to be diurnal regulated with a higher
expression rate in the afternoon. Compared to wild-type littermates, Ca V 1.3
(-/-) mice showed a shift in the circadian POS phagocytosis with an increased
activity in the afternoon. Thus we suggest that mutant bestrophin-1 leads to an
impaired regulation of the POS phagocytosis by the RPE which would explain the
fast lipofuscin accumulation in Best patients.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-17121-0_98
PMID: 26427483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
