---
reference_id: "PMID:37569413"
title: Fatigue in Inflammatory Joint Diseases.
authors:
- Chmielewski G
- Majewski MS
- Kuna J
- Mikiewicz M
- Krajewska-Włodarczyk M
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms241512040
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fatigue in Inflammatory Joint Diseases.
**Authors:** Chmielewski G, Majewski MS, Kuna J, Mikiewicz M, Krajewska-Włodarczyk M
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms241512040](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms241512040)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Jul 27;24(15):12040. doi: 10.3390/ijms241512040.

Fatigue in Inflammatory Joint Diseases.

Chmielewski G(1), Majewski MS(2), Kuna J(1), Mikiewicz M(3), 
Krajewska-Włodarczyk M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, School of Medicine, Collegium Medicum, University 
of Warmia and Mazury in Olsztyn, 10-900 Olsztyn, Poland.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Warmia and Mazury in Olsztyn, 10-082 Olsztyn, Poland.
(3)Department of Pathological Anatomy, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Warmia and Mazury in Olsztyn, 10-719 Olsztyn, Poland.

Fatigue is a prevalent symptom in various rheumatic diseases, such as rheumatoid 
arthritis, psoriatic arthritis, and ankylosing spondylitis. It is characterised 
as a subjective, enduring feeling of generalised tiredness or exhaustion, 
impacting the patient's life quality and exacerbating disability. The fatigue 
nature is multifaceted, encompassing physiological, psychological, and social 
factors, and although the exact cause of inflammatory joint diseases is not 
fully understood, several factors are believed to contribute to its development. 
Despite high prevalence and importance, the symptom is often underestimated in 
clinical practice. Chronic inflammation, commonly associated with rheumatic 
diseases, has been proposed as a potential contributor to fatigue development. 
While current treatments effectively target inflammation and reduce disease 
activity, fatigue remains a persistent problem. Clinical evaluation of rheumatic 
diseases primarily relies on objective criteria, whereas fatigue, being a 
subjective symptom, is solely experienced and reported by the patient. Managing 
fatigue in inflammatory joint diseases involves a multifaceted approach. 
Identifying and comprehensively assessing the subjective components of fatigue 
in individual patients is crucial for effectively managing this symptom in 
everyday clinical practice.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241512040
PMCID: PMC10418999
PMID: 37569413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.