---
reference_id: "PMID:37189054"
title: "Frequency of pleural effusion in dengue patients by severity, age and imaging modality: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Kaagaard MD
- Matos LO
- Evangelista MVP
- Wegener A
- Holm AE
- Vestergaard LS
- Do Valle SCN
- Silvestre OM
- Lacerda MVG
- de Souza RM
- Barreto Dos Santos F
- Biering-Sørensen T
- Brainin P
journal: BMC Infect Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12879-023-08311-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frequency of pleural effusion in dengue patients by severity, age and imaging modality: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Kaagaard MD, Matos LO, Evangelista MVP, Wegener A, Holm AE, Vestergaard LS, Do Valle SCN, Silvestre OM, Lacerda MVG, de Souza RM, Barreto Dos Santos F, Biering-Sørensen T, Brainin P
**Journal:** BMC Infect Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12879-023-08311-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12879-023-08311-y)

## Content

1. BMC Infect Dis. 2023 May 15;23(1):327. doi: 10.1186/s12879-023-08311-y.

Frequency of pleural effusion in dengue patients by severity, age and imaging 
modality: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Kaagaard MD(1)(2), Matos LO(3), Evangelista MVP(3), Wegener A(3)(4), Holm 
AE(3)(4), Vestergaard LS(5), Do Valle SCN(3), Silvestre OM(6), Lacerda 
MVG(7)(8), de Souza RM(3), Barreto Dos Santos F(9), Biering-Sørensen T(4)(10), 
Brainin P(3)(4)(11).

Author information:
(1)Multidisciplinary Center, Federal University of Acre, Campus Floresta, 
Cruzeiro do Sul, Acre, Brazil. mollykaagaard@gmail.com.
(2)Cardiovascular Non-Invasive Imaging Research Laboratory, Department of 
Cardiology, Herlev-Gentofte University Hospital, Hellerup, Denmark. 
mollykaagaard@gmail.com.
(3)Multidisciplinary Center, Federal University of Acre, Campus Floresta, 
Cruzeiro do Sul, Acre, Brazil.
(4)Cardiovascular Non-Invasive Imaging Research Laboratory, Department of 
Cardiology, Herlev-Gentofte University Hospital, Hellerup, Denmark.
(5)Department of Bacteria, Parasites and Fungi, National Malaria Reference 
Laboratory, Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(6)Health and Sport Science Center, Federal University of Acre, Rio Branco, 
Acre, Brazil.
(7)Foundation of Tropical Medicine Dr Heitor Vieira Dourado, Fiocruz, Manaus, 
Brazil.
(8)University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, USA.
(9)Laboratory of Host-Virus Interactions, Oswaldo Cruz Institute, Fiocruz, Rio 
de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(10)Faculty of Biomedical Sciences, Copenhagen University, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(11)Sound Bioventures, Hellerup, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Identification of pleural effusion (PE) in dengue infection is an 
objective measure of plasma leakage and may predict disease progression. 
However, no studies have systematically assessed the frequency of PE in patients 
with dengue, and whether this differs across age and imaging modality.
METHODS: We searched Pubmed, Embase Web of Science and Lilacs (period 1900-2021) 
for studies reporting on PE in dengue patients (hospitalized and outpatient). We 
defined PE as fluid in the thoracic cavity detected by any imaging test. The 
study was registered in PROSPERO (CRD42021228862). Complicated dengue was 
defined as hemorrhagic fever, dengue shock syndrome or severe dengue.
RESULTS: The search identified 2,157 studies of which 85 studies were eligible 
for inclusion. The studies (n = 31 children, n = 10 adults, n = 44 mixed age) 
involved 12,800 patients (30% complicated dengue). The overall frequency of PE 
was 33% [95%CI: 29 to 37%] and the rate of PE increased significantly with 
disease severity (P = 0.001) such that in complicated vs. uncomplicated dengue 
the frequencies were 48% and 17% (P < 0.001). When assessing all studies, PE 
occurred significantly more often in children compared to adults (43% vs. 13%, 
P = 0.002) and lung ultrasound more frequently detected PE than conventional 
chest X-ray (P = 0.023).
CONCLUSIONS: We found that 1/3 of dengue patients presented with PE and the 
frequency increased with severity and younger age. Importantly, lung ultrasound 
demonstrated the highest rate of detection. Our findings suggest that PE is a 
relatively common finding in dengue and that bedside imaging tools, such as lung 
ultrasound, potentially may enhance detection.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-023-08311-y
PMCID: PMC10184094
PMID: 37189054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.