---
reference_id: "PMID:9042914"
title: A unique point mutation in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 gene (FGFR3) defines a new craniosynostosis syndrome.
authors:
- Muenke M
- Gripp KW
- McDonald-McGinn DM
- Gaudenz K
- Whitaker LA
- Bartlett SP
- Markowitz RI
- Robin NH
- Nwokoro N
- Mulvihill JJ
- Losken HW
- Mulliken JB
- Guttmacher AE
- Wilroy RS
- Clarke LA
- Hollway G
- Adès LC
- Haan EA
- Mulley JC
- Cohen MM Jr
- Bellus GA
- Francomano CA
- Moloney DM
- Wall SA
- Wilkie AO
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1997'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A unique point mutation in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 gene (FGFR3) defines a new craniosynostosis syndrome.
**Authors:** Muenke M, Gripp KW, McDonald-McGinn DM, Gaudenz K, Whitaker LA, Bartlett SP, Markowitz RI, Robin NH, Nwokoro N, Mulvihill JJ, Losken HW, Mulliken JB, Guttmacher AE, Wilroy RS, Clarke LA, Hollway G, Adès LC, Haan EA, Mulley JC, Cohen MM Jr, Bellus GA, Francomano CA, Moloney DM, Wall SA, Wilkie AO
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1997)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1997 Mar;60(3):555-64.

A unique point mutation in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 gene (FGFR3) 
defines a new craniosynostosis syndrome.

Muenke M(1), Gripp KW, McDonald-McGinn DM, Gaudenz K, Whitaker LA, Bartlett SP, 
Markowitz RI, Robin NH, Nwokoro N, Mulvihill JJ, Losken HW, Mulliken JB, 
Guttmacher AE, Wilroy RS, Clarke LA, Hollway G, Adès LC, Haan EA, Mulley JC, 
Cohen MM Jr, Bellus GA, Francomano CA, Moloney DM, Wall SA, Wilkie AO, et al.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA. 
muenke@mail.med.upenn.edu

The underlying basis of many forms of syndromic craniosynostosis has been 
defined on a molecular level. However, many patients with familial or sporadic 
craniosynostosis do not have the classical findings of those craniosynostosis 
syndromes. Here we present 61 individuals from 20 unrelated families where 
coronal synostosis is due to an amino acid substitution (Pro250Arg) that results 
from a single point mutation in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 gene on 
chromosome 4p. In this instance, a new clinical syndrome is being defined on the 
basis of the molecular finding. In addition to the skull findings, some patients 
had abnormalities on radiographs of hands and feet, including thimble-like 
middle phalanges, coned epiphyses, and carpal and tarsal fusions. Brachydactyly 
was seen in some cases; none had clinically significant syndactyly or deviation 
of the great toe. Sensorineural hearing loss was present in some, and 
developmental delay was seen in a minority. While the radiological findings of 
hands and feet can be very helpful in diagnosing this syndrome, it is not in all 
cases clearly distinguishable on a clinical basis from other craniosynostosis 
syndromes. Therefore, this mutation should be tested for in patients with 
coronal synostosis.

PMCID: PMC1712518
PMID: 9042914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]