---
reference_id: "PMID:16142659"
title: Prospective clinical evaluation of patients from Missouri and New York with erythema migrans-like skin lesions.
authors:
- Wormser GP
- Masters E
- Nowakowski J
- McKenna D
- Holmgren D
- Ma K
- Ihde L
- Cavaliere LF
- Nadelman RB
journal: Clin Infect Dis
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1086/432935
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Child
- "Erythema Chronicum Migrans/diagnosis, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Missouri
- New York
- Skin/pathology
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prospective clinical evaluation of patients from Missouri and New York with erythema migrans-like skin lesions.
**Authors:** Wormser GP, Masters E, Nowakowski J, McKenna D, Holmgren D, Ma K, Ihde L, Cavaliere LF, Nadelman RB
**Journal:** Clin Infect Dis (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1086/432935](https://doi.org/10.1086/432935)

## Content

1. Clin Infect Dis. 2005 Oct 1;41(7):958-65. doi: 10.1086/432935. Epub 2005 Aug
31.

Prospective clinical evaluation of patients from Missouri and New York with 
erythema migrans-like skin lesions.

Wormser GP(1), Masters E, Nowakowski J, McKenna D, Holmgren D, Ma K, Ihde L, 
Cavaliere LF, Nadelman RB.

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, New York Medical 
College, Valhalla 10595, USA. gary_wormser@nymc.edu

Comment in
    Clin Infect Dis. 2005 Oct 1;41(7):966-8. doi: 10.1086/432958.
    Clin Infect Dis. 2006 Jan 15;42(2):306-7; author reply 307-8. doi: 
10.1086/499111.

BACKGROUND: The most common and most recognizable feature of Borrelia 
burgdorferi infection (Lyme disease) is the skin lesion erythema migrans (EM). 
An illness associated with an EM-like skin lesion, but which is not caused by B. 
burgdorferi, occurs in many southern states in the United States (southern 
tick-associated rash illness [STARI], also known as Masters disease).
METHODS: Clinical features of 21 cases of EM-like skin lesions in 21 patients 
from Missouri were compared in a prospective study with those of 101 cases in 97 
patients with EM-like skin lesions from New York.
RESULTS: Among Missouri cases, the peak incidence of EM-like skin lesions 
occurred earlier in the year than it did among New York cases (P<.001). Case 
patients from Missouri were more likely to recall a tick bite than were case 
patients from New York (85.7% and 19.8%, respectively; P<.001), and the time 
period from tick bite to onset of the skin lesion was shorter among Missouri 
case patients (6.1+/-4.2 days and 10.4+/-6.1 days, respectively; P=.011). 
Missouri case patients were less likely to be symptomatic than were New York 
case patients (19.0% and 76.2%, respectively; P<.001), and Missouri case 
patients were less likely to have multiple skin lesions (4.8% and 26.7%, 
respectively; P=.042). EM-like lesions in Missouri cases were smaller in size 
than those in New York cases (8.3+/-2.2 cm and 16.4+/-11.5 cm, respectively; 
P<.001), more circular in shape (P=.004), and more likely to have central 
clearing (76.2% and 21.6%, respectively; P<.001). After antibiotic treatment, 
Missouri case patients recovered more rapidly than did New York case patients 
(P=.037).
CONCLUSION: Cases of EM-like skin lesion in patients from Missouri and New York 
have distinct clinical presentations.

DOI: 10.1086/432935
PMID: 16142659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]