---
reference_id: "PMID:12359824"
title: New concepts in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
authors:
- Barnes PJ
journal: Annu Rev Med
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1146/annurev.med.54.101601.152209
keywords:
- Disease Progression
- Humans
- Inflammation Mediators/metabolism
- "Macrophages, Alveolar/immunology"
- Neutrophils/immunology
- "Pulmonary Disease, Chronic Obstructive/immunology"
- Pulmonary Emphysema/immunology
- "T-Lymphocytes, Cytotoxic/immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New concepts in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
**Authors:** Barnes PJ
**Journal:** Annu Rev Med (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev.med.54.101601.152209](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.med.54.101601.152209)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Med. 2003;54:113-29. doi: 10.1146/annurev.med.54.101601.152209. Epub 
2001 Dec 3.

New concepts in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Barnes PJ(1).

Author information:
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College School of Medicine, 
Dovehouse Street, London, United Kingdom. p.j.barnes@ic.ac.uk

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a leading cause of death and 
disability but has only recently been explored from a cellular and molecular 
perspective. In COPD, chronic inflammation leads to fixed narrowing of small 
airways and alveolar wall destruction (emphysema). This is characterized by 
increased numbers of alveolar macrophages, neutrophils, and cytotoxic T 
lymphocytes, and the release of multiple inflammatory mediators (lipids, 
chemokines, cytokines, growth factors). There is also a high level of oxidative 
stress, which may amplify this inflammation. There is increased elastolysis and 
probable involvement of matrix metalloproteinases. The inflammation and 
proteolysis in COPD is an amplification of the normal inflammatory response to 
cigarette smoke. Unlike asthma, this inflammation appears to be resistant to 
corticosteroids, prompting a search for novel anti-inflammatory therapies that 
may prevent the relentless progression of the disease.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.med.54.101601.152209
PMID: 12359824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]