---
reference_id: "PMID:27084392"
title: "Biotinylation: a novel posttranslational modification linking cell autonomous circadian clocks with metabolism."
authors:
- He L
- Hamm JA
- Reddy A
- Sams D
- Peliciari-Garcia RA
- McGinnis GR
- Bailey SM
- Chow CW
- Rowe GC
- Chatham JC
- Young ME
journal: Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00959.2015
keywords:
- "ARNTL Transcription Factors/deficiency, genetics"
- Acetyl-CoA Carboxylase/metabolism
- Animals
- "Biotin/administration & dosage, metabolism"
- Biotinylation
- CLOCK Proteins/genetics
- Carbon-Carbon Ligases/metabolism
- Carbon-Carbon Lyases/metabolism
- "Chronobiology Disorders/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Circadian Clocks/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Energy Metabolism
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Heart Diseases/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Liver/metabolism
- Male
- Methylmalonyl-CoA Decarboxylase/metabolism
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/metabolism"
- Phenotype
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational"
- Pyruvate Carboxylase/metabolism
- Symporters/metabolism
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biotinylation: a novel posttranslational modification linking cell autonomous circadian clocks with metabolism.
**Authors:** He L, Hamm JA, Reddy A, Sams D, Peliciari-Garcia RA, McGinnis GR, Bailey SM, Chow CW, Rowe GC, Chatham JC, Young ME
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpheart.00959.2015](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00959.2015)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2016 Jun 1;310(11):H1520-32. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00959.2015. Epub 2016 Apr 15.

Biotinylation: a novel posttranslational modification linking cell autonomous
circadian clocks with metabolism.

He L(1), Hamm JA(2), Reddy A(1), Sams D(1), Peliciari-Garcia RA(3), McGinnis
GR(1), Bailey SM(4), Chow CW(5), Rowe GC(1), Chatham JC(4), Young ME(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Disease, Department of Medicine, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama;
(2)Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama;
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Federal University of Sao Paulo, Diadema,
Sao Paulo, Brazil;
(4)Division of Molecular and Cellular Pathology, Department of Pathology,
University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama; and.
(5)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, New York.
(6)Division of Cardiovascular Disease, Department of Medicine, University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama; meyoung@uab.edu.

Circadian clocks are critical modulators of metabolism. However, mechanistic
links between cell autonomous clocks and metabolic processes remain largely
unknown. Here, we report that expression of the biotin transporter slc5a6 gene
is decreased in hearts of two distinct genetic mouse models of
cardiomyocyte-specific circadian clock disruption [i.e., cardiomyocyte-specific
CLOCK mutant (CCM) and cardiomyocyte-specific BMAL1 knockout (CBK) mice].
Biotinylation is an obligate posttranslational modification for five mammalian
carboxylases: acetyl-CoA carboxylase α (ACCα), ACCβ, pyruvate carboxylase (PC),
methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase (MCC), and propionyl-CoA carboxylase (PCC). We
therefore hypothesized that the cardiomyocyte circadian clock impacts metabolism
through biotinylation. Consistent with decreased slc5a6 expression,
biotinylation of all carboxylases is significantly decreased (10-46%) in CCM and
CBK hearts. In association with decreased biotinylated ACC, oleate oxidation
rates are increased in both CCM and CBK hearts. Consistent with decreased
biotinylated MCC, leucine oxidation rates are significantly decreased in both
CCM and CBK hearts, whereas rates of protein synthesis are increased.
Importantly, feeding CBK mice with a biotin-enriched diet for 6 wk normalized
myocardial 1) ACC biotinylation and oleate oxidation rates; 2) PCC/MCC
biotinylation (and partially restored leucine oxidation rates); and 3) net
protein synthesis rates. Furthermore, data suggest that the RRAGD/mTOR/4E-BP1
signaling axis is chronically activated in CBK and CCM hearts. Finally we report
that the hepatocyte circadian clock also regulates both slc5a6 expression and
protein biotinylation in the liver. Collectively, these findings suggest that
biotinylation is a novel mechanism by which cell autonomous circadian clocks
influence metabolic pathways.

Copyright © 2016 the American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.00959.2015
PMCID: PMC4935513
PMID: 27084392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
