---
reference_id: "PMID:36912284"
title: "Fanconi anemia-isogenic head and neck cancer cell line pairs: A basic and translational science resource."
authors:
- Nguyen HT
- Tang W
- Webster ALH
- Whiteaker JR
- Chandler CM
- Errazquin R
- Roohollahi K
- Fritzke M
- Hoskins EE
- Jonlin E
- Wakefield L
- Sullivan LB
- Chen EY
- Dorsman J
- Brakenhoff R
- Paulovich AG
- Grompe M
- Garcia-Escudero R
- Wells SI
- Smogorzewska A
- Monnat RJ Jr
journal: Int J Cancer
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ijc.34506
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fanconi anemia-isogenic head and neck cancer cell line pairs: A basic and translational science resource.
**Authors:** Nguyen HT, Tang W, Webster ALH, Whiteaker JR, Chandler CM, Errazquin R, Roohollahi K, Fritzke M, Hoskins EE, Jonlin E, Wakefield L, Sullivan LB, Chen EY, Dorsman J, Brakenhoff R, Paulovich AG, Grompe M, Garcia-Escudero R, Wells SI, Smogorzewska A, Monnat RJ Jr
**Journal:** Int J Cancer (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ijc.34506](https://doi.org/10.1002/ijc.34506)

## Content

1. Int J Cancer. 2023 Jul 1;153(1):183-196. doi: 10.1002/ijc.34506. Epub 2023 Mar
 30.

Fanconi anemia-isogenic head and neck cancer cell line pairs: A basic and 
translational science resource.

Nguyen HT(1), Tang W(1), Webster ALH(2), Whiteaker JR(3), Chandler CM(1), 
Errazquin R(4)(5), Roohollahi K(6), Fritzke M(1), Hoskins EE(6), Jonlin E(1)(7), 
Wakefield L(8), Sullivan LB(9), Chen EY(1), Dorsman J(6), Brakenhoff R(6), 
Paulovich AG(3), Grompe M(8), Garcia-Escudero R(4)(5)(10), Wells SI(11), 
Smogorzewska A(2), Monnat RJ Jr(1)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Genome Maintenance, Rockefeller University, New York, New York, 
USA.
(3)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, Clinical Research Division, Seattle, 
Washington, USA.
(4)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Hospital 12 de Octubre (imas12), Madrid, 
Spain.
(5)Biomedical Oncology Unit, CIEMAT (Centro de Investigaciones Energéticas, 
Medio-ambientales y Tecnológicas), Madrid, Spain.
(6)Amsterdam University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)University of Washington Institute for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, 
Seattle, Washington, USA.
(8)Departments of Pediatrics and Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health 
and Sciences University, Portland, Oregon, USA.
(9)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, Human Biology Division, Seattle, Washington, 
USA.
(10)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Cáncer (CIBERONC), Madrid, 
Spain.
(11)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(12)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, 
Washington, USA.

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a heritable malformation, bone marrow failure and cancer 
predisposition syndrome that confers an exceptionally high risk of squamous 
carcinomas. These carcinomas originate in epithelia lining the mouth, proximal 
esophagus, vulva and anus: their origins are not understood, and no effective 
ways have been identified to prevent or delay their appearance. Many 
FA-associated carcinomas are also therapeutically challenging: they may be 
multi-focal and stage-advanced at diagnosis, and most individuals with FA cannot 
tolerate standard-of-care systemic therapies such as DNA cross-linking drugs or 
ionizing radiation due to constitutional DNA damage hypersensitivity. We 
developed the Fanconi Anemia Cancer Cell Line Resource (FA-CCLR) to foster new 
work on the origins, treatment and prevention of FA-associated carcinomas. The 
FA-CCLR consists of Fanconi-isogenic head and neck squamous cell carcinoma 
(HNSCC) cell line pairs generated from five individuals with FA-associated 
HNSCC, and five individuals with sporadic HNSCC. Sporadic, isogenic HNSCC cell 
line pairs were generated in parallel with FA patient-derived isogenic cell line 
pairs to provide comparable experimental material to use to identify cell and 
molecular phenotypes driven by germline or somatic loss of Fanconi pathway 
function, and the subset of these FA-dependent phenotypes that can be modified, 
complemented or suppressed. All 10 FANC-isogenic cell line pairs are available 
to academic, non-profit and industry investigators via the "Fanconi Anemia 
Research Materials" Resource and Repository at Oregon Health & Sciences 
University, Portland OR.

© 2023 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.34506
PMCID: PMC12303535
PMID: 36912284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest disclosure statements: 
A.G.P. is founder of Precision Assays, LLC; M.G. is founder of Yecuris 
Corporation and founder and C.S.O. of Ambys Medicines. Rocket Pharmaceuticals 
provided research funding and partial salary support to A.S. for an unrelated 
project. None of the other authors have a conflict of interest to disclose.