---
reference_id: "PMID:32193835"
title: New drugs for the treatment of Anderson-Fabry disease.
authors:
- Feriozzi S
- Hughes DA
journal: J Nephrol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s40620-020-00721-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New drugs for the treatment of Anderson-Fabry disease.
**Authors:** Feriozzi S, Hughes DA
**Journal:** J Nephrol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40620-020-00721-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40620-020-00721-4)

## Content

1. J Nephrol. 2021 Feb;34(1):221-230. doi: 10.1007/s40620-020-00721-4. Epub 2020 
Mar 20.

New drugs for the treatment of Anderson-Fabry disease.

Feriozzi S(1), Hughes DA(2).

Author information:
(1)Nephrology and Dialysis Unit, Belcolle Hospital, Via Sammartinese snc, 01100, 
Viterbo, Italy. sandro.feriozzi@asl.vt.it.
(2)Lysosomal Storage Disorders Unit, Royal Free London NHS Foundation Trust and 
University College London, London, UK.

Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) of the Anderson-Fabry disease (AFD) has changed 
the outcome of patients. However, ERT has some limitations: a restricted volume 
of distribution, requirement for intravenous access, and stimulation of the 
production of anti-drug antibodies. Studies of new drugs aiming to improve the 
clinical effectiveness and convenience of therapy have been reported. 
Migalastat, a pharmacological chaperone, increases available enzymate activity 
in patients with mutations amenable to the therapy, is now available for 
clinical practice. It is orally administered, and while clinical trial results 
are promising, long term real world follow up is awaited. PEGylated enzyme has a 
longer half-life and potentially reduced antigenicity, compared with standard 
preparations; investigation of whether a longer dosing interval is viable is 
under way. Moss-derived enzyme has a higher affinity for mannose receptors, and 
appears to have access to renal tissue. Substrate reduction therapy is based on 
reducing the catabolism processes of the glycosphingolipids, and is currently 
under investigation as monotherapy. Gene therapy has now been initiated in 
clinical trail of in vivo and ex vivo technologies with early results are 
emerging. ERT represents a certain milestone of therapy for AFD with Migalastat 
now a newly available option. Other agents in clinical trial prevent further 
potential opportunities to improve outcomes in AFD.

DOI: 10.1007/s40620-020-00721-4
PMID: 32193835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]