---
reference_id: "PMID:31708048"
title: Evidence-Based Psychosocial Treatment for Individuals with Early Psychosis.
authors:
- Wright A
- Browne J
- Mueser KT
- Cather C
journal: Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.chc.2019.08.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evidence-Based Psychosocial Treatment for Individuals with Early Psychosis.
**Authors:** Wright A, Browne J, Mueser KT, Cather C
**Journal:** Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.chc.2019.08.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chc.2019.08.013)

## Content

1. Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am. 2020 Jan;29(1):211-223. doi: 
10.1016/j.chc.2019.08.013. Epub 2019 Oct 9.

Evidence-Based Psychosocial Treatment for Individuals with Early Psychosis.

Wright A(1), Browne J(2), Mueser KT(3), Cather C(2).

Author information:
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital, Center of Excellence in Psychosocial and 
Systemic Research, 151 Merrimac Street, 6th Floor, Boston, MA 02114, USA; 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: 
AWRIGHT24@mgh.harvard.edu.
(2)Massachusetts General Hospital, Center of Excellence in Psychosocial and 
Systemic Research, 151 Merrimac Street, 6th Floor, Boston, MA 02114, USA; 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Center for Psychiatric Rehabilitation, Boston University, 940 Commonwealth 
Avenue West, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Coordinated specialty care (CSC) first-episode models are an evidence-based 
practice in the treatment of first-episode psychosis. Group, individual, and 
family therapies in CSC aim to help the client and family understand and cope 
with the experience of psychosis, promote symptomatic and functional recovery 
and improve quality of life, and support the pursuit of personally meaningful 
goals of the client. Common elements to these interventions include building a 
therapeutic alliance, recovery orientation, education, and skills training, 
which can be directed to a range of targets, including problem-solving, 
communication, social skills, and social cognition.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chc.2019.08.013
PMID: 31708048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]