---
reference_id: "PMID:26053668"
title: "LMNB1-related autosomal-dominant leukodystrophy: Clinical and radiological course."
authors:
- Finnsson J
- Sundblom J
- Dahl N
- Melberg A
- Raininko R
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/ana.24452
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Brain/diagnostic imaging
- Female
- Humans
- Lamin Type B/genetics
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease/diagnostic imaging, genetics, mortality"
- Radiography
- Spinal Cord/diagnostic imaging
- Survival Rate/trends
content_type: abstract_only
---

# LMNB1-related autosomal-dominant leukodystrophy: Clinical and radiological course.
**Authors:** Finnsson J, Sundblom J, Dahl N, Melberg A, Raininko R
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.24452](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.24452)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2015 Sep;78(3):412-25. doi: 10.1002/ana.24452. Epub 2015 Jul 27.

LMNB1-related autosomal-dominant leukodystrophy: Clinical and radiological 
course.

Finnsson J(1), Sundblom J(2), Dahl N(3), Melberg A(2), Raininko R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Neurology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(3)Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Science for Life 
Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: Duplication of the LMNB1 gene encoding lamin B1 causes adult-onset 
autosomal-dominant leukodystrophy (ADLD) starting with autonomic symptoms, which 
are followed by pyramidal signs and ataxia. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of 
the brain reveals characteristic findings. This is the first longitudinal study 
on this disease. Our objective is to describe the natural clinical and 
radiological course of LMNB1-related ADLD.
METHODS: Twenty-three subjects in two families with LMNB1 duplications were 
studied over two decades with clinical assessment and MRI of the brain and 
spinal cord. They were 29 to 70 years old at their first MRI. Repeated MRIs were 
performed in 14 subjects over a time period of up to 17 years.
RESULTS: Pathological MRI findings were found in the brain and spinal cord in 
all examinations (i.e., even preceding clinical symptoms). MRI changes and 
clinical symptoms progressed in a definite order. Autonomic dysfunction appeared 
in the fifth to sixth decade, preceding or together with gait and coordination 
difficulties. Motor signs developed ascending from spastic paraplegia to 
tetraplegia and pseudobulbar palsy in the seventh decade. There were clinical, 
radiological, and neurophysiological signs of myelopathy. Survival lasted more 
than two decades after clinical onset.
INTERPRETATION: LMNB1-related ADLD is a slowly progressive neurological disease. 
MRI abnormalities of the brain and spinal cord can precede clinical symptoms by 
more than a decade and are extensive in all symptomatic patients. Spinal cord 
involvement is a likely contributing factor to early autonomic symptoms and 
spastic paraplegia.

© 2015 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.24452
PMCID: PMC5054845
PMID: 26053668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]