---
reference_id: "PMID:26324575"
title: "Familial Mediterranean Fever: An Unusual Case Presentation."
authors:
- Soora R
- Nicandri K
journal: J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpag.2015.06.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial Mediterranean Fever: An Unusual Case Presentation.
**Authors:** Soora R, Nicandri K
**Journal:** J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpag.2015.06.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpag.2015.06.005)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Adolesc Gynecol. 2015 Dec;28(6):e193-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.jpag.2015.06.005. Epub 2015 Jun 14.

Familial Mediterranean Fever: An Unusual Case Presentation.

Soora R(1), Nicandri K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Rochester Medical 
Center, Rochester, New York.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Rochester Medical 
Center, Rochester, New York. Electronic address: 
katrina_nicandri@urmc.rochester.edu.

BACKGROUND: Familial Mediterranean Fever is a heritable illness typically 
characterized by recurrent fevers and serositis. Triggers of this illness 
include many things, such as cold or stress.
CASE: This case describes a teenager who initially presented to the gynecologist 
office because of recurrent fevers with menses. Because she only had symptoms 
with menses, was healthy between attacks, and met the Livneh criteria, treatment 
with colchicine and combined oral contraceptive pills was initiated, with 
improvement of her symptoms.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION: There are multiple etiologies for febrile illness during 
menses, and one should consider familial Mediterranean fever as a possible cause 
of cyclic fevers.

Copyright © 2015 North American Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Gynecology. 
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpag.2015.06.005
PMID: 26324575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]