---
reference_id: "PMID:37365244"
title: "Adnp-mutant mice with cognitive inflexibility, CaMKIIα hyperactivity, and synaptic plasticity deficits."
authors:
- Cho H
- Yoo T
- Moon H
- Kang H
- Yang Y
- Kang M
- Yang E
- Lee D
- Hwang D
- Kim H
- Kim D
- Kim JY
- Kim E
journal: Mol Psychiatry
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41380-023-02129-5
keywords:
- Mice
- Animals
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/metabolism
- Neuronal Plasticity/genetics
- Long-Term Potentiation/genetics
- Autistic Disorder/metabolism
- Intellectual Disability
- Cognition
- Homeodomain Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adnp-mutant mice with cognitive inflexibility, CaMKIIα hyperactivity, and synaptic plasticity deficits.
**Authors:** Cho H, Yoo T, Moon H, Kang H, Yang Y, Kang M, Yang E, Lee D, Hwang D, Kim H, Kim D, Kim JY, Kim E
**Journal:** Mol Psychiatry (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41380-023-02129-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-023-02129-5)

## Content

1. Mol Psychiatry. 2023 Aug;28(8):3548-3562. doi: 10.1038/s41380-023-02129-5.
Epub  2023 Jun 26.

Adnp-mutant mice with cognitive inflexibility, CaMKIIα hyperactivity, and 
synaptic plasticity deficits.

Cho H(#)(1)(2), Yoo T(#)(2), Moon H(1), Kang H(3), Yang Y(1)(4), Kang M(5), Yang 
E(6), Lee D(7), Hwang D(7), Kim H(6), Kim D(5)(8), Kim JY(4), Kim E(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute for Science and 
Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, 34141, Korea.
(2)Center for Synaptic Brain Dysfunctions, Institute for Basic Science (IBS), 
Daejeon, 34141, Korea.
(3)Division of National Supercomputing, Korea Institute of Science and 
Technology Information, Daejeon, 34141, Korea.
(4)Research Center for Bioconvergence Analysis, Korea Basic Science Institute, 
162 Yeongudanjiro, Ochang, Cheongju, Chungbuk, 28119, Korea.
(5)Therapeutics & Biotechnology Division, Drug discovery platform research 
center, Korea Research Institute of Chemical Technology (KRICT), Daejeon, 34114, 
Korea.
(6)Department of Anatomy and BK21 Graduate Program, Biomedical Sciences, College 
of Medicine, Korea University, Seoul, 02841, Korea.
(7)School of Biological Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, 08826, 
Korea.
(8)Medicinal Chemistry and Pharmacology, Korea University of Science and 
Technology (UST), Daejeon, 34113, Korea.
(9)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute for Science and 
Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, 34141, Korea. kime@kaist.ac.kr.
(10)Center for Synaptic Brain Dysfunctions, Institute for Basic Science (IBS), 
Daejeon, 34141, Korea. kime@kaist.ac.kr.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Mol Psychiatry. 2023 Aug;28(8):3563. doi: 10.1038/s41380-023-02192-y.

ADNP syndrome, involving the ADNP transcription factor of the SWI/SNF 
chromatin-remodeling complex, is characterized by developmental delay, 
intellectual disability, and autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Although 
Adnp-haploinsufficient (Adnp-HT) mice display various phenotypic deficits, 
whether these mice display abnormal synaptic functions remain poorly understood. 
Here, we report synaptic plasticity deficits associated with cognitive 
inflexibility and CaMKIIα hyperactivity in Adnp-HT mice. These mice show 
impaired and inflexible contextual learning and memory, additional to social 
deficits, long after the juvenile-stage decrease of ADNP protein levels to ~10% 
of the newborn level. The adult Adnp-HT hippocampus shows hyperphosphorylated 
CaMKIIα and its substrates, including SynGAP1, and excessive long-term 
potentiation that is normalized by CaMKIIα inhibition. Therefore, Adnp 
haploinsufficiency in mice leads to cognitive inflexibility involving CaMKIIα 
hyperphosphorylation and excessive LTP in adults long after its marked 
expressional decrease in juveniles.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41380-023-02129-5
PMCID: PMC10618100
PMID: 37365244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.