---
reference_id: "PMID:39082153"
title: "Löfgren syndrome, characteristics of Japanese cases: A case and a review of the literature."
authors:
- Taguchi H
- Sumitomo S
- Oka H
- Hara S
- Ohmura K
journal: Mod Rheumatol Case Rep
year: "2025"
doi: 10.1093/mrcr/rxae034
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Löfgren syndrome, characteristics of Japanese cases: A case and a review of the literature.
**Authors:** Taguchi H, Sumitomo S, Oka H, Hara S, Ohmura K
**Journal:** Mod Rheumatol Case Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/mrcr/rxae034](https://doi.org/10.1093/mrcr/rxae034)

## Content

1. Mod Rheumatol Case Rep. 2025 Jan 16;9(1):193-199. doi: 10.1093/mrcr/rxae034.

Löfgren syndrome, characteristics of Japanese cases: A case and a review of the
literature.

Taguchi H(1), Sumitomo S(1), Oka H(1), Hara S(2), Ohmura K(1).

Löfgren syndrome (LS) is a sarcoidosis subtype characterised by an acute
disease course, bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy (BHL), erythema nodosum (EN),
and ankle arthritis. LS in Caucasians appears to be self-limiting; however, our
patients require glucocorticoid (GC) treatment. Here, we present a case of LS
and review the literature to identify the characteristics of Japanese patients
with LS. A 66-year-old woman was referred to Kobe City Medical Center General
Hospital; she initially presented with an acute onset of low-grade fever and
ankle arthritis, followed by EN. Skin biopsy revealed a noncaseating granuloma,
and a chest computed tomography scan displayed BHL; she was diagnosed with LS.
Her arthralgia ameliorated spontaneously, but the erythema persisted,
necessitating GC treatment. A literature review revealed that the Japanese LS
patients showed more fever, were more frequently treated with GCs, and more
patients seemed to relapse, which may be explained by the absence of human
leucocyte antigen-DR isotype 3, a good prognostic allele in Caucasians.
Japanese LS may cause severe symptoms after development because of the
differences in human leucocyte antigens from foreign countries. For early
diagnosis, it is important to evaluate EN and BHL in patients with polyarthritis
involving ankle arthralgia.

DOI: 10.1093/mrcr/rxae034
PMID: 39082153
