---
reference_id: "PMID:40134850"
title: "Emerging mechanism and therapeutic potential of neurofibromatosis type 1-related nerve system tumor: Advancing insights into tumor development."
authors:
- Yu X
- Gu Y
- Liu J
- Huang J
- Li Q
- Wang Z
journal: Neurooncol Adv
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/noajnl/vdaf040
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Emerging mechanism and therapeutic potential of neurofibromatosis type 1-related nerve system tumor: Advancing insights into tumor development.
**Authors:** Yu X, Gu Y, Liu J, Huang J, Li Q, Wang Z
**Journal:** Neurooncol Adv (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/noajnl/vdaf040](https://doi.org/10.1093/noajnl/vdaf040)

## Content

1. Neurooncol Adv. 2025 Feb 16;7(1):vdaf040. doi: 10.1093/noajnl/vdaf040. 
eCollection 2025 Jan-Dec.

Emerging mechanism and therapeutic potential of neurofibromatosis type 1-related 
nerve system tumor: Advancing insights into tumor development.

Yu X(1)(2), Gu Y(1)(2), Liu J(1)(2), Huang J(1)(2), Li Q(1)(2), Wang Z(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Neurofibromatosis Type 1 Center and Laboratory for Neurofibromatosis Type 1 
Research, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School 
of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Shanghai Ninth People's 
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Neurofibromatosis Type 1 (NF1) is a genetic disorder resulting from mutations in 
the NF1 gene, which increases susceptibility to various nervous system tumors, 
including plexiform neurofibromas, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, and 
optic pathway gliomas. Recent research has shown that these tumors are 
intricately connected to the complex, dynamic interactions within neurons, 
culminating in neuronal signaling that fosters tumor growth. These interactions 
offer crucial insights into the molecular mechanisms underpinning tumor 
development, as well as broader implications for therapeutic strategies. This 
review summarizes the mechanisms through which mutations in the NF1 gene within 
neural tissues trigger tumorigenesis, while examining the role of the neuron-via 
factors such as visual experience, neurotransmitter, tumor microenvironment, and 
psychological influences-in both promoting tumor progression and being affected 
by the tumors themselves. By investigating the dynamic relationship between 
NF1-associated nervous system tumor cells and neurons, we aim to shed light on 
novel biological pathways and disease processes, emphasizing the potential of 
interdisciplinary approaches that combine neurobiology, oncology, and 
pharmacology to enhance treatment strategies and even inhibit the tumorigenesis.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press, the Society for 
Neuro-Oncology and the European Association of Neuro-Oncology.

DOI: 10.1093/noajnl/vdaf040
PMCID: PMC11934560
PMID: 40134850