---
reference_id: "PMID:26231194"
title: Epidemiology and Clinical Correlates of AKI in Chinese Hospitalized Adults.
authors:
- Xu X
- Nie S
- Liu Z
- Chen C
- Xu G
- Zha Y
- Qian J
- Liu B
- Han S
- Xu A
- Xu X
- Hou FF
journal: Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.2215/CJN.02140215
keywords:
- "Acute Kidney Injury/economics, epidemiology, etiology"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Cardiac Surgical Procedures/statistics & numerical data"
- China/epidemiology
- Creatinine/blood
- "Critical Care/statistics & numerical data"
- Drug-Related Side Effects and Adverse Reactions/epidemiology
- "Drugs, Chinese Herbal/adverse effects"
- Female
- Hospital Mortality
- Humans
- Iatrogenic Disease/epidemiology
- Incidence
- "Inpatients/statistics & numerical data"
- Length of Stay
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Pneumonia/epidemiology
- Recovery of Function
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/epidemiology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- Sepsis/epidemiology
- Sex Factors
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology and Clinical Correlates of AKI in Chinese Hospitalized Adults.
**Authors:** Xu X, Nie S, Liu Z, Chen C, Xu G, Zha Y, Qian J, Liu B, Han S, Xu A, Xu X, Hou FF
**Journal:** Clin J Am Soc Nephrol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.2215/CJN.02140215](https://doi.org/10.2215/CJN.02140215)

## Content

1. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015 Sep 4;10(9):1510-8. doi: 10.2215/CJN.02140215.
Epub  2015 Jul 31.

Epidemiology and Clinical Correlates of AKI in Chinese Hospitalized Adults.

Xu X(1), Nie S(1), Liu Z(2), Chen C(3), Xu G(4), Zha Y(5), Qian J(5), Liu B(6), 
Han S(7), Xu A(8), Xu X(1), Hou FF(9).

Author information:
(1)National Clinical Research Center for Kidney Disease, State Key Laboratory of 
Organ Failure Research, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, 
Guangzhou, China;
(2)The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou University, 
Zhengzhou, China;
(3)Guangdong General Hospital, Guangzhou, China;
(4)Tongji Hospital, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China;
(5)Guizhou Provincial People's Hospital, Guiyang Medical University, Guiyang, 
China;
(6)Zhongda Hospital, Southeast University, Nanjing, China;
(7)The Second Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical University, Dalian Medical 
University, Dalian, China; and.
(8)Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(9)National Clinical Research Center for Kidney Disease, State Key Laboratory of 
Organ Failure Research, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, 
Guangzhou, China; ffhouguangzhou@163.com.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Comprehensive epidemiologic data on AKI are 
particularly lacking in Asian countries. This study sought to assess the 
epidemiology and clinical correlates of AKI among hospitalized adults in China.
DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, & MEASUREMENTS: This was a multicenter 
retrospective cohort study of 659,945 hospitalized adults from a wide range of 
clinical settings in nine regional central hospitals across China in 2013. AKI 
was defined and staged according to Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes 
criteria. The incidence of AKI in the cohort was estimated using a novel 
two-step approach with adjustment for the frequency of serum creatinine tests 
and other potential confounders. Risk factor profiles for hospital-acquired (HA) 
and community-acquired (CA) AKI were examined. The in-hospital outcomes of AKI, 
including mortality, renal recovery, length of stay, and daily cost, were 
assessed.
RESULTS: The incidence of CA-AKI and HA-AKI was 2.5% and 9.1%, respectively, 
giving rise to an overall incidence of 11.6%. Although the risk profiles for 
CA-AKI and HA-AKI differed, preexisting CKD was a major risk factor for both, 
contributing to 20% of risk in CA-AKI and 12% of risk in HA-AKI. About 40% of 
AKI cases were possibly drug-related and 16% may have been induced by Chinese 
traditional medicines or remedies. The in-hospital mortality of AKI was 8.8%. 
The risk of in-hospital death was higher among patients with more severe AKI. 
Preexisting CKD and need for intensive care unit admission were associated with 
higher death risk in patients at any stage of AKI. Transiency of AKI did not 
modify the risk of in-hospital death. AKI was associated with longer length of 
stay and higher daily costs, even after adjustment for confounders.
CONCLUSION: AKI is common in hospitalized adults in China and is associated with 
significantly higher in-hospital mortality and resource utilization.

Copyright © 2015 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.02140215
PMCID: PMC4559507
PMID: 26231194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]