---
reference_id: "PMID:36912427"
title: "Position statement: Recommendations on the diagnosis and treatment of Malassezia folliculitis."
authors:
- Henning MAS
- Hay R
- Rodriguez-Cerdeira C
- Szepietowski JC
- Piraccini BM
- Ferreirós MP
- Arabatzis M
- Sergeev A
- Nenoff P
- Kotrekhova L
- Nowicki RJ
- Faergemann J
- Padovese V
- Prohic A
- Skerlev M
- Schmid-Grendelmeier P
- Sigurgeirsson B
- Gaitanis G
- Lecerf P
- Saunte DML
journal: J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/jdv.18982
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Position statement: Recommendations on the diagnosis and treatment of Malassezia folliculitis.
**Authors:** Henning MAS, Hay R, Rodriguez-Cerdeira C, Szepietowski JC, Piraccini BM, Ferreirós MP, Arabatzis M, Sergeev A, Nenoff P, Kotrekhova L, Nowicki RJ, Faergemann J, Padovese V, Prohic A, Skerlev M, Schmid-Grendelmeier P, Sigurgeirsson B, Gaitanis G, Lecerf P, Saunte DML
**Journal:** J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jdv.18982](https://doi.org/10.1111/jdv.18982)

## Content

1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2023 Jul;37(7):1268-1275. doi:
10.1111/jdv.18982.  Epub 2023 Mar 13.

Position statement: Recommendations on the diagnosis and treatment of Malassezia 
folliculitis.

Henning MAS(1)(2), Hay R(3), Rodriguez-Cerdeira C(4), Szepietowski JC(5), 
Piraccini BM(6)(7), Ferreirós MP(8), Arabatzis M(9), Sergeev A(10), Nenoff 
P(11), Kotrekhova L(12), Nowicki RJ(13), Faergemann J(14), Padovese V(15)(16), 
Prohic A(17), Skerlev M(18), Schmid-Grendelmeier P(19), Sigurgeirsson B(20), 
Gaitanis G(21), Lecerf P(22), Saunte DML(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Zealand University Hospital, Roskilde, Denmark.
(2)Department of Clinical Medicine, Health Sciences Faculty, University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)King's College London, London, UK.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Vithas hospital and University of Vigo, Vigo, 
Spain.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, Wroclaw Medical 
University, Wroclaw, Poland.
(6)Dermatology, IRCCS Policlinico di Sant'Orsola, Bologna, Italy.
(7)Department of Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine (DIMES), Alma 
Mater Studiorum University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(8)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Santiago de 
Compostela, A Coruña, Spain.
(9)Dermatology Department, Medical School, University of Thessaloniki, 
Thessaloniki, Greece.
(10)All-Russian National Academy of Mycology, Moscow, Russia.
(11)Laboratory of Medical Microbiology, Mölbis, Germany.
(12)Department of Dermatovenereology, North Western State Medical University, 
Saint Petersburg, Russia.
(13)Department of Dermatology, Venereology, and Allergology, Medical University 
of Gdansk, Gdańsk, Poland.
(14)Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(15)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Genitourinary Clinic, Mater Dei 
Hospital, Msida, Malta.
(16)International Foundation for Dermatology, Migrants Health Dermatology 
Working Group, London, UK.
(17)Department of Dermatovenereology, University Sarajevo School of Science and 
Technology, Sarajevo Medical School, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
(18)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Zagreb University School of 
Medicine and Zagreb University Hospital, Zagreb, Croatia.
(19)Allergy Unit, Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Zurich and 
Medical Faculty, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(20)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, 
Reykjavik, Iceland.
(21)Department of Skin and Venereal Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, School of 
Health Sciences, University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece.
(22)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Brugmann & Saint-Pierre, 
Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.

Malassezia is a lipophilic yeast that is a part of the human mycobiome. 
Malassezia folliculitis appears when the benign colonization of the hair 
follicles, by the Malassezia yeasts, becomes symptomatic with pruritic papules 
and pustules. Although Malassezia folliculitis is common in hospital 
departments, diagnosing and treating it varies among dermatologists and 
countries. The European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology Mycology Task 
Force Malassezia folliculitis working group has, therefore, sought to develop 
these recommendations for the diagnosis and management of Malassezia 
folliculitis. Recommendations comprise methods for diagnosing Malassezia 
folliculitis, required positive findings before starting therapies and specific 
treatment algorithms for individuals who are immunocompetent, immunocompromised 
or who have compromised liver function. In conclusion, this study provides a 
clinical strategy for diagnosing and managing Malassezia folliculitis.

© 2023 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

DOI: 10.1111/jdv.18982
PMID: 36912427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]