---
reference_id: "PMID:17384641"
title: "A functional polymorphism in the 5' UTR of GDF5 is associated with susceptibility to osteoarthritis."
authors:
- Miyamoto Y
- Mabuchi A
- Shi D
- Kubo T
- Takatori Y
- Saito S
- Fujioka M
- Sudo A
- Uchida A
- Yamamoto S
- Ozaki K
- Takigawa M
- Tanaka T
- Nakamura Y
- Jiang Q
- Ikegawa S
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1038/2005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A functional polymorphism in the 5' UTR of GDF5 is associated with susceptibility to osteoarthritis.
**Authors:** Miyamoto Y, Mabuchi A, Shi D, Kubo T, Takatori Y, Saito S, Fujioka M, Sudo A, Uchida A, Yamamoto S, Ozaki K, Takigawa M, Tanaka T, Nakamura Y, Jiang Q, Ikegawa S
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/2005](https://doi.org/10.1038/2005)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2007 Apr;39(4):529-33. doi: 10.1038/2005. Epub 2007 Mar 25.

A functional polymorphism in the 5' UTR of GDF5 is associated with 
susceptibility to osteoarthritis.

Miyamoto Y(1), Mabuchi A, Shi D, Kubo T, Takatori Y, Saito S, Fujioka M, Sudo A, 
Uchida A, Yamamoto S, Ozaki K, Takigawa M, Tanaka T, Nakamura Y, Jiang Q, 
Ikegawa S.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Bone and Joint Diseases, SNP Research Center, RIKEN, 4-6-1, 
Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

Osteoarthritis (MIM 165720), characterized by degeneration of articular 
cartilage, is the most common form of human arthritis and a major concern for 
aging societies worldwide. Epidemiological and genetic studies have shown that 
osteoarthritis is a polygenic disease. Here, we report that the gene encoding 
growth differentiation factor 5 (GDF5) is associated with osteoarthritis in 
Asian populations. A SNP in the 5' UTR of GDF5 (+104T/C; rs143383) showed 
significant association (P = 1.8 x 10(-13)) with hip osteoarthritis in two 
independent Japanese populations. This association was replicated for knee 
osteoarthritis in Japanese (P = 0.0021) and Han Chinese (P = 0.00028) 
populations. This SNP, located in the GDF5 core promoter, exerts allelic 
differences on transcriptional activity in chondrogenic cells, with the 
susceptibility allele showing reduced activity. Our findings implicate GDF5 as a 
susceptibility gene for osteoarthritis and suggest that decreased GDF5 
expression is involved in the pathogenesis of osteoarthritis.

DOI: 10.1038/2005
PMID: 17384641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]