---
reference_id: "PMID:26368033"
title: Use of the Impella 5.0 Device as a Bridge to Recovery in Adult Fulminant Viral Myocarditis.
authors:
- Burns DJ
- Quantz MA
journal: Innovations (Phila)
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1097/IMI.0000000000000171
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- "Acute Kidney Injury/diagnostic imaging, therapy, virology"
- Coronary Angiography/methods
- Echocardiography
- "Emergency Service, Hospital"
- Female
- Heart-Assist Devices
- Humans
- Intensive Care Units
- Middle Aged
- Minimally Invasive Surgical Procedures/instrumentation
- "Myocarditis/diagnostic imaging, therapy, virology"
- "Shock, Cardiogenic/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, therapy, virology"
- Treatment Outcome
- "Ventricular Dysfunction, Left/diagnostic imaging, etiology, virology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Use of the Impella 5.0 Device as a Bridge to Recovery in Adult Fulminant Viral Myocarditis.
**Authors:** Burns DJ, Quantz MA
**Journal:** Innovations (Phila) (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1097/IMI.0000000000000171](https://doi.org/10.1097/IMI.0000000000000171)

## Content

1. Innovations (Phila). 2015 Jul-Aug;10(4):279-81. doi:
10.1097/IMI.0000000000000171.

Use of the Impella 5.0 Device as a Bridge to Recovery in Adult Fulminant Viral
Myocarditis.

Burns DJ(1), Quantz MA.

Author information:
(1)From the Division of Cardiac Surgery, Department of Surgery, Western
University, London Health Sciences Centre, London, Ontario, Canada.

We present a case of a 48-year-old female patient successfully bridged to
recovery with the Impella 5.0 microaxial pump (Abiomed, Danvers, MA USA) after
presenting with cardiogenic shock secondary to acute fulminant viral
myocarditis. After 1 week of flu-like symptoms, the patient presented to her
community emergency department with chest pain and hypotension. A diagnosis of
inferior ST elevation myocardial infarction was made; subsequent angiography
demonstrated normal coronary arteries and a left ventricular ejection fraction
of 10%. A provisional diagnosis of viral myocarditis was made. As her condition
deteriorated further, she underwent insertion of an Impella 5.0 after failure of
supportive medical therapy. Myocardial recovery occurred, and the Impella was
removed after 1 week. After a prolonged cardiac intensive care unit stay
requiring temporary hemodialysis, the patient recovered sufficiently to tolerate
device explant, transfer to the recovery ward, and ultimate discharge home. This
case report highlights the benefit of mechanical circulatory support in a
patient with cardiogenic shock from viral myocarditis as well as some of the
complications that can occur in this critically ill subset of patients.

DOI: 10.1097/IMI.0000000000000171
PMID: 26368033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
