---
reference_id: "PMID:28851243"
title: Binimetinib for the treatment of NRAS-mutant melanoma.
authors:
- Queirolo P
- Spagnolo F
journal: Expert Rev Anticancer Ther
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1080/14737140.2017.1374177
keywords:
- "Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Benzimidazoles/adverse effects, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Disease-Free Survival
- GTP Phosphohydrolases/genetics
- Humans
- Immunotherapy/methods
- "Melanoma/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- "Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- Mutation
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/adverse effects, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Survival Rate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Binimetinib for the treatment of NRAS-mutant melanoma.
**Authors:** Queirolo P, Spagnolo F
**Journal:** Expert Rev Anticancer Ther (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14737140.2017.1374177](https://doi.org/10.1080/14737140.2017.1374177)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2017 Nov;17(11):985-990. doi:
10.1080/14737140.2017.1374177. Epub 2017 Sep 8.

Binimetinib for the treatment of NRAS-mutant melanoma.

Queirolo P(1), Spagnolo F(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Medical Oncology , Ospedale Policlinico San Martino , Genova
, Italy.

Activating NRAS mutations occur in approximately 15-20% of melanomas and are the
second most common oncogenic driver mutation in this disease, after BRAF
mutations. There is an unmet medical need for new targeted therapy opportunities
in metastatic patients whose tumors harbor an NRAS mutation. Binimetinib, a
mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MEK) inhibitor, has shown clinical
activity in this group of patients. Areas covered: The purpose of this paper was
to review the safety, activity and efficacy of the MEK inhibitor binimetinib for
the treatment of NRAS-mutant melanoma, as well as to discuss future therapeutic
perspectives such as multiple pathways, targeted therapy, and combinations with
immunotherapy. Expert commentary: Only a modest progression-free survival (PFS)
benefit was observed in NRAS-mutated patients who received binimetinib compared
with dacarbazine in a randomized phase 3 clinical trial, with no improvement in
overall survival. Nevertheless, binimetinib represents another promising
treatment option for advanced melanoma and the first molecularly targeted
therapy for the NRAS-mutant population. Binimetinib may also have a role in
treating NRAS-mutated melanoma patients after failure of immunotherapy.

DOI: 10.1080/14737140.2017.1374177
PMID: 28851243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
