---
reference_id: "PMID:27564665"
title: "Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency: Beyond the Protease/Antiprotease Paradigm."
authors:
- Cosio MG
- Bazzan E
- Rigobello C
- Tinè M
- Turato G
- Baraldo S
- Saetta M
journal: Ann Am Thorac Soc
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201510-671KV
keywords:
- Adaptive Immunity/immunology
- Humans
- Peptide Hydrolases/metabolism
- Protease Inhibitors/metabolism
- "Pulmonary Disease, Chronic Obstructive/immunology, metabolism"
- alpha 1-Antitrypsin/metabolism
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/immunology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency: Beyond the Protease/Antiprotease Paradigm.
**Authors:** Cosio MG, Bazzan E, Rigobello C, Tinè M, Turato G, Baraldo S, Saetta M
**Journal:** Ann Am Thorac Soc (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1513/AnnalsATS.201510-671KV](https://doi.org/10.1513/AnnalsATS.201510-671KV)

## Content

1. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2016 Aug;13 Suppl 4:S305-10. doi: 
10.1513/AnnalsATS.201510-671KV.

Alpha-1 Antitrypsin Deficiency: Beyond the Protease/Antiprotease Paradigm.

Cosio MG(1)(2), Bazzan E(1), Rigobello C(1), Tinè M(1), Turato G(1), Baraldo 
S(1), Saetta M(1).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Cardiac, Thoracic, and Vascular Sciences, University of 
Padova, Padova, Italy; and.
(2)2 Meakins-Christie Laboratories, Respiratory Division, McGill University, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

From the discovery that alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) was an effective inhibitor of 
neutrophil elastase originated the classic paradigm of protease/antiprotease 
imbalance, linking lung destruction to the unopposed effect of proteases in 
patients with the deficiency. Notwithstanding its importance as an antiprotease, 
it has become evident that alpha-1 antitrypsin has important antiinflammatory 
and immune-regulatory activities, which may be critically involved in lung 
destruction. We review here recent evidence showing that, indeed, an important 
adaptive immune reaction is present in lungs with AAT deficiency, similar to the 
one seen in severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease with normal AAT. On the 
basis of recent evidence from epidemiological, clinical, and pathogenetic 
studies, it is likely time to move on from the original protease/antiprotease 
hypothesis for the production of emphysema toward a more complex paradigm, 
involving the antiinflammatory and immune modulating functions of AAT.

DOI: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201510-671KV
PMID: 27564665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]