---
reference_id: "PMID:33591350"
title: "Diagnosis and Treatment of Metastatic Colorectal Cancer: A Review."
authors:
- Biller LH
- Schrag D
journal: JAMA
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1001/jama.2021.0106
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Colorectal Neoplasms/diagnosis, drug therapy, pathology, secondary"
- Female
- Genetic Profile
- Humans
- Maintenance Chemotherapy
- Male
- Molecular Diagnostic Techniques
- Prognosis
- Survival Rate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and Treatment of Metastatic Colorectal Cancer: A Review.
**Authors:** Biller LH, Schrag D
**Journal:** JAMA (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.2021.0106](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2021.0106)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2021 Feb 16;325(7):669-685. doi: 10.1001/jama.2021.0106.

Diagnosis and Treatment of Metastatic Colorectal Cancer: A Review.

Biller LH(1)(2), Schrag D(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastrointestinal Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(3)Division of Population Sciences, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(4)Associate Editor, JAMA.

Comment in
    JAMA. 2021 Jun 15;325(23):2404-2405. doi: 10.1001/jama.2021.6021.

IMPORTANCE: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cause of cancer 
mortality worldwide with more than 1.85 million cases and 850 000 deaths 
annually. Of new colorectal cancer diagnoses, 20% of patients have metastatic 
disease at presentation and another 25% who present with localized disease will 
later develop metastases.
OBSERVATIONS: Colorectal cancer is the third most common cause of cancer 
mortality for men and women in the United States, with 53 200 deaths projected 
in 2020. Among people diagnosed with metastatic colorectal cancer, approximately 
70% to 75% of patients survive beyond 1 year, 30% to 35% beyond 3 years, and 
fewer than 20% beyond 5 years from diagnosis. The primary treatment for 
unresectable metastatic CRC is systemic therapy (cytotoxic chemotherapy, 
biologic therapy such as antibodies to cellular growth factors, immunotherapy, 
and their combinations.) Clinical trials completed in the past 5 years have 
demonstrated that tailoring treatment to the molecular and pathologic features 
of the tumor improves overall survival. Genomic profiling to detect somatic 
variants is important because it identifies the treatments that may be 
effective. For the 50% of patients with metastatic CRC with KRAS/NRAS/BRAF 
wild-type tumors, cetuximab and panitumumab (monoclonal antibodies to the 
epithelial growth factor receptor [EGFR]), in combination with chemotherapy, can 
extend median survival by 2 to 4 months compared with chemotherapy alone. 
However, for the 35% to 40% of patients with KRAS or NRAS sequence variations 
(formerly termed mutations), effective targeted therapies are not yet available. 
For the 5% to 10% with BRAF V600E sequence variations, targeted combination 
therapy with BRAF and EGFR inhibitors extended overall survival to 9.3 months, 
compared to 5.9 months for those receiving standard chemotherapy. For the 5% 
with microsatellite instability (the presence of numerous insertions or 
deletions at repetitive DNA units) or mismatch repair deficiency, immunotherapy 
may be used in the first or subsequent line and has improved treatment outcomes 
with a median overall survival of 31.4 months in previously treated patients.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Advances in molecular profiling of metastatic CRC 
facilitate the ability to direct treatments to the biologic features of the 
tumor for specific patient subsets. Although cures remain uncommon, more 
patients can anticipate extended survival. Genomic profiling allows treatment 
selection so that more patients derive benefit and fewer are exposed to toxicity 
from ineffective therapies.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2021.0106
PMID: 33591350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]