---
reference_id: "PMID:23479201"
title: Infantile hypophosphatasia secondary to a novel compound heterozygous mutation presenting with pyridoxine-responsive seizures.
authors:
- Belachew D
- Kazmerski T
- Libman I
- Goldstein AC
- Stevens ST
- Deward S
- Vockley J
- Sperling MA
- Balest AL
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/8904_2013_217
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Infantile hypophosphatasia secondary to a novel compound heterozygous mutation presenting with pyridoxine-responsive seizures.
**Authors:** Belachew D, Kazmerski T, Libman I, Goldstein AC, Stevens ST, Deward S, Vockley J, Sperling MA, Balest AL
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/8904_2013_217](https://doi.org/10.1007/8904_2013_217)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2013;11:17-24. doi: 10.1007/8904_2013_217. Epub 2013 Mar 12.

Infantile hypophosphatasia secondary to a novel compound heterozygous mutation
presenting with pyridoxine-responsive seizures.

Belachew D(1), Kazmerski T, Libman I, Goldstein AC, Stevens ST, Deward S,
Vockley J, Sperling MA, Balest AL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of
UPMC, Pittsburgh, USA.

Hypophosphatasia (HPP) is a rare metabolic disease with the hallmark finding of
deficient serum tissue nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNSALP) activity.
TNSALP is primarily known for its role in mineralization; hence, HPP is
characterized by defective mineralization of bone and/or teeth. TNSALP is also
necessary for proper vitamin B6 metabolism and its participation as a cofactor
for neurotransmitters in the central nervous system. Defective TNSALP activity
in the brain can result in intractable seizures responsive to pyridoxine. The
pathophysiology of pyridoxine-responsive seizures (PRS) in severe HPP remains to
be clearly defined. We review the case of a 2-month-old Caucasian boy presenting
with seizures refractory to conventional antiepileptic medications. Empiric
treatment with favorable response to pyridoxine in conjunction with severe
metabolic bone disease, extremely low serum alkaline phosphatase, elevated
phosphoethanolamine, hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria, and nephrocalcinosis led to
a clinical diagnosis of infantile HPP. Sequence analysis revealed compound
heterozygosity of the TNSALP gene with a novel mutation in exon 9 and a
previously reported mutation in exon 12. This case reminds the physician that
severe infantile HPP can present with PRS as its major initial manifestation and
should alert clinicians to consider HPP in their differential of PRS. In
addition, despite this severe genotype, the clinical diagnosis of our patient
was delayed because of minimal phenotypic features initially. This highlights
that the phenotype-genotype correlation could be variable even in severe
disease. This case also demonstrates that HPP should be classified as PRS and
not a form of pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy (PDE) as our patient was able to
stop the pyridoxine supplementation without seizure recurrence once enzyme
replacement was initiated. With the advent of enzyme replacement therapy, this
once fatal disease may have improved morbidity and mortality.

DOI: 10.1007/8904_2013_217
PMCID: PMC3755558
PMID: 23479201
