---
reference_id: "PMID:16301686"
title: Analysis of GAD65 autoantibodies in Stiff-Person syndrome patients.
authors:
- Raju R
- Foote J
- Banga JP
- Hall TR
- Padoa CJ
- Dalakas MC
- Ortqvist E
- Hampe CS
journal: J Immunol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.175.11.7755
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of GAD65 autoantibodies in Stiff-Person syndrome patients.
**Authors:** Raju R, Foote J, Banga JP, Hall TR, Padoa CJ, Dalakas MC, Ortqvist E, Hampe CS
**Journal:** J Immunol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.4049/jimmunol.175.11.7755](https://doi.org/10.4049/jimmunol.175.11.7755)

## Content

1. J Immunol. 2005 Dec 1;175(11):7755-62. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.175.11.7755.

Analysis of GAD65 autoantibodies in Stiff-Person syndrome patients.

Raju R(1), Foote J, Banga JP, Hall TR, Padoa CJ, Dalakas MC, Ortqvist E, Hampe 
CS.

Author information:
(1)Neuromuscular Diseases Section, National Institute of Neurological Disorders 
and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Autoantibodies to the 65-kDa isoform of glutamate decarboxylase GAD65 (GAD65Ab) 
are strong candidates for a pathological role in Stiff-Person syndrome (SPS). We 
have analyzed the binding specificity of the GAD65Ab in serum and cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) of 12 patients with SPS by competitive displacement studies with 
GAD65-specific rFab-derived from a number of human and mouse mAbs specific for 
different determinants on the Ag. We demonstrate considerable differences in the 
epitope specificity when comparing paired serum and CSF samples, suggesting 
local stimulation of B cells in the CSF compartment of these patients. Moreover, 
these autoantibodies strongly inhibit the enzymatic activity of GAD65, thus 
blocking the formation of the neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid. The 
capacity of the sera to inhibit the enzymatic activity of GAD65 correlated with 
their binding to a conformational C-terminal Ab epitope. Investigation of the 
inhibitory mechanism revealed that the inhibition could not be overcome by high 
concentrations of glutamate or the cofactor pyridoxal phosphate, suggesting a 
noncompetitive inhibitory mechanism. Finally, we identified a linear epitope on 
amino acids residues 4-22 of GAD65 that was recognized solely by autoantibodies 
from patients with SPS but not by serum from type 1 diabetes patients. A mAb 
(N-GAD65 mAb) recognizing this N-terminal epitope was successfully humanized to 
enhance its potential therapeutic value by reducing its overall immunogenicity.

DOI: 10.4049/jimmunol.175.11.7755
PMID: 16301686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]