---
reference_id: "PMID:27639840"
title: "Steroid-responsive encephalopathy associated with autoimmune thyroiditis (SREAT): Characteristics, treatment and outcome in 251 cases from the literature."
authors:
- Laurent C
- Capron J
- Quillerou B
- Thomas G
- Alamowitch S
- Fain O
- Mekinian A
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2016.09.008
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Encephalitis/drug therapy
- Hashimoto Disease/drug therapy
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Steroids/therapeutic use
- "Thyroiditis, Autoimmune/complications"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Steroid-responsive encephalopathy associated with autoimmune thyroiditis (SREAT): Characteristics, treatment and outcome in 251 cases from the literature.
**Authors:** Laurent C, Capron J, Quillerou B, Thomas G, Alamowitch S, Fain O, Mekinian A
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2016.09.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2016.09.008)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2016 Dec;15(12):1129-1133. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2016.09.008. 
Epub 2016 Sep 15.

Steroid-responsive encephalopathy associated with autoimmune thyroiditis 
(SREAT): Characteristics, treatment and outcome in 251 cases from the 
literature.

Laurent C(1), Capron J(2), Quillerou B(3), Thomas G(3), Alamowitch S(2), Fain 
O(1), Mekinian A(4).

Author information:
(1)Service de médecine interne, UPMC, DHU i2B AP-HP, Hôpital Saint Antoine, 
75012 Paris, France.
(2)Service de neurologie, UPMC, AP-HP, Hôpital Saint Antoine, 75012 Paris, 
France.
(3)Service de psychiatrie, UPMC, AP-HP, Hôpital Saint Antoine, 75012 Paris, 
France.
(4)Service de médecine interne, UPMC, DHU i2B AP-HP, Hôpital Saint Antoine, 
75012 Paris, France. Electronic address: arsene.mekinian@aphp.fr.

BACKGROUND: Steroid-responsive encephalopathy and associated autoimmune 
thyroiditis (SREAT) is characterized by encephalopathy and the presence of 
antithyroid antibodies. We describe the clinical presentation, outcome and 
treatments for SREAT by a systematic review of the literature.
METHODS: MEDLINE via PubMed, Web of Science and the Cochrane Library were 
searched for articles published until 2015. Inclusion criteria were unexplained 
encephalopathy with antithyroid antibodies.
RESULTS: We found reports of 251 patients (median age 52years [range 18-86], 73% 
females, 80 [32%] with preexisting thyroiditis). Patients presented encephalitis 
signs with convulsions (n=117; 47%), confusion (n=115, 46%), speech disorder 
(n=91, 37%), memory impairment (n=107, 43%), gait disturbance (n=67, 27%) and 
persecutory delusions (n=61, 25%). Twenty-eight patients (11%) presented 
progressive memory impairment and 26 (10%) isolated psychiatric disorders. In 
serum, 34% of patients were positive for anti-thyroid peroxidase (TPO) 
antibodies, 7% for anti-thyroglobulin (TG) antibodies, and 69% both. 
Thyroid-stimulating hormone levels were usually normal, at 2 UI/ml [0.001-205]. 
Cerebrospinal fluid from 10/53 patients (19%) was positive for anti-TPO 
antibodies, 2/53 (4%) anti-TG antibodies and 28 (53%) both. 
Electroencephalography findings were abnormal for 82% of patients, showing 
diffuse slowing consistent with encephalopathy (70%) or epileptic activity 
(14%). The first-line treatment was steroids in 193 patients and other 
immunosuppressive drugs in 10 cases. At a median follow-up of 12months [range 
0.2-110], 91% of patients showed complete or partial neurological response, with 
anti-TPO and -TG antibody titers at 347 UI/ml [0-825,000] and 110 UI/ml 
[0-50,892], respectively. During follow-up, 40 patients (16%) experienced at 
least one relapse. Relapse was more frequent in patients with initial coma (26% 
vs 13%, p=0.08).
CONCLUSION: The diagnosis of SREAT should be suspected in case of encephalopathy 
without obvious cause, to quickly start corticosteroid treatment. The exact 
modalities of treatment must be defined.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2016.09.008
PMID: 27639840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]