---
reference_id: "PMID:29266530"
title: Resilience and positive affect contribute to lower cancer-related fatigue among Chinese patients with gastric cancer.
authors:
- Zou G
- Li Y
- Xu R
- Li P
journal: J Clin Nurs
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/jocn.14245
keywords:
- Adult
- Affect
- China/epidemiology
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- "Fatigue/diagnosis, epidemiology, psychology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Regression Analysis
- "Resilience, Psychological"
- "Stomach Neoplasms/epidemiology, psychology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Resilience and positive affect contribute to lower cancer-related fatigue among Chinese patients with gastric cancer.
**Authors:** Zou G, Li Y, Xu R, Li P
**Journal:** J Clin Nurs (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jocn.14245](https://doi.org/10.1111/jocn.14245)

## Content

1. J Clin Nurs. 2018 Apr;27(7-8):e1412-e1418. doi: 10.1111/jocn.14245. Epub 2018
Mar 23.

Resilience and positive affect contribute to lower cancer-related fatigue among
Chinese patients with gastric cancer.

Zou G(1)(2), Li Y(3), Xu R(4), Li P(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Nursing, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong Province, China.
(2)Shandong Mental Health Center, Jinan, Shandong Province, China.
(3)Linyi People's Hospital, Linyi, Shandong Province, China.
(4)Shandong Provincial Hospital, Jinan, Shandong Province, China.

AIMS AND OBJECTIVES: To investigate the prevalence of cancer-related fatigue and
explore the relationship between resilience, positive affect, and fatigue among
Chinese patients with gastric cancer.
BACKGROUND: Cancer-related fatigue is the most distressing symptom reported
frequently by cancer patients during both treatment and survival phases.
Resilience and positive affect as vital protective factors against
cancer-related fatigue have been examined, but the underlying psychological
mechanisms are not well understood.
DESIGN: A cross-sectional study.
METHODS: Two hundred and three gastric cancer patients were enrolled from three
hospitals in China. The Cancer Fatigue Scale, the positive affect subscale of
the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule and the Connor-Davidson Resilience
Scale (CD-RISC10) were administered. Hierarchical linear regression modelling
was conducted to examine the association between resilience and cancer-related
fatigue, and the mediating effect of positive affect.
RESULTS: The incidence of clinically relevant fatigue among patients with
gastric cancer was 91.6%. Regression analysis showed that resilience was
negatively associated with cancer-related fatigue, explaining 15.4% of variance
in cancer-related fatigue. Mediation analysis showed that high resilience was
associated with increased positive affect, which was associated with decreased
cancer-related fatigue.
CONCLUSIONS: Cancer-related fatigue is prevalent among patients with gastric
cancer. Positive affect may mediate the relationship between resilience and
cancer-related fatigue.
RELEVANCE TO CLINICAL PRACTICE: Interventions that attend to resilience training
and promotion of positive affect may be the focus for future clinical and
research endeavours.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jocn.14245
PMID: 29266530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
