---
reference_id: "PMID:34047774"
title: Clinicopathologic Features of Oculopharyngodistal Myopathy With LRP12 CGG Repeat Expansions Compared With Other Oculopharyngodistal Myopathy Subtypes.
authors:
- Kumutpongpanich T
- Ogasawara M
- Ozaki A
- Ishiura H
- Tsuji S
- Minami N
- Hayashi S
- Noguchi S
- Iida A
- Nishino I
- OPDM_LRP12 Study Group
- Mori-Yoshimura M
- Oya Y
- Ono K
- Shimizu T
- Kawata A
- Shimohama S
- Toyooka K
- Endo K
- Toru S
- Sasaki O
- Isahaya K
- Takahashi MP
- Iwasa K
- Kira JI
- Yamamoto T
- Kawamoto M
- Hamano T
- Sugie K
- Eura N
- Shiota T
- Koide M
- Sekiya K
- Kishi H
- Hideyama T
- Kawai S
- Yanagimoto S
- Sato H
- Arahata H
- Murayama S
- Saito K
- Hara H
- Kanda T
- Yaguchi H
- Imai N
- Kawagashira Y
- Sanada M
- Obara K
- Kaido M
- Furuta M
- Kurashige T
- Hara W
- Kuzume D
- Yamamoto M
- Tsugawa J
- Kishida H
- Ishizuka N
- Morimoto K
- Tsuji Y
- Tsuneyama A
- Matsuno A
- Sasaki R
- Tamakoshi D
- Abe E
- Yamada S
- Uzawa A
journal: JAMA Neurol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2021.1509
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- DNA Repeat Expansion
- Female
- Humans
- Japan
- Low Density Lipoprotein Receptor-Related Protein-1
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Muscle Weakness
- "Muscle, Skeletal/pathology"
- Muscular Dystrophies/diagnosis
- Pedigree
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinicopathologic Features of Oculopharyngodistal Myopathy With LRP12 CGG Repeat Expansions Compared With Other Oculopharyngodistal Myopathy Subtypes.
**Authors:** Kumutpongpanich T, Ogasawara M, Ozaki A, Ishiura H, Tsuji S, Minami N, Hayashi S, Noguchi S, Iida A, Nishino I, OPDM_LRP12 Study Group, Mori-Yoshimura M, Oya Y, Ono K, Shimizu T, Kawata A, Shimohama S, Toyooka K, Endo K, Toru S, Sasaki O, Isahaya K, Takahashi MP, Iwasa K, Kira JI, Yamamoto T, Kawamoto M, Hamano T, Sugie K, Eura N, Shiota T, Koide M, Sekiya K, Kishi H, Hideyama T, Kawai S, Yanagimoto S, Sato H, Arahata H, Murayama S, Saito K, Hara H, Kanda T, Yaguchi H, Imai N, Kawagashira Y, Sanada M, Obara K, Kaido M, Furuta M, Kurashige T, Hara W, Kuzume D, Yamamoto M, Tsugawa J, Kishida H, Ishizuka N, Morimoto K, Tsuji Y, Tsuneyama A, Matsuno A, Sasaki R, Tamakoshi D, Abe E, Yamada S, Uzawa A
**Journal:** JAMA Neurol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaneurol.2021.1509](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2021.1509)

## Content

1. JAMA Neurol. 2021 Jul 1;78(7):853-863. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2021.1509.

Clinicopathologic Features of Oculopharyngodistal Myopathy With LRP12 CGG Repeat 
Expansions Compared With Other Oculopharyngodistal Myopathy Subtypes.

Kumutpongpanich T(1)(2), Ogasawara M(1)(2), Ozaki A(1)(2), Ishiura H(3), Tsuji 
S(3), Minami N(1)(2), Hayashi S(1)(2), Noguchi S(1)(2), Iida A(2), Nishino 
I(1)(2); OPDM_LRP12 Study Group; Mori-Yoshimura M(4), Oya Y(4), Ono K(5), 
Shimizu T(6), Kawata A(6), Shimohama S(7), Toyooka K(8), Endo K(9), Toru S(10), 
Sasaki O(11), Isahaya K(11), Takahashi MP(12), Iwasa K(13), Kira JI(14), 
Yamamoto T(15), Kawamoto M(16), Hamano T(17), Sugie K(18), Eura N(18), Shiota 
T(18), Koide M(19), Sekiya K(20), Kishi H(21), Hideyama T(22), Kawai S(23), 
Yanagimoto S(23), Sato H(24), Arahata H(25), Murayama S(26), Saito K(27), Hara 
H(28), Kanda T(29), Yaguchi H(30), Imai N(31), Kawagashira Y(32), Sanada M(33), 
Obara K(34), Kaido M(35), Furuta M(36), Kurashige T(37), Hara W(38), Kuzume 
D(39), Yamamoto M(40), Tsugawa J(41), Kishida H(42), Ishizuka N(43), Morimoto 
K(44), Tsuji Y(44), Tsuneyama A(45), Matsuno A(46), Sasaki R(47), Tamakoshi 
D(48), Abe E(49), Yamada S(50), Uzawa A(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuromuscular Research, National Institute of Neuroscience, 
National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Medical Genome Center, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology, The University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Neurology, National Center Hospital, National Center of 
Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Division of Neurology, Department of Internal Medicine, Showa University 
School of Medicine, Shinagawa, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Neurology, Tokyo Metropolitan Neurological Hospital, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(7)Department of Neurology, Sapporo Medical University, Sapporo, Japan.
(8)Department of Neurology, Osaka Toneyama Medical Center, Osaka, Japan.
(9)Department of Neurology, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Miyagi, Japan.
(10)Department of Neurology, Nitobe Memorial Nakano General Hospital, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(11)Division of Neurology, Department of Internal Medicine, St Marianna 
University School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan.
(12)Department of Neurology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Osaka, Japan.
(13)Department of Neurology and Neurobiology of Aging, Kanazawa University 
Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa, Japan.
(14)Department of Neurology, Neurological Institute, Graduate School of Medical 
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(15)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 
Chiba, Japan.
(16)Department of Neurology, Kobe City Medical Center General Hospital, Kobe, 
Hyogo, Japan.
(17)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Neurology, Department of 
Aging and Dementia, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Fukui, Fukui, 
Japan.
(18)Department of Neurology, Nara Medical University, Nara, Japan.
(19)Department of Neurology, Chiba-East National Hospital, Chiba, Japan.
(20)Department of Neurology, Niigata City General Hospital, Niigata, Japan.
(21)Department of Neurology, Asahikawa Medical Center, Asahikawa, Japan.
(22)Department of Neurology, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.
(23)Department of Neurology, Kindai University Faculty of Medicine, Osaka, 
Japan.
(24)Department of Neurology, Hematology, Metabolism, Endocrinology and 
Diabetology, Yamagata University Faculty of Medicine, Yamagata, Japan.
(25)Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization Omuta National 
Hospital, Omuta, Japan.
(26)Department of Neurology and Neuropathology (the Brain Bank for Aging 
Research), Tokyo Metropolitan Geriatric Hospital, Institute of Gerontology, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(27)Institute of Medical Genetics, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Shinjuku, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(28)Division of Neurology, Department of Internal Medicine, Saga University 
Faculty of Medicine, Saga, Japan.
(29)Department of Neurology and Clinical Neuroscience, Yamaguchi University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Ube, Japan.
(30)Department of Neurology, The Jikei University Kashiwa Hospital, Kashiwa, 
Japan.
(31)Department of Neurology, Japanese Red Cross Shizuoka Hospital, Shizuoka, 
Japan.
(32)Department of Neurology, Tsushima City Hospital, Aichi, Japan.
(33)Department of Neurology, Kanazawa Medical University Hospital, Ishikawa, 
Japan.
(34)Department of Neurology, Anjo Kosei Hospital, Aichi, Japan.
(35)Department of Neurology, Sakai City Medical Center, Osaka, Japan.
(36)Department of Neurology, Gunma University, Maebashi, Japan.
(37)Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization Kure Medical Center, 
Chugoku Cancer Center, Kure, Japan.
(38)Department of Neurology, Saitama Medical Center, Saitama, Japan.
(39)Department of Neurology, Chikamori Hospital, Kochi, Japan.
(40)Department of Neurology, Toyama University, Toyama, Japan.
(41)Department of Neurology, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(42)Department of Neurology, Yokohama City University Medical Center, Yokohama, 
Japan.
(43)Division of Neurology and Gerontology, Department of Internal Medicine, 
School of Medicine, Iwate Medical University, Iwate, Japan.
(44)Department of Neurology, Kobe University, Kobe, Japan.
(45)Department of Neurology, Narita Red Cross Hospital, Chiba, Japan.
(46)Department of Medicine (Neurology and Rheumatology), Shinshu University 
School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan.
(47)Department of Neurology, Okayama University, Okayama, Japan.
(48)Department of Neurology, Chukyo Hospital, Nagoya, Japan.
(49)Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization Akita Hospital, 
Akita, Japan.
(50)Department of Neurology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Nagoya, Japan.

IMPORTANCE: Repeat expansion of CGG in LRP12 has been identified as the 
causative variation of oculopharyngodistal myopathy (OPDM). However, to our 
knowledge, the clinicopathologic features of OPDM with CGG repeat expansion in 
LRP12 (hereafter referred to as OPDM_LRP12) remain unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To identify and characterize the clinicopathologic features of 
patients with OPDM_LRP12.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This case series included 208 patients with a 
clinical or clinicopathologic diagnosis of oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy 
(OPDM) from January 1, 1978, to December 31, 2020. Patients with GCN repeat 
expansions in PABPN1 were excluded from the study. Repeat expansions of CGG in 
LRP12 were screened by repeat primed polymerase chain reaction and/or Southern 
blot.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Clinical information, muscle imaging data obtained 
by either computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging, and muscle 
pathologic characteristics.
RESULTS: Sixty-five Japanese patients with OPDM (40 men [62%]; mean [SD] age at 
onset, 41.0 [10.1] years) from 59 families with CGG repeat expansions in LRP12 
were identified. This represents the most common OPDM subtype among all patients 
in Japan with genetically diagnosed OPDM. The expansions ranged from 85 to 289 
repeats. A negative correlation was observed between the repeat size and the age 
at onset (r2 = 0.188, P = .001). The most common initial symptoms were ptosis 
and muscle weakness, present in 24 patients (37%). Limb muscle weakness was 
predominantly distal in 53 of 64 patients (83%), but 2 of 64 patients (3%) had 
predominantly proximal muscle weakness. Ptosis was observed in 62 of 64 patients 
(97%), and dysphagia or dysarthria was observed in 63 of 64 patients (98%). A 
total of 21 of 64 patients (33%) had asymmetric muscle weakness. Aspiration 
pneumonia was seen in 11 of 64 patients (17%), and 5 of 64 patients (8%) 
required mechanical ventilation. Seven of 64 patients (11%) developed cardiac 
abnormalities, and 5 of 64 patients (8%) developed neurologic abnormalities. 
Asymmetric muscle involvement was detected on computed tomography scans in 6 of 
27 patients (22%) and on magnetic resonance imaging scans in 4 of 15 patients 
(27%), with the soleus and the medial head of the gastrocnemius being the worst 
affected. All 42 muscle biopsy samples showed rimmed vacuoles. Intranuclear 
tubulofilamentous inclusions were observed in only 1 of 5 patients.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: This study suggests that OPDM_LRP12 is the most 
frequent OPDM subtype in Japan and is characterized by oculopharyngeal weakness, 
distal myopathy that especially affects the soleus and gastrocnemius muscles, 
and rimmed vacuoles in muscle biopsy.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2021.1509
PMCID: PMC8164150
PMID: 34047774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Ogasawara 
reported receiving grants from JSPS KAKENHI 20K16612 outside the submitted work. 
Dr Ishiura reported receiving grants from Japan Society for the Promotion of 
Science and The Kato Memorial Trust for Nambyo Research during the conduct of 
the study; and having a patent for diagnosis of OPDM pending. Dr S. Tsuji 
reported receiving grants from Nobelpharma Co Ltd; personal fees from Sanofi KK, 
Ono Pharmaceutical Co Ltd, and Sanwa Kagaku Kenkyusho Co Ltd outside the 
submitted work; and having a patent for diagnosis of OPDM pending. Dr Shimizu 
reported receiving grants from Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science 
and JSPS KAKENHI by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and 
Technology of Japan outside the submitted work. Dr Kurashige reported receiving 
grants from Tsuchiya Foundation, Takeda Science Foundation, and Taiju Life 
Social Welfare Foundation outside the submitted work. Dr Noguchi reported 
receiving grants from Daiichi Sankyo Company and Astellas Pharma Inc outside the 
submitted work. Dr Nishino reported receiving honoraria from Sanofi and Japan 
Blood Products Organization; and a grant from Astellas Pharma Inc outside the 
submitted work. No other disclosures were reported.