---
reference_id: "PMID:21901520"
title: Emergency and elective surgery for small bowel Crohn's disease.
authors:
- Kosmidis C
- Anthimidis G
journal: Tech Coloproctol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s10151-011-0728-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Emergency and elective surgery for small bowel Crohn's disease.
**Authors:** Kosmidis C, Anthimidis G
**Journal:** Tech Coloproctol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10151-011-0728-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10151-011-0728-y)

## Content

1. Tech Coloproctol. 2011 Oct;15 Suppl 1:S1-4. doi: 10.1007/s10151-011-0728-y.

Emergency and elective surgery for small bowel Crohn's disease.

Kosmidis C(1), Anthimidis G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Interbalkan European Medical Center, Asklipiou 10, 
Pilea, Thessaloniki, Greece. dr.ckosmidis@gmail.com

Advancements in the medical treatment of Crohn's disease have reduced the need 
for surgery. The indications for surgery include the failure of medical 
management, especially the persistence or worsening of symptoms in spite of 
proper treatment and complications of the disease process. These complications 
include intestinal obstruction, intestinal perforation with fistula formation or 
abscess, free perforation, gastrointestinal bleeding, urologic complications, 
cancer, and perianal disease. In these cases, operative therapy should be 
directed to the specific indication for surgery, resecting only the segment of 
bowel involved in the complicating process while preserving as much bowel length 
as possible in order to prevent short-bowel syndrome. Laparoscopic surgery has 
been gaining acceptance as an alternative surgical approach for properly 
selected patients with Crohn's disease. In conclusion, identifying the need for 
surgery and determining the timing of operation are the cornerstones to 
successful surgical management of patients with Crohn's disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s10151-011-0728-y
PMID: 21901520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]