---
reference_id: "PMID:22972295"
title: "Diversity, stability and resilience of the human gut microbiota."
authors:
- Lozupone CA
- Stombaugh JI
- Gordon JI
- Jansson JK
- Knight R
journal: Nature
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1038/nature11550
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diversity, stability and resilience of the human gut microbiota.
**Authors:** Lozupone CA, Stombaugh JI, Gordon JI, Jansson JK, Knight R
**Journal:** Nature (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature11550](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature11550)

## Content

1. Nature. 2012 Sep 13;489(7415):220-30. doi: 10.1038/nature11550.

Diversity, stability and resilience of the human gut microbiota.

Lozupone CA(1), Stombaugh JI, Gordon JI, Jansson JK, Knight R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder, 
Colorado, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Transplant. 2013 Apr;13(4):829. doi: 10.1111/ajt.12232.

Trillions of microbes inhabit the human intestine, forming a complex ecological 
community that influences normal physiology and susceptibility to disease 
through its collective metabolic activities and host interactions. Understanding 
the factors that underlie changes in the composition and function of the gut 
microbiota will aid in the design of therapies that target it. This goal is 
formidable. The gut microbiota is immensely diverse, varies between individuals 
and can fluctuate over time - especially during disease and early development. 
Viewing the microbiota from an ecological perspective could provide insight into 
how to promote health by targeting this microbial community in clinical 
treatments.

DOI: 10.1038/nature11550
PMCID: PMC3577372
PMID: 22972295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]