---
reference_id: "PMID:24183879"
title: "The need for vigilance: false-negative screening for adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency caused by deribosylation of urinary biomarkers."
authors:
- Krijt J
- Skopova V
- Adamkova V
- Cermakova R
- Jurecka A
- Kmoch S
- Zikanova M
journal: Clin Biochem
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2013.10.018
keywords:
- "Adenosine/analogs & derivatives, urine"
- "Adenylosuccinate Lyase/deficiency, urine"
- "Aminoimidazole Carboxamide/analogs & derivatives, metabolism, urine"
- Autistic Disorder
- Bacterial Proteins/metabolism
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid"
- "Chromatography, Thin Layer/methods"
- Enterococcus faecalis
- Enzymes/metabolism
- False Negative Reactions
- Humans
- Klebsiella pneumoniae
- "Purine-Pyrimidine Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, urine"
- "Ribonucleosides/metabolism, urine"
- Tandem Mass Spectrometry/methods
- Urine/microbiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The need for vigilance: false-negative screening for adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency caused by deribosylation of urinary biomarkers.
**Authors:** Krijt J, Skopova V, Adamkova V, Cermakova R, Jurecka A, Kmoch S, Zikanova M
**Journal:** Clin Biochem (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2013.10.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2013.10.018)

## Content

1. Clin Biochem. 2013 Dec;46(18):1899-901. doi:
10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2013.10.018.  Epub 2013 Oct 30.

The need for vigilance: false-negative screening for adenylosuccinate lyase
deficiency caused by deribosylation of urinary biomarkers.

Krijt J(1), Skopova V, Adamkova V, Cermakova R, Jurecka A, Kmoch S, Zikanova M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine,
Charles University in Prague and General University Hospital in Prague, Ke
Karlovu 2, 128 08 Praha 2, Czech Republic. Electronic address:
jkrijt@lf1.cuni.cz.

OBJECTIVES: Adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency (dADSL) is a rare inherited
metabolic disorder. Biochemical diagnosis of the disease is based on the
determination of enormously elevated urinary levels of succinylaminoimidazole
carboxamide riboside (SAICA-riboside) and succinyladenosine (SAdo). We report a
case of false negative screening for dADSL caused by deribosylation of the
urinary biomarkers SAICA-riboside and SAdo.
DESIGN AND METHODS: A thin-layer chromatography (TLC) method with Pauly reagent
detection of SAICA-riboside was used as a screening method. High-performance
liquid chromatography with diode-array detection (HPLC-DAD) and LC-MS/MS methods
were used for the identification and quantitative determination of
SAICA-riboside, SAdo, succinylaminoimidazole carboxamide (SAICA) and
succinyladenine (SA).
RESULTS: Following a negative TLC screening in a known case of dADSL, we
analyzed urine using HPLC-DAD. The concentration of SAICA-riboside was
2.7mmol/mol creatinine (below the TLC detection limit), and we detected the two
abnormal metabolites identified by LC-MS/MS as SAICA and SA. We showed that
SAICA and SA were produced by deribosylation of SAICA-riboside and SAdo in the
patient's urine. Studies performed by monitoring the production of SAICA and SA
after the addition of SAICA-riboside and SAdo to the patient's urine and to
urine samples from patients with urinary tract infections suggested that
deribosylation is facilitated by bacterial enzymes.
CONCLUSIONS: Screening methods for the diagnosis of dADSL may be falsely
negative due to bacteria-mediated deribosylation of SAICA-riboside and SAdo.
HPLC-DAD or LC-MS/MS analyses allowing for simultaneous detection of
SAICA-riboside, SAdo and their deribosylation products SAICA and SA should be
preferentially used for the diagnosis of dADSL in urine.

© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2013.10.018
PMID: 24183879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
