---
reference_id: "PMID:20889558"
title: "Host defense mechanisms in secondary syphilitic lesions: a role for IFN-gamma-/IL-17-producing CD8+ T cells?"
authors:
- Stary G
- Klein I
- Brüggen MC
- Kohlhofer S
- Brunner PM
- Spazierer D
- Müllauer L
- Petzelbauer P
- Stingl G
journal: Am J Pathol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.100277
keywords:
- Adult
- Animals
- CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes/immunology
- Female
- "HIV Infections/complications, immunology, pathology"
- Humans
- Interferon-gamma/immunology
- Interleukin-17/immunology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Skin/immunology, microbiology, pathology"
- "Syphilis/etiology, immunology, pathology"
- Treponema pallidum/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Host defense mechanisms in secondary syphilitic lesions: a role for IFN-gamma-/IL-17-producing CD8+ T cells?
**Authors:** Stary G, Klein I, Brüggen MC, Kohlhofer S, Brunner PM, Spazierer D, Müllauer L, Petzelbauer P, Stingl G
**Journal:** Am J Pathol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.2353/ajpath.2010.100277](https://doi.org/10.2353/ajpath.2010.100277)

## Content

1. Am J Pathol. 2010 Nov;177(5):2421-32. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.100277. Epub
2010  Oct 1.

Host defense mechanisms in secondary syphilitic lesions: a role for
IFN-gamma-/IL-17-producing CD8+ T cells?

Stary G(1), Klein I, Brüggen MC, Kohlhofer S, Brunner PM, Spazierer D, Müllauer
L, Petzelbauer P, Stingl G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Division of Immunology, Allergy, and Infectious
Diseases (DIAID), Medical University of Vienna, Währinger Gürtel 18-20, 1090
Vienna, Austria. georg.stary@meduniwien.ac.at

Cell-mediated immunity is thought to be of critical importance in antisyphilitic
host defense, but the exact mechanisms are still unknown. This fact is
particularly true for HIV-infected persons with a deficit in CD4+ T-cell number.
We therefore obtained lesional skin samples from HIV+ and HIV- patients with
secondary syphilis at different time points of lesional age to search both for
causative microorganisms and to characterize the inflammatory infiltrate. By
doing so, we detected Treponema pallidum spirochetes with a much greater
abundance in late lesions of HIV+ individuals compared with the HIV- cohort. The
dominating inflammatory cells were T cells, macrophages, and neutrophils at all
stages and plasma cells in older lesions. In HIV- persons, T cells consisted of
equal numbers of CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells, whereas in HIV+ patients, the majority
of T cells belonged to the CD8 lineage and produced both IFN-γ and IL-17.
Regulatory T cells and Langerhans cells were reduced in these patients compared
with their HIV- counterparts. Because of our observations, we propose that T
cells of both the CD4 and CD8 lineage are needed for an at least partial
protective antisyphilitic immunity. Compensation mechanisms in HIV+ individuals,
such as an increase of Tc1/17 cells as well as a reduction in immunoregulatory
Langerhans cells and T cells, apparently do not overcome the deficiencies in
these patients to eliminate the spirochete.

DOI: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.100277
PMCID: PMC2966800
PMID: 20889558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
