---
reference_id: "PMID:12640572"
title: "Desmopressin in mild hemophilia A: indications, limitations, efficacy, and safety."
authors:
- Lethagen S
journal: Semin Thromb Hemost
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1055/s-2003-37944
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Desmopressin in mild hemophilia A: indications, limitations, efficacy, and safety.
**Authors:** Lethagen S
**Journal:** Semin Thromb Hemost (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-2003-37944](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-2003-37944)

## Content

1. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2003 Feb;29(1):101-6. doi: 10.1055/s-2003-37944.

Desmopressin in mild hemophilia A: indications, limitations, efficacy, and 
safety.

Lethagen S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department for Coagulation Disorders, University of Lund, University 
Hospital, Malmö, Sweden. stefan.lethagen@medforsk.mas.lu.se

Replacement therapy with blood products has long been the only available 
therapeutic option for patients with bleeding disorders. Plasma-derived 
cryoprecipitate and factor (F) VIII concentrates, which have been used for 
hemophilia A patients, involve the risk of transmitting blood-borne diseases. 
Both plasma-derived and recombinant FVIII concentrates are expensive, and there 
is a global shortage. The synthetic vasopressin analogue desmopressin acetate 
(1-deamino-[8-D-arginine]-vasopressin, DDAVP) increases plasma concentrations of 
coagulation FVIII and von Willebrand factor (vWF) two fold to six fold through 
endogenous release. The drug is an attractive therapeutic alternative because it 
carries no risk of transmission of infectious diseases. Desmopressin is today a 
widely used hemostatic agent not only in patients with mild hemophilia A or von 
Willebrand disease (vWD) but also in those with congenital or acquired platelet 
dysfunction. There is a long clinical experience with the drug because it has 
been used for prevention of bleedings in connection with invasive procedures and 
for treatment of bleedings since the mid-1970s. Not all hemophilia A patients 
can be treated. The clinical usefulness depends on the postdesmopressin plasma 
concentration of FVIII, which in turn depends on the patient's basal FVIII 
level. Therefore, a test dose is recommended in candidate patients. In general, 
only the mildest hemophilia A patients respond sufficiently. Optimal hemostatic 
effect is achieved with a dosage of 0.3 microg/kg given intravenously. An 
intranasal desmopressin spray is suitable for the home treatment.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2003-37944
PMID: 12640572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]