---
reference_id: "PMID:37644229"
title: Ocular manifestations of renal ciliopathies.
authors:
- Salehi O
- Mack H
- Colville D
- Lewis D
- Savige J
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00467-023-06096-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ocular manifestations of renal ciliopathies.
**Authors:** Salehi O, Mack H, Colville D, Lewis D, Savige J
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00467-023-06096-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00467-023-06096-5)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2024 May;39(5):1327-1346. doi: 10.1007/s00467-023-06096-5.
Epub  2023 Aug 30.

Ocular manifestations of renal ciliopathies.

Salehi O(1), Mack H(2), Colville D(2), Lewis D(3), Savige J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (Melbourne Health and Northern Health), The University 
of Melbourne, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, VIC, 3050, Australia.
(2)University Department of Surgery (Ophthalmology), Royal Victorian Eye and Ear 
Hospital, East Melbourne, VIC, 3002, Australia.
(3)Nephrology Department, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, NSW, 
2145, Australia.
(4)Department of Medicine (Melbourne Health and Northern Health), The University 
of Melbourne, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, VIC, 3050, Australia. 
jasavige@unimelb.edu.au.

Renal ciliopathies are a common cause of kidney failure in children and adults, 
and this study reviewed their ocular associations. Genes affected in renal 
ciliopathies were identified from the Genomics England Panels. Ocular 
associations were identified from Medline and OMIM, and the genes additionally 
examined for expression in the human retina ( 
https://www.proteinatlas.org/humanproteome/tissue ) and for an ocular phenotype 
in mouse models ( http://www.informatics.jax.org/ ). Eighty-two of the 86 
pediatric-onset renal ciliopathies (95%) have an ocular phenotype, including 
inherited retinal degeneration, oculomotor disorders, and coloboma. Diseases 
associated with pathogenic variants in ANK6, MAPKBP1, NEK8, and TCTN1 have no 
reported ocular manifestations, as well as low retinal expression and no ocular 
features in mouse models. Ocular abnormalities are not associated with the most 
common adult-onset "cystic" kidney diseases, namely, autosomal dominant (AD) 
polycystic kidney disease and the AD tubulointerstitial kidney diseases (ADTKD). 
However, other kidney syndromes with cysts have ocular features including 
papillorenal syndrome (optic disc dysplasia), Hereditary Angiopathy Nephropathy, 
Aneurysms and muscle Cramps (HANAC) (tortuous retinal vessels), tuberous 
sclerosis (retinal hamartomas), von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (retinal 
hemangiomas), and Alport syndrome (lenticonus, fleck retinopathy). Ocular 
abnormalities are associated with many pediatric-onset renal ciliopathies but 
are uncommon in adult-onset cystic kidney disease. However the demonstration of 
ocular manifestations may be helpful diagnostically and the features may require 
monitoring or treatment.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-023-06096-5
PMCID: PMC10942941
PMID: 37644229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: OS was a medical student who undertook this 
research project as part of his degree. None of the authors has a financial or 
non-financial Conflict of Interest to declare.