---
reference_id: "PMID:29100265"
title: Nano-drug for Pain Medicine.
authors:
- Hasanzadeh-Kiabi F
journal: Drug Res (Stuttg)
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1055/s-0043-120661
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nano-drug for Pain Medicine.
**Authors:** Hasanzadeh-Kiabi F
**Journal:** Drug Res (Stuttg) (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0043-120661](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0043-120661)

## Content

1. Drug Res (Stuttg). 2018 May;68(5):245-249. doi: 10.1055/s-0043-120661. Epub
2017  Nov 3.

Nano-drug for Pain Medicine.

Hasanzadeh-Kiabi F(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Anesthesiology, Mazandaran University of 
Medical Sciences, Sari, Iran.

Pain is commonly categorized into two diverse groups: acute pain, characterized 
by early onset and last for a very short time; while chronic pain, characterized 
by a prolonged pain for least 3 months' duration. Timely and immediate 
management of critical pain is critical in reducing its aggravation to chronic 
pain. There has been successful application of nano-technology, nano-medicine to 
the treatment and management of pain both in clinical and experimental studies 
like the fabrication of nano-formulated liposomes to deliver drugs for pain 
therapy, formulation of non- steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). However 
safety issues related with NSAIDs have impelled the fabrication and the design 
of new drug formulations that reduces side effects and sustain efficacy. This 
review will give a concise summary on the available studies on the application 
of nano-formulated drugs designed for pain treatment and management.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0043-120661
PMID: 29100265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest