---
reference_id: "PMID:36699536"
title: "Low-grade epilepsy-associated neuroepithelial tumors: Tumor spectrum and diagnosis based on genetic alterations."
authors:
- Xie M
- Wang X
- Duan Z
- Luan G
journal: Front Neurosci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2022.1071314
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Low-grade epilepsy-associated neuroepithelial tumors: Tumor spectrum and diagnosis based on genetic alterations.
**Authors:** Xie M, Wang X, Duan Z, Luan G
**Journal:** Front Neurosci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnins.2022.1071314](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2022.1071314)

## Content

1. Front Neurosci. 2023 Jan 9;16:1071314. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2022.1071314. 
eCollection 2022.

Low-grade epilepsy-associated neuroepithelial tumors: Tumor spectrum and 
diagnosis based on genetic alterations.

Xie M(1)(2), Wang X(1)(2), Duan Z(3), Luan G(1)(2)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Epilepsy Center, Sanbo Brain Hospital, Capital 
Medical University, Beijing, China.
(2)Beijing Key Laboratory of Epilepsy, Sanbo Brain Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, Sanbo Brain Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, China.
(4)Beijing Institute for Brain Disorders, Capital Medical University, Beijing, 
China.
(5)Chinese Institute for Brain Research, Beijing, China.

Brain tumors can always result in seizures when involving the cortical neurons 
or their circuits, and they were found to be one of the most common etiologies 
of intractable focal seizures. The low-grade epilepsy-associated neuroepithelial 
tumors (LEAT), as a special group of brain tumors associated with seizures, 
share common clinicopathological features, such as seizure onsets at a young 
age, a predilection for involving the temporal lobe, and an almost benign 
course, including a rather slow growth pattern and thus a long-term history of 
seizures. Ganglioglioma (GG) and dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumor (DNET) 
are the typical representatives of LEATs. Surgical treatments with complete 
resection of tumors and related epileptogenic zones are deemed the optimal way 
to achieve postoperative seizure control and lifetime recurrence-free survival 
in patients with LEATs. Although the term LEAT was originally introduced in 
2003, debates on the tumor spectrum and the diagnosis or classification of LEAT 
entities are still confusing among epileptologists and neuropathologists. In 
this review, we would further discuss these questions, especially based on the 
updated classification of central nervous system tumors in the WHO fifth edition 
and the latest molecular genetic findings of tumor entities in LEAT entities.

Copyright © 2023 Xie, Wang, Duan and Luan.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2022.1071314
PMCID: PMC9868944
PMID: 36699536

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.