---
reference_id: "PMID:11963614"
title: Breathless.
authors:
- Dominguez OJ Jr
journal: Emerg Med Serv
year: '2002'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Breathless.
**Authors:** Dominguez OJ Jr
**Journal:** Emerg Med Serv (2002)

## Content

1. Emerg Med Serv. 2002 Apr;31(4):87.

Breathless.

Dominguez OJ Jr(1).

Author information:
(1)Brevard County Fire Rescue, EMS Program, Health First Training Center, 
Brevard County, FL, USA.

This case presented the scenario of a patient who had severe bronchospasm from 
an unknown etiology. Further, she had difficulty speaking and denied any past 
medical history, which made a diagnosis more difficult. Prehospital providers 
were challenged with determining the differential diagnosis for bronchospasm and 
hypoxemia. Was the patient experiencing an anaphylactic reaction, acute 
asthmatic attack or something else? The key here, once again, is conducting a 
thorough assessment and patient history. Remember, all that wheezes is not 
asthma; therefore, providers in this case had to determine if the patient was 
suffering something such as anaphylaxis, asthma, bronchitis, pneumonia or even 
congestive heart failure (CHF). Typically, anaphylaxis and asthma affect 
ventilation, not oxygenation, so until the late stages of anaphylaxis or asthma, 
the patient will have difficulty moving air, but will be oxygenating OK. We 
understand that many respiratory conditions can cause wheezing, but CHF? Yes: As 
left ventricular function diminishes and leads to increased pulmonary pressure, 
serum begins to leak out of the pulmonary vessels and into the interstitial 
space. As the interstitial pressure increases, it causes narrowing of the 
bronchioles, and air traveling through the narrowed bronchioles causes the 
wheezing sound. Fluid may also be leaking out of the pulmonary capillaries and 
occupying space in the alveolar sacs. When the interstitial pressure is high and 
the bronchioles continue to narrow, providers may initially hear only the 
wheezing and not the crackles from the smaller airways. In these conditions, 
oxygen is not exchanged adequately into the blood, and the patient becomes 
hypoxemic. Good assessment and patient history will guide the EMS provider to 
the cause of bronchospasm. For example, does the patient have a history of 
asthma? If yes, asthma is likely to be the cause. Does the patient have any 
rash, hives or swelling? If yes, anaphylaxis is likely the cause. Is the patient 
elderly, and does he/she show pedal edema, JVD, hypoxemia and/or distended neck 
veins? If yes, CHF may be the cause. [table: see text] There are questions 
regarding the use of bronchodilators in patients suffering CHF. If a CHF patient 
is wheezing (bronchospasm), then a beta-2 selective breathing treatment may be 
appropriate, along with nitrates and diuretics. Oxygenation is the critical 
problem in CHF, and hypoxemia will continue to worsen cardiac function. 
Remember, both bronchoconstriction and alveolar sacs filling with fluid will 
impair oxygenation of the RBCs and ultimately the vital organs. Focused 
prehospital management of CHF is aggressive in restoring oxygenation. For 
example, many agencies are now using oxygen, nitrates, ACE inhibitors and CPAP. 
By better understanding the pathophysiology of respiratory emergencies and their 
differential diagnosis, we will improve patient outcomes.

PMID: 11963614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]