---
reference_id: "PMID:39435148"
title: Establishment of an ulcerative colitis model using colon organoids derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells.
authors:
- Yokoi F
- Deguchi S
- Watanabe Y
- Takayama K
journal: iScience
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2024.111049
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Establishment of an ulcerative colitis model using colon organoids derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells.
**Authors:** Yokoi F, Deguchi S, Watanabe Y, Takayama K
**Journal:** iScience (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.isci.2024.111049](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2024.111049)

## Content

1. iScience. 2024 Sep 26;27(10):111049. doi: 10.1016/j.isci.2024.111049.
eCollection 2024 Oct 18.

Establishment of an ulcerative colitis model using colon organoids derived from
human induced pluripotent stem cells.

Yokoi F(1)(2), Deguchi S(1), Watanabe Y(1), Takayama K(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for iPS Cell Research and Application (CiRA), Kyoto University, Kyoto
606-8507, Japan.
(2)Department of Human Health Sciences, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.
(3)AMED-CREST, Japan Agency for Medical Research and Development (AMED), Tokyo
100-0004, Japan.

The etiology of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is complex, with much room for
a greater understanding and development of improved therapies. Therefore,
establishing a reliable IBD model is crucial for future advancements. In this
study, human induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cell-derived colon organoids
(hiPSC-COs) were treated with a combination of tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNF-α), interferon-gamma (IFN-γ), and interleukin (IL)-1β (3 cytokines [3CK]),
known to be elevated in the serum of IBD patients. Inflammatory responses in
stromal cells and damage to intestinal epithelial cells were observed in the
3CK-treated hiPSC-COs. Comparison of molecular signatures of 3CK-treated
hiPSC-COs with those of ulcerative colitis (UC) patient's colon revealed that
3CK-treated hiPSC-COs resemble UC patient's colon. Furthermore, the elevated
production of inflammatory cytokines observed in 3CK-treated hiPSC-COs was
attenuated by treatment with tofacitinib. Our UC model will be an essential tool
to understand its pathologic mechanisms and identify effective therapeutic
approaches.

© 2024 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.isci.2024.111049
PMCID: PMC11492162
PMID: 39435148

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
