---
reference_id: "PMID:40602718"
title: Failed cellular surveillance enables pathogenic matrix deposition in a COL2A1-related osteoarthritis.
authors:
- Yammine KM
- Mirda Abularach S
- Xiong M
- Kim SY
- Bikovtseva AA
- Butty VL
- Schiavoni RP
- Bateman JF
- Lamandé SR
- Shoulders MD
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2025.110436
keywords:
- Humans
- "Collagen Type II/genetics, metabolism"
- "Osteoarthritis/metabolism, pathology, genetics"
- "Chondrocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- "Extracellular Matrix/metabolism, pathology, genetics"
- "Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- "Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism, pathology"
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Cell Differentiation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Failed cellular surveillance enables pathogenic matrix deposition in a COL2A1-related osteoarthritis.
**Authors:** Yammine KM, Mirda Abularach S, Xiong M, Kim SY, Bikovtseva AA, Butty VL, Schiavoni RP, Bateman JF, Lamandé SR, Shoulders MD
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jbc.2025.110436](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbc.2025.110436)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2025 Aug;301(8):110436. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2025.110436. Epub 2025
 Jun 30.

Failed cellular surveillance enables pathogenic matrix deposition in a 
COL2A1-related osteoarthritis.

Yammine KM(1), Mirda Abularach S(1), Xiong M(1), Kim SY(1), Bikovtseva AA(1), 
Butty VL(2), Schiavoni RP(3), Bateman JF(4), Lamandé SR(5), Shoulders MD(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, United States.
(2)BioMicro Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, United States.
(3)Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States.
(4)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia; 
Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.
(5)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia; 
Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia; The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Stem Cell Medicine (reNEW), 
Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(6)Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, United States; Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States; 
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States. 
Electronic address: mshoulde@mit.edu.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2025 Jun 11:2024.11.07.622468. doi: 10.1101/2024.11.07.622468.

Mutations in the COL2A1 gene, encoding procollagen-II, cause various 
chondrodysplasias, including precocious osteoarthritis with mild 
spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia engendered by the p.Arg719Cys substitution. The 
molecular mechanisms underlying these disorders remain incompletely understood, 
largely owing to the absence of models faithfully recapitulating the human 
disease. Here, we developed an in vitro human cartilage model using isogenic 
induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) lines carrying either wild-type or 
Arg719Cys COL2A1. Directed differentiation into chondrocytes yielded cartilage 
tissues that were analyzed by immunohistochemistry, electron microscopy, 
SDS-PAGE, and RNA-sequencing. Tissues derived from Arg719Cys heterozygotes 
displayed a deficient matrix, closely reflecting the human disease phenotype. 
Arg719Cys procollagen-II was excessively post-translationally modified and 
partially retained within the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), leading to ER 
distention. Notably, despite introduction of an aberrant cysteine 
residue-expected to engage redox-sensitive folding and quality control 
pathways-Arg719Cys procollagen-II was not detectably recognized by the ER 
proteostasis network. The resulting inability to mount a quality control 
response, including absent activation of the unfolded protein response, 
indicates a failure in cellular surveillance. As a result, malformed 
procollagen-II both accumulates intracellularly and is secreted, contributing to 
the deposition of a structurally compromised extracellular matrix that drives 
disease pathology. The iPSC-derived cartilage model presented here provides a 
genetically defined, expandable, and human-based system for dissecting 
mechanisms of failed proteostasis in collagenopathies. These findings shed light 
on the types of substitutions in procollagen that cells do or do not recognize, 
and underscore the therapeutic potential of targeting cellular surveillance and 
collagen quality control pathways in COL2A1-related disorders and beyond.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2025.110436
PMCID: PMC12340388
PMID: 40602718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.