---
reference_id: "PMID:22383894"
title: Genome-wide association study identifies chromosome 10q24.32 variants associated with arsenic metabolism and toxicity phenotypes in Bangladesh.
authors:
- Pierce BL
- Kibriya MG
- Tong L
- Jasmine F
- Argos M
- Roy S
- Paul-Brutus R
- Rahaman R
- Rakibuz-Zaman M
- Parvez F
- Ahmed A
- Quasem I
- Hore SK
- Alam S
- Islam T
- Slavkovich V
- Gamble MV
- Yunus M
- Rahman M
- Baron JA
- Graziano JH
- Ahsan H
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002522
keywords:
- Arsenic/metabolism
- Arsenic Poisoning/genetics
- Arsenicals/metabolism
- Bangladesh
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 10/genetics"
- Environmental Exposure
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Humans
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Water Pollutants, Chemical/toxicity"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genome-wide association study identifies chromosome 10q24.32 variants associated with arsenic metabolism and toxicity phenotypes in Bangladesh.
**Authors:** Pierce BL, Kibriya MG, Tong L, Jasmine F, Argos M, Roy S, Paul-Brutus R, Rahaman R, Rakibuz-Zaman M, Parvez F, Ahmed A, Quasem I, Hore SK, Alam S, Islam T, Slavkovich V, Gamble MV, Yunus M, Rahman M, Baron JA, Graziano JH, Ahsan H
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1002522](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1002522)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(2):e1002522. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002522. Epub 2012
Feb  23.

Genome-wide association study identifies chromosome 10q24.32 variants associated
with arsenic metabolism and toxicity phenotypes in Bangladesh.

Pierce BL(1), Kibriya MG, Tong L, Jasmine F, Argos M, Roy S, Paul-Brutus R,
Rahaman R, Rakibuz-Zaman M, Parvez F, Ahmed A, Quasem I, Hore SK, Alam S, Islam
T, Slavkovich V, Gamble MV, Yunus M, Rahman M, Baron JA, Graziano JH, Ahsan H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Studies, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois,
United States of America.

Arsenic contamination of drinking water is a major public health issue in many
countries, increasing risk for a wide array of diseases, including cancer. There
is inter-individual variation in arsenic metabolism efficiency and
susceptibility to arsenic toxicity; however, the basis of this variation is not
well understood. Here, we have performed the first genome-wide association study
(GWAS) of arsenic-related metabolism and toxicity phenotypes to improve our
understanding of the mechanisms by which arsenic affects health. Using data on
urinary arsenic metabolite concentrations and approximately 300,000 genome-wide
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for 1,313 arsenic-exposed Bangladeshi
individuals, we identified genome-wide significant association signals
(P<5×10(-8)) for percentages of both monomethylarsonic acid (MMA) and
dimethylarsinic acid (DMA) near the AS3MT gene (arsenite methyltransferase;
10q24.32), with five genetic variants showing independent associations. In a
follow-up analysis of 1,085 individuals with arsenic-induced premalignant skin
lesions (the classical sign of arsenic toxicity) and 1,794 controls, we show
that one of these five variants (rs9527) is also associated with skin lesion
risk (P = 0.0005). Using a subset of individuals with prospectively measured
arsenic (n = 769), we show that rs9527 interacts with arsenic to influence
incident skin lesion risk (P = 0.01). Expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL)
analyses of genome-wide expression data from 950 individual's lymphocyte RNA
suggest that several of our lead SNPs represent cis-eQTLs for AS3MT
(P = 10(-12)) and neighboring gene C10orf32 (P = 10(-44)), which are involved in
C10orf32-AS3MT read-through transcription. This is the largest and most
comprehensive genomic investigation of arsenic metabolism and toxicity to date,
the only GWAS of any arsenic-related trait, and the first study to implicate
10q24.32 variants in both arsenic metabolism and arsenical skin lesion risk. The
observed patterns of associations suggest that MMA% and DMA% have distinct
genetic determinants and support the hypothesis that DMA is the less toxic of
these two methylated arsenic species. These results have potential translational
implications for the prevention and treatment of arsenic-associated toxicities
worldwide.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002522
PMCID: PMC3285587
PMID: 22383894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
