---
reference_id: "PMID:36080191"
title: Poly-(lactic-co-glycolic) Acid Nanoparticles Entrapping Pterostilbene for Targeting Aspergillus Section Nigri.
authors:
- Orekhova A
- Palocci C
- Chronopoulou L
- De Angelis G
- Badiali C
- Petruccelli V
- "D'Angeli S"
- Pasqua G
- Simonetti G
journal: Molecules
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/molecules27175424
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Poly-(lactic-co-glycolic) Acid Nanoparticles Entrapping Pterostilbene for Targeting Aspergillus Section Nigri.
**Authors:** Orekhova A, Palocci C, Chronopoulou L, De Angelis G, Badiali C, Petruccelli V, D'Angeli S, Pasqua G, Simonetti G
**Journal:** Molecules (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/molecules27175424](https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules27175424)

## Content

1. Molecules. 2022 Aug 25;27(17):5424. doi: 10.3390/molecules27175424.

Poly-(lactic-co-glycolic) Acid Nanoparticles Entrapping Pterostilbene for 
Targeting Aspergillus Section Nigri.

Orekhova A(1), Palocci C(2)(3), Chronopoulou L(2), De Angelis G(4), Badiali 
C(4), Petruccelli V(4), D'Angeli S(4), Pasqua G(4), Simonetti G(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health and Infectious Diseases, Sapienza University of 
Rome, P.le A. Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Sapienza University of Rome, P.le A. Moro 5, 00185 
Rome, Italy.
(3)Research Center for Applied Sciences to the Safeguard of Environment and 
Cultural Heritage (CIABC), P.le A. Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Environmental Biology, Sapienza University of Rome, P.le A. 
Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy.

Poly-(lactic-co-glycolic) acid (PLGA) is a biodegradable, biosafe, and 
biocompatible copolymer. The Aspergillus section Nigri causes otomycosis 
localized in the external auditory canal. In this research, Aspergillus 
brasiliensis, a species belonging to the Nigri section, was tested. Coumarin 6 
and pterostilbene loaded in poly-(lactic-co-glycolic) acid nanoparticles 
(PLGA-coumarin6-NPs and PLGA-PTB-NPs) were tested for fungal cell uptake and 
antifungal ability against A. brasiliensis biofilm, respectively. Moreover, the 
activity of PLGA-PTB-NPs in inhibiting the A. brasiliensis infection was tested 
using Galleria mellonella larvae. The results showed a fluorescence signal, 
after 50 nm PLGA-coumarin6-NPs treatment, inside A. brasiliensis hyphae and 
along the entire thickness of the biofilm matrix, which was indicative of an 
efficient NP uptake. Regarding antifungal activity, a reduction in A. 
brasiliensis biofilm formation and mature biofilm with PLGA-PTB-NPs has been 
demonstrated. Moreover, in vivo experiments showed a significant reduction in 
mortality of infected larvae after injection of PLGA-PTB-NPs compared to free 
PTB at the same concentration. In conclusion, the PLGA-NPs system can increase 
the bioavailability of PTB in Aspergillus section Nigri biofilm by overcoming 
the biofilm matrix barrier and delivering PTB to fungal cells.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules27175424
PMCID: PMC9458066
PMID: 36080191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.