---
reference_id: "PMID:20513432"
title: Simple combinations of lineage-determining transcription factors prime cis-regulatory elements required for macrophage and B cell identities.
authors:
- Heinz S
- Benner C
- Spann N
- Bertolino E
- Lin YC
- Laslo P
- Cheng JX
- Murre C
- Singh H
- Glass CK
journal: Mol Cell
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.05.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Simple combinations of lineage-determining transcription factors prime cis-regulatory elements required for macrophage and B cell identities.
**Authors:** Heinz S, Benner C, Spann N, Bertolino E, Lin YC, Laslo P, Cheng JX, Murre C, Singh H, Glass CK
**Journal:** Mol Cell (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molcel.2010.05.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molcel.2010.05.004)

## Content

1. Mol Cell. 2010 May 28;38(4):576-89. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.05.004.

Simple combinations of lineage-determining transcription factors prime 
cis-regulatory elements required for macrophage and B cell identities.

Heinz S(1), Benner C, Spann N, Bertolino E, Lin YC, Laslo P, Cheng JX, Murre C, 
Singh H, Glass CK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Genome-scale studies have revealed extensive, cell type-specific colocalization 
of transcription factors, but the mechanisms underlying this phenomenon remain 
poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate in macrophages and B cells that 
collaborative interactions of the common factor PU.1 with small sets of 
macrophage- or B cell lineage-determining transcription factors establish 
cell-specific binding sites that are associated with the majority of 
promoter-distal H3K4me1-marked genomic regions. PU.1 binding initiates 
nucleosome remodeling, followed by H3K4 monomethylation at large numbers of 
genomic regions associated with both broadly and specifically expressed genes. 
These locations serve as beacons for additional factors, exemplified by liver X 
receptors, which drive both cell-specific gene expression and signal-dependent 
responses. Together with analyses of transcription factor binding and H3K4me1 
patterns in other cell types, these studies suggest that simple combinations of 
lineage-determining transcription factors can specify the genomic sites 
ultimately responsible for both cell identity and cell type-specific responses 
to diverse signaling inputs.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.05.004
PMCID: PMC2898526
PMID: 20513432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]