---
reference_id: "PMID:40498799"
title: The mysterious link between migraine aura and migraine headache.
authors:
- Hougaard A
- Ayata C
- Brennan KC
- van den Maagdenberg AMJM
- Ashina M
journal: PLoS Biol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3003168
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Mice
- Cortical Spreading Depression/physiology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Migraine Disorders/physiopathology
- "Migraine with Aura/physiopathology, drug therapy"
- Nociceptors/physiology
- Trigeminal Nerve/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The mysterious link between migraine aura and migraine headache.
**Authors:** Hougaard A, Ayata C, Brennan KC, van den Maagdenberg AMJM, Ashina M
**Journal:** PLoS Biol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pbio.3003168](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3003168)

## Content

1. PLoS Biol. 2025 Jun 11;23(6):e3003168. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3003168. 
eCollection 2025 Jun.

The mysterious link between migraine aura and migraine headache.

Hougaard A(1)(2), Ayata C(3), Brennan KC(4), van den Maagdenberg AMJM(5)(6), 
Ashina M(2)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Copenhagen University Hospital - Herlev and 
Gentofte, Herlev, Denmark.
(2)Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Stroke Service, Department of Neurology, and Neurovascular Research Unit, 
Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Charlestown, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(4)Headache Physiology Laboratory, Department of Neurology, University of Utah, 
Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(6)Department of Neurology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(7)Department of Neurology, Danish Headache Center, Copenhagen University 
Hospital-Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(8)Danish Knowledge Center on Headache Disorders, Glostrup, Denmark.

Migraine aura - manifesting as transient, neurological disturbances - presents a 
complex and unresolved relationship with migraine headache. Cortical spreading 
depolarization (SD), recognized as the mechanism underlying aura symptoms, has 
been shown to trigger head pain through activation of trigeminal nociceptors in 
animal models. However, recent clinical data challenge the notion that aura 
causes migraine headache in patients. In this Essay, we critically examine the 
pathophysiology of migraine aura and migraine headache, exploring evidence from 
clinical observations, (genetic) mouse models, and pharmacological studies. We 
also discuss the role of SD, the trigeminovascular system, and the impact of 
pharmacological agents that both trigger and treat migraine attacks. Our essay 
highlights the complexities and conflicting data surrounding the interplay 
between aura and headache, emphasizing the need for further research to unravel 
this mystery and improve therapeutic strategies for individuals with migraine.

Copyright: © 2025 Hougaard et al. This is an open access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.3003168
PMCID: PMC12157119
PMID: 40498799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal's policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: AH is Associate 
Editor of Headache: The Journal of Head and Face Pain and Chair of the Headache 
and Vascular Disorders Special Interest Group of the International Headache 
Society. He has received honoraria for lecturing from Abbvie, Pfizer, and 
Lundbeck. CA: NIH (R01NS129192) Sponsored Research Agreement, AbbVie Visiting 
Fellowship, Charite, Berlin. KCB has received funding from NIH NINDS (R37 
NS102978, R61 NS125153). He has also received honoraria for consulting from 
Abbvie. AMJMvdM has received research funding from Delphian Therapeutics and 
Praxis Precision Medicine. MA has received personal fees from AbbVie, Amgen, 
AstraZeneca, Eli Lilly, GlaxoSmithKline, Lundbeck, Novartis, Pfizer, and Teva 
Pharmaceuticals for consulting, advisory board participation, and speaker 
honoraria, outside of the submitted work. M.A. also serves as an Associate 
Editor of Brain and The Journal of Headache and Pain.