---
reference_id: "PMID:33301619"
title: Chronic Kidney Disease-Induced Vascular Calcification Impairs Bone Metabolism.
authors:
- Mace ML
- Gravesen E
- Nordholm A
- Egstrand S
- Morevati M
- Nielsen C
- Kjaer A
- Behets G
- "D'Haese P"
- Olgaard K
- Lewin E
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.4203
keywords:
- Animals
- Bone and Bones
- Kidney
- Rats
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic"
- Vascular Calcification
- Wnt Signaling Pathway
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic Kidney Disease-Induced Vascular Calcification Impairs Bone Metabolism.
**Authors:** Mace ML, Gravesen E, Nordholm A, Egstrand S, Morevati M, Nielsen C, Kjaer A, Behets G, D'Haese P, Olgaard K, Lewin E
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.4203](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.4203)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2021 Mar;36(3):510-522. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.4203. Epub 2020
Dec  10.

Chronic Kidney Disease-Induced Vascular Calcification Impairs Bone Metabolism.

Mace ML(1), Gravesen E(1), Nordholm A(1)(2), Egstrand S(1)(2), Morevati M(1), 
Nielsen C(3), Kjaer A(3), Behets G(4), D'Haese P(4), Olgaard K(1), Lewin 
E(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Herlev Hospital, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Department of Clinical Physiology, Nuclear Medicine and PET and Cluster for 
Molecular Imaging, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Laboratory of Pathophysiology, University 
of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.

An association between lower bone mineral density (BMD) and presence of vascular 
calcification (VC) has been reported in several studies. Chronic kidney disease 
(CKD) causes detrimental disturbances in the mineral balance, bone turnover, and 
development of severe VC. Our group has previously demonstrated expression of 
Wnt inhibitors in calcified arteries of CKD rats. Therefore, we hypothesized 
that the CKD-induced VC via this pathway signals to bone and induces bone loss. 
To address this novel hypothesis, we developed a new animal model using isogenic 
aorta transplantation (ATx). Severely calcified aortas from uremic rats were 
transplanted into healthy rats (uremic ATx). Transplantation of normal aortas 
into healthy rats (normal ATx) and age-matched rats (control) served as control 
groups. Trabecular tissue mineral density, as measured by μCT, was significantly 
lower in uremic ATx rats compared with both control groups. Uremic ATx rats 
showed a significant upregulation of the mineralization inhibitors osteopontin 
and progressive ankylosis protein homolog in bone. In addition, we found 
significant changes in bone mRNA levels of several genes related to 
extracellular matrix, bone turnover, and Wnt signaling in uremic ATx rats, with 
no difference between normal ATx and control. The bone histomorphometry analysis 
showed significant lower osteoid area in uremic ATx compared with normal ATx 
along with a trend toward fewer osteoblasts as well as more osteoclasts in the 
erosion lacunae. Uremic ATx and normal ATx had similar trabecular number and 
thickness. The bone formation rate did not differ between the three groups. 
Plasma biochemistry, including sclerostin, kidney, and mineral parameters, were 
similar between all three groups. ex vivo cultures of aorta from uremic rats 
showed high secretion of the Wnt inhibitor sclerostin. In conclusion, the 
presence of VC lowers BMD, impairs bone metabolism, and affects several pathways 
in bone. The present results prove the existence of a vasculature to bone tissue 
cross-talk. © 2020 The Authors. Journal of Bone and Mineral Research published 
by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Society for Bone and Mineral 
Research (ASBMR).

© 2020 The Authors. Journal of Bone and Mineral Research published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Society for Bone and Mineral Research 
(ASBMR).

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.4203
PMCID: PMC7988613
PMID: 33301619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]