---
reference_id: "PMID:34776127"
title: Most common infant health concerns in osteopathic practices in Germany. A survey.
authors:
- Schwerla F
- Daake B
- Moeckel E
- Resch KL
journal: J Bodyw Mov Ther
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.jbmt.2021.07.038
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Most common infant health concerns in osteopathic practices in Germany. A survey.
**Authors:** Schwerla F, Daake B, Moeckel E, Resch KL
**Journal:** J Bodyw Mov Ther (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jbmt.2021.07.038](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbmt.2021.07.038)

## Content

1. J Bodyw Mov Ther. 2021 Oct;28:114-120. doi: 10.1016/j.jbmt.2021.07.038. Epub 
2021 Aug 8.

Most common infant health concerns in osteopathic practices in Germany. A 
survey.

Schwerla F(1), Daake B(2), Moeckel E(3), Resch KL(4).

Author information:
(1)German Academy of Osteopathy, Gauting, Germany. Electronic address: 
f.schwerla@german-afo.de.
(2)Practice for Osteopathy, Bonn, Germany. Electronic address: 
boris.daake@me.com.
(3)Practice for Osteopathy, Hamburg, Germany. Electronic address: 
moeckelinfo@gmx.de.
(4)German Institute for Health Research (DIG), Bad Elster, Germany. Electronic 
address: K.L.Resch@t-online.de.

BACKGROUND: In Germany, more parents have been seeking help from osteopaths for 
their infants and children in recent years. This implies an increasing demand of 
reliable evidence regarding the effectiveness of osteopathic intervention for 
this group.
OBJECTIVE: To identify the 'typical' (most common) health concerns of parents 
when presenting their infants (age 0-12 months) in pediatric osteopathic 
practices.
METHODS: For the purpose of this survey, well-trained osteopaths who specialize 
in the treatment of children and infants were selected. A documentation form 
containing a list of the likely most common infant health problems, developed by 
means of systematic literature analyses, was provided to experienced osteopaths 
to assess which health problems were seen most frequently.
RESULTS: Eighty-one osteopaths were contacted, of which 64 (79 %) responded and 
returned the documentation form. Nine documentation forms could not be 
evaluated. The remaining 55 documentation forms included information on 2833 
health concerns. Quantitatively, there was no dominant health problem, but five 
problems were found to be common: 21 % of the cases were idiopathic infant 
asymmetry, 17 % were plagiocephaly, 16 % were excessive crying, and 14 % were 
feeding and sleep disorders. All other problems were observed as far less 
frequent. In addition, osteopaths reported 423 other health concerns that were 
not specified in the documentation form.
CONCLUSIONS: In this survey, infants that were presented in osteopathic 
practices often had one or more of those five health problems mentioned above. A 
large observational trial is currently underway to document changes observed 
during osteopathic treatment of these health problems.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbmt.2021.07.038
PMID: 34776127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
have no conflicts of interest to declare. No benefits in any form have been or 
will be received from a commercial party related directly or indirectly to the 
subject of this manuscript.