---
reference_id: "PMID:30079710"
title: "[Multimodal Imaging of a Case of Acute Annular Outer Retinopathy]."
authors:
- Sekiryu T
- Shintake H
- Kasai A
- Ojima A
journal: Nippon Ganka Gakkai Zasshi
year: '2016'
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Multimodal Imaging
- Ophthalmoscopy
- Retinal Diseases/diagnostic imaging
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Visual Acuity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Multimodal Imaging of a Case of Acute Annular Outer Retinopathy].
**Authors:** Sekiryu T, Shintake H, Kasai A, Ojima A
**Journal:** Nippon Ganka Gakkai Zasshi (2016)

## Content

1. Nippon Ganka Gakkai Zasshi. 2016 Dec;120(12):837-45.

[Multimodal Imaging of a Case of Acute Annular Outer Retinopathy].

[Article in Japanese]

Sekiryu T, Shintake H, Kasai A, Ojima A.

Background: Acute annular retinopathy (AAOR) is a rare entity showing grayish
spots with annular lesions. We report the clinical characteristics of a patient
with AAOR derived by using multimodal imaging including spectral-domain optical
coherence tomography (OCT), fundus autofluorescence (FAF), and an adaptive
optics fundus camera. Case: A 56-year-old man who had fever one month and a half
before presenting. He noticed bilateral visual loss after lowering of fever.
Clinical findings: Grayish white rings of different sizes were seen in the
posterior fundus. Margin of the lesion showed hyperautofluorescence. OCT
demonstrated an indistinct ellipsoid zone, disruption of external limiting
membrane, and bulging of the retinal pigment epithelium in the annular lesions.
We found hyperreflective foci in the inner retina and an indistinct
interdigitation zone on the OCT images and indistinct cone mosaic patterns on
the AO images at an ophthalmoscopically normal fovea in the left eye.
Conclusion: Multimodal imaging showed the damage in the photoreceptors and the
retinal pigment epithelium at the annular lesions. OCT and AO imaging can
demonstrate abnormal findings in ophthalmoscopically normal areas in eyes with
AAOR.

PMID: 30079710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
