---
reference_id: "PMID:19601990"
title: The mutation spectrum associated with type 3 von Willebrand disease in a cohort of patients from the north west of England.
authors:
- Sutherland MS
- Keeney S
- Bolton-Maggs PH
- Hay CR
- Will A
- Cumming AM
journal: Haemophilia
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2516.2009.02059.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The mutation spectrum associated with type 3 von Willebrand disease in a cohort of patients from the north west of England.
**Authors:** Sutherland MS, Keeney S, Bolton-Maggs PH, Hay CR, Will A, Cumming AM
**Journal:** Haemophilia (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2516.2009.02059.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2516.2009.02059.x)

## Content

1. Haemophilia. 2009 Sep;15(5):1048-57. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2516.2009.02059.x.
Epub  2009 Jul 10.

The mutation spectrum associated with type 3 von Willebrand disease in a cohort 
of patients from the north west of England.

Sutherland MS(1), Keeney S, Bolton-Maggs PH, Hay CR, Will A, Cumming AM.

Author information:
(1)University Department of Haematology, Manchester Royal Infirmary, Manchester, 
UK.

Type 3 von Willebrand disease (VWD) is a severe autosomal recessive inherited 
bleeding disorder. In affected individuals the underlying von Willebrand factor 
gene (VWF) mutations frequently remain uncharacterized. The aim of this study 
was to investigate the molecular basis of type 3 VWD in patients (11 Caucasians 
and 9 of Asian origin) attending the haemophilia centres at Central Manchester 
NHS Trust. A combination of DNA sequencing of VWF genomic and complementary DNA 
was performed to identify mutations in the patient cohort. Fifteen different VWF 
mutations were identified at the genomic DNA level: two gene conversion events, 
three nonsense, three frameshift, one missense, two splice site, one 
insertion-deletion and three deletion mutations. Homozygosity or compound 
heterozygosity for mutations was present in 15 of the 20 patients. In the 
remaining five individuals, heterozygosity for a single VWF mutation was 
identified in four cases and one patient had no detectable VWF mutation. 
Analysis of platelet-derived VWF RNA from these five individuals revealed 
heterozygosity for a deletion of exons 4 and 5 in four cases. The remaining 
patient was heterozygous for a three base deletion which had already been 
identified at the DNA level. Overall the observed VWF genotype explained the 
phenotype in 18 of the 20 patients investigated. In genetic studies in type 3 
VWD, if VWF mutations are not detected at the DNA level, RNA analysis should be 
performed to search for intronic mutations, heterozygous deletions or aberrant 
splicing/post-transcriptional events. However, this may still not explain all 
cases of previously phenotypically diagnosed type 3 VWD.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2516.2009.02059.x
PMID: 19601990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]