---
reference_id: "PMID:32937045"
title: "Two-Year, Randomized, Controlled Trial of Belimumab in Lupus Nephritis."
authors:
- Furie R
- Rovin BH
- Houssiau F
- Malvar A
- Teng YKO
- Contreras G
- Amoura Z
- Yu X
- Mok CC
- Santiago MB
- Saxena A
- Green Y
- Ji B
- Kleoudis C
- Burriss SW
- Barnett C
- Roth DA
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2001180
keywords:
- Adult
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Azathioprine/therapeutic use
- Creatinine/urine
- Cyclophosphamide/therapeutic use
- Double-Blind Method
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Enzyme Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Female
- Glomerular Filtration Rate
- Humans
- "Immunosuppressive Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Infusions, Intravenous"
- Intention to Treat Analysis
- "Lupus Nephritis/drug therapy, mortality"
- Male
- Mycophenolic Acid/therapeutic use
- Remission Induction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two-Year, Randomized, Controlled Trial of Belimumab in Lupus Nephritis.
**Authors:** Furie R, Rovin BH, Houssiau F, Malvar A, Teng YKO, Contreras G, Amoura Z, Yu X, Mok CC, Santiago MB, Saxena A, Green Y, Ji B, Kleoudis C, Burriss SW, Barnett C, Roth DA
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2001180](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2001180)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2020 Sep 17;383(12):1117-1128. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2001180.

Two-Year, Randomized, Controlled Trial of Belimumab in Lupus Nephritis.

Furie R(1), Rovin BH(1), Houssiau F(1), Malvar A(1), Teng YKO(1), Contreras
G(1), Amoura Z(1), Yu X(1), Mok CC(1), Santiago MB(1), Saxena A(1), Green Y(1),
Ji B(1), Kleoudis C(1), Burriss SW(1), Barnett C(1), Roth DA(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Division of Rheumatology, Northwell Health, Donald and Barbara
Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra-Northwell, Great Neck, NY (R.F.); the
Division of Nephrology, Ohio State University, Columbus (B.H.R.); Pôle de
Pathologies Rhumatismales Inflammatoires et Systémiques, Institut de Recherche
Expérimentale et Clinique, Université Catholique de Louvain, and Service de
Rhumatologie, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc - both in Brussels (F.H.);
Organización Médica de Investigación, Buenos Aires (A.M.); the Department of
Internal Medicine, Section of Nephrology, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, the Netherlands (Y.K.O.T.); the Division of Nephrology, Division of
Hypertension, Department of Medicine, University of Miami Miller School of
Medicine, Miami (G.C.); Sorbonne Université, INSERM Unité 1135 (Z.A.), and
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris Sorbonne Université, Service de Médecine
Interne 2, Institut Endocrinologie, Maladies Métaboliques et Médecine Interne,
Centre de Référence National du Lupus et Syndrome des Antiphospholipides,
Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière (Z.A.) - both in Paris; the Department of Nephrology,
Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital and Guangdong Academy of Medical
Sciences, Guangzhou (X.Y.), and the Department of Medicine, Tuen Mun Hospital,
Hong Kong (C.C.M.) - both in China; Escola Bahiana de Medicina e Saúde Pública,
Salvador, Brazil (M.B.S.); the Division of Rheumatology, New York University
School of Medicine, New York (A.S.); GlaxoSmithKline, Stockley Park, Uxbridge,
United Kingdom (Y.G., B.J.); Parexel, Durham, NC (C.K.); and GlaxoSmithKline,
Collegeville, PA (S.W.B., C.B., D.A.R.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2020 Sep 17;383(12):1184-1185. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe2027516.
    Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2020 Nov;16(11):601. doi: 10.1038/s41584-020-00520-y.
    Nat Rev Nephrol. 2020 Dec;16(12):702. doi: 10.1038/s41581-020-00362-7.
    N Engl J Med. 2021 Jan 14;384(2):187. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2032520.
    N Engl J Med. 2021 Jan 14;384(2):187-188. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2032520.
    Kidney Int. 2021 Feb;99(2):298-300. doi: 10.1016/j.kint.2020.11.020.

BACKGROUND: In adults with active lupus nephritis, the efficacy and safety of
intravenous belimumab as compared with placebo, when added to standard therapy
(mycophenolate mofetil or cyclophosphamide-azathioprine), are unknown.
METHODS: In a phase 3, multinational, multicenter, randomized, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, 104-week trial conducted at 107 sites in 21 countries, we
assigned adults with biopsy-proven, active lupus nephritis in a 1:1 ratio to
receive intravenous belimumab (at a dose of 10 mg per kilogram of body weight)
or matching placebo, in addition to standard therapy. The primary end point at
week 104 was a primary efficacy renal response (a ratio of urinary protein to
creatinine of ≤0.7, an estimated glomerular filtration rate [eGFR] that was no
worse than 20% below the value before the renal flare (pre-flare value) or ≥60
ml per minute per 1.73 m2 of body-surface area, and no use of rescue therapy),
and the major secondary end point was a complete renal response (a ratio of
urinary protein to creatinine of <0.5, an eGFR that was no worse than 10% below
the pre-flare value or ≥90 ml per minute per 1.73 m2, and no use of rescue
therapy). The time to a renal-related event or death was assessed.
RESULTS: A total of 448 patients underwent randomization (224 to the belimumab
group and 224 to the placebo group). At week 104, significantly more patients in
the belimumab group than in the placebo group had a primary efficacy renal
response (43% vs. 32%; odds ratio, 1.6; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.0 to
2.3; P = 0.03) and a complete renal response (30% vs. 20%; odds ratio, 1.7; 95%
CI, 1.1 to 2.7; P = 0.02). The risk of a renal-related event or death was lower
among patients who received belimumab than among those who received placebo
(hazard ratio, 0.51; 95% CI, 0.34 to 0.77; P = 0.001). The safety profile of
belimumab was consistent with that in previous trials.
CONCLUSIONS: In this trial involving patients with active lupus nephritis, more
patients who received belimumab plus standard therapy had a primary efficacy
renal response than those who received standard therapy alone. (Funded by
GlaxoSmithKline; BLISS-LN ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01639339.).

Copyright © 2020 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2001180
PMID: 32937045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
