---
reference_id: "PMID:35164914"
title: "Pediatric Osteosarcoma: Pearls and Pitfalls."
authors:
- Menendez N
- Epelman M
- Shao L
- Douglas D
- Meyers AB
journal: Semin Ultrasound CT MR
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1053/j.sult.2021.05.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric Osteosarcoma: Pearls and Pitfalls.
**Authors:** Menendez N, Epelman M, Shao L, Douglas D, Meyers AB
**Journal:** Semin Ultrasound CT MR (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.sult.2021.05.010](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.sult.2021.05.010)

## Content

1. Semin Ultrasound CT MR. 2022 Feb;43(1):97-114. doi:
10.1053/j.sult.2021.05.010.  Epub 2021 May 15.

Pediatric Osteosarcoma: Pearls and Pitfalls.

Menendez N(1), Epelman M(1), Shao L(2), Douglas D(3), Meyers AB(4).

Author information:
(1)University of Central Florida College of Medicine, Orlando, FL; Department of 
Radiology, Nemours Children's Health System/Nemours Children's Hospital, 
Orlando, FL.
(2)University of Central Florida College of Medicine, Orlando, FL; Department of 
Pathology and Lab Medicine, Nemours Children's Health System/Nemours Children's 
Hospital, Orlando, FL.
(3)University of Central Florida College of Medicine, Orlando, FL; Department of 
Pediatrics, Nemours Children's Health System/Nemours Children's Hospital, 
Orlando, FL.
(4)Department of Radiology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Dept. 
of Radiology, Cincinnati, OH. Electronic address: arthur.meyers@cchmc.org.

Osteosarcoma is a malignant bone tumor most commonly presenting in children. It 
has a bimodal distribution with a peak incidence occurring during the ages of 
10-14 years old and in adults greater than age 65. The first peak of 
osteosarcoma correlates with the increased proliferation of bone during the 
pubertal growth period. Osteosarcoma most frequently presents with localized 
bone pain, swelling, and an antalgic gait. The patient may attribute symptoms to 
trauma or strenuous exercise, causing the patient to be managed conservatively. 
In these cases, the pain persists and eventually leads to further evaluation. 
The most common type of osteosarcoma is the conventional high-grade 
osteosarcoma. For conventional osteosarcoma, the diagnosis is typically made or 
strongly suggested based upon the initial radiographic appearance. Other types 
of osteosarcomas include low grade central, telangiectatic, small-cell, surface 
and intracortical. Consequently, it is important for radiologists to be aware of 
these subtypes and the imaging features that differentiate them from other 
etiologies to prevent a delay in treatment.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.sult.2021.05.010
PMID: 35164914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]