---
reference_id: "PMID:25972150"
title: Gastrointestinal and Hepatic Manifestations of Ebola Virus Infection.
authors:
- Sharma N
- Cappell MS
journal: Dig Dis Sci
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s10620-015-3691-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gastrointestinal and Hepatic Manifestations of Ebola Virus Infection.
**Authors:** Sharma N, Cappell MS
**Journal:** Dig Dis Sci (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10620-015-3691-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10620-015-3691-z)

## Content

1. Dig Dis Sci. 2015 Sep;60(9):2590-603. doi: 10.1007/s10620-015-3691-z. Epub
2015  May 14.

Gastrointestinal and Hepatic Manifestations of Ebola Virus Infection.

Sharma N(1), Cappell MS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Westchester Medical Center, Valhalla, NY, USA.

AIM: Although Ebola virus infection (EVI) clinically presents with common, 
prominent, gastroenterologic manifestations, this subject has not been 
previously reviewed. This work critically and comprehensively reviews this 
subject.
METHODS: This study is a comprehensive literature review generated by 
computerized search of literature, supplemented by review of monographs and 
textbooks in pathology, gastroenterology, infectious diseases, and virology.
RESULTS: Common gastrointestinal manifestations include diarrhea-70 %, nausea 
and vomiting-60 %, and abdominal pain-45 %. The diarrhea and nausea and vomiting 
frequently produce profound, life-threatening hypovolemia requiring intravenous 
administration of crystalloid solutions, and frequently produce electrolyte 
disorders requiring electrolyte supplementation. Although gastrointestinal 
hemorrhage was commonly reported in early epidemics, its frequency has decreased 
to 10 % with prevention of disseminated intravascular coagulation. 
Hyperamylasemia is commonly reported, but the frequency of pancreatitis is 
unknown. The mean serum AST and ALT levels are each about 200/UL, with an 
unusual pattern for viral hepatitis of AST > ALT. The serum alkaline phosphatase 
averages about 160 IU/L, whereas the total bilirubin averages about 0.8 mg/dL. 
Risks of contracting infection during endoscopy performed on infected patients 
are unknown, but may be significant, as indicated by hundreds of healthcare 
workers contracting EVI during epidemics before instituting strict infectious 
control measures and anecdotal evidence of one endoscopist contracting EVI from 
performing endoscopy on an infected patient.
CONCLUSIONS: Physicians must be vigilant for gastroenterologic manifestations of 
EVI for appropriate diagnosis and therapy. This work should stimulate 
clinicopathologic studies to improve the current understanding of the 
gastroenterologic pathophysiology. Endoscopy is currently not standardly 
recommended to evaluate diarrhea, nausea and vomiting, or abdominal pain 
associated with EVI due to potential risks, but may be considered for endoscopic 
therapy for active, life-threatening, GI hemorrhage.

DOI: 10.1007/s10620-015-3691-z
PMID: 25972150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]