---
reference_id: "PMID:16782422"
title: "Effect of calcium, vitamins K1 and D3 on bone in galactosemia."
authors:
- Panis B
- Vermeer C
- van Kroonenburgh MJPG
- Nieman FHM
- Menheere PPCA
- Spaapen LJ
- Rubio-Gozalbo ME
journal: Bone
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2006.05.002
keywords:
- "Absorptiometry, Photon"
- Adolescent
- Body Composition/drug effects
- Bone Density/drug effects
- "Bone and Bones/drug effects, metabolism"
- "Calcium/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Dietary Supplements
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- "Galactosemias/drug therapy, metabolism"
- Humans
- Male
- "Osteocalcin/chemistry, metabolism"
- Treatment Outcome
- "Vitamin D/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Vitamin K 1/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Vitamins/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of calcium, vitamins K1 and D3 on bone in galactosemia.
**Authors:** Panis B, Vermeer C, van Kroonenburgh MJPG, Nieman FHM, Menheere PPCA, Spaapen LJ, Rubio-Gozalbo ME
**Journal:** Bone (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bone.2006.05.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2006.05.002)

## Content

1. Bone. 2006 Nov;39(5):1123-1129. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2006.05.002. Epub 2006 Jun
 19.

Effect of calcium, vitamins K1 and D3 on bone in galactosemia.

Panis B(1), Vermeer C(2), van Kroonenburgh MJPG(3), Nieman FHM(4), Menheere 
PPCA(5), Spaapen LJ(6), Rubio-Gozalbo ME(7).

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Pediatrics, University Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The 
Netherlands; Dept. of Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, University Hospital 
Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(2)Dept. of Biochemistry, University Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Dept. of Nuclear Medicine, University Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Dept. of Clinical Epidemiology and Medical Technology Assessment (KEMTA), 
University Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(5)Dept. of Clinical Chemistry, University Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The 
Netherlands.
(6)Dept. of Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, University Hospital 
Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(7)Dept. of Pediatrics, University Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, The 
Netherlands; Dept. of Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, University Hospital 
Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands. Electronic address: mrub@paed.azm.nl.

Classical galactosemia is an inherited disorder of galactose metabolism. 
Recently, diminished bone mineral content (BMC) in children and adolescents has 
been found. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of calcium, 
vitamins K(1) and D(3) supplementation on bone in children with galactosemia. A 
2-year randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial was 
undertaken in which 40 children with classical galactosemia (13 males and 27 
females, aged 3-17 years) were included to receive daily either 750 mg calcium, 
1.0 mg vitamin K(1) and 10.0 microg vitamin D(3) or placebo. BMC of femoral 
neck, lumbar spine and total body and body composition data were determined by 
dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) at baseline and after 1 and 2 years. Diet 
was assessed using a food frequency questionnaire and a 3-day food diary. 
Biochemical measurements were determined at baseline and after 1 and 2 years. In 
the children receiving treatment, carboxylated osteocalcin (cOC) concentration 
significantly increased (P < 0.001) and undercarboxylated osteocalcin (ucOC) 
concentration significantly decreased (P = 0.001) when compared to the children 
receiving placebo. Furthermore, there was a statistically significant increase 
in BMC of lumbar spine (P = 0.001), lean tissue mass (LTM: P = 0.016) and fat 
mass (FM: P = 0.014) in the treatment group when compared to the placebo group. 
The significant increase in cOC and decrease in ucOC concentration in the 
treatment group were present in prepubertal (P < 0.001 and P = 0.006 
respectively) and pubertal children (P = 0.004 and P = 0.042 respectively). The 
significant increase in BMC of lumbar spine in the treatment group was present 
only in the prepubertal children (P = 0.015). Supplementation of calcium, 
vitamins K(1) and D(3) given in this dose (750 mg, 1.0 mg and 10.0 mug 
respectively) is likely to have a role in the treatment of BMC abnormalities in 
galactosemia.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2006.05.002
PMID: 16782422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]