---
reference_id: "PMID:36397921"
title: "Bell's Palsy: A Review."
authors:
- Singh A
- Deshmukh P
journal: Cureus
year: '2022'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.30186
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bell's Palsy: A Review.
**Authors:** Singh A, Deshmukh P
**Journal:** Cureus (2022)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.30186](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.30186)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2022 Oct 11;14(10):e30186. doi: 10.7759/cureus.30186. eCollection 2022
 Oct.

Bell's Palsy: A Review.

Singh A(1), Deshmukh P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Datta 
Meghe Institute of Medical Sciences, Wardha, IND.

Bell's palsy, also known as "acute facial palsy of unknown cause", is a common 
cranial neuropathy leading to facial muscle paresis or complete paralysis 
characteristically on one side, occurring suddenly and may progress over 48 
hours. It results from facial nerve dysfunction due to trauma or inflammation of 
the 7th cranial nerve or facial nerve or its branches along its course, 
primarily in the bony canal. Both sexes are equally affected, and though no age 
is immune, its incidence rises with increasing age. The risk is high in 
diabetics, hypertensives, women who are pregnant, obese, and people with upper 
respiratory tract infections. It is considered chiefly idiopathic and is 
diagnosed by the exclusion of other causes. Bell's palsy can cause physical and 
psychological complications and negatively impact patients and their relatives. 
Thus, early diagnosis and quick cause determination are prime roles in proper 
treatment. However, the exact etiology of Bell's palsy is unknown, affecting its 
treatment. Still, determining probable causative and risk factors is critical 
for employing a targeted treatment approach and requires a comprehensive 
examination and a complete history. Although the majority of patients recover 
spontaneously in less than three weeks even if they are not treated. But there 
is always a risk of residual paresis after treatment or recovery, which may 
require medical help. This review aims to furnish the most thorough 
understanding of Bell's palsy, focusing on anatomy, etiology, clinical features, 
diagnosis, clinical consequences,and preferred therapy approaches.

Copyright © 2022, Singh et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.30186
PMCID: PMC9648613
PMID: 36397921

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.