---
reference_id: "PMID:24056678"
title: In silico study on multidrug resistance conferred by I223R/H275Y double mutant neuraminidase.
authors:
- Tan H
- Wei K
- Bao J
- Zhou X
journal: Mol Biosyst
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1039/c3mb70253g
keywords:
- Amino Acid Substitution
- "Antiviral Agents/chemistry, pharmacology"
- Binding Sites
- Codon
- "Drug Resistance, Multiple/genetics"
- "Drug Resistance, Viral/genetics"
- Humans
- Hydrogen Bonding
- "Influenza A Virus, H1N1 Subtype/drug effects, genetics"
- "Models, Molecular"
- Molecular Conformation
- Molecular Docking Simulation
- Molecular Dynamics Simulation
- Mutation
- "Neuraminidase/chemistry, genetics"
- Protein Binding
- Quantitative Structure-Activity Relationship
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In silico study on multidrug resistance conferred by I223R/H275Y double mutant neuraminidase.
**Authors:** Tan H, Wei K, Bao J, Zhou X
**Journal:** Mol Biosyst (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1039/c3mb70253g](https://doi.org/10.1039/c3mb70253g)

## Content

1. Mol Biosyst. 2013 Nov;9(11):2764-74. doi: 10.1039/c3mb70253g.

In silico study on multidrug resistance conferred by I223R/H275Y double mutant 
neuraminidase.

Tan H(1), Wei K, Bao J, Zhou X.

Author information:
(1)College of Global Change and Earth System Science, Beijing Normal University, 
Beijing 100875, P. R. China. htan@bnu.edu.cn.

It was recently reported that an I223R/H275Y double mutant of neuraminidase (NA) 
creates a multidrug-resistant form of the pandemic influenza A (H1N1) virus. 
However, a comprehensive understanding of the molecular mechanisms is still 
lacking. We conducted a systematic in silico study to explore the structural 
basis underlying this multidrug resistance. By molecular docking analyses and 
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, we compared various biochemical and 
biophysical properties of the wild type, the I223R single mutant and the 
I223R/H275Y double mutant NA with two inhibitors, zanamivir (ZMR) and 
oseltamivir (G39). The binding free energy of oseltamivir with all types of NA 
was substantially lower than its zanamivir counterpart. On the other hand, the 
binding free energy of each inhibitor with wild type NA was generally higher 
than that with mutant NAs. MD simulation outcomes exemplify distinct patterns 
for oseltamivir and zanamivir with all types of NA. In particular, the stronger 
resistance of the double mutant NA relative to the wild and single mutant types 
can be ascribed to the overall looser but locally more compact structure of the 
former. Specifically, as a whole the double mutant NA adapts to the larger 
gyration radius and greater distance between charged atom groups, which is 
contrary to the pattern in the local binding site region. The enhanced 
resistance of all types of NA to oseltamivir rather than zanamivir might be 
accounted for similarly. We expect these findings to provide significant 
insights into improving inhibitors for the multidrug-resistant neuraminidase of 
H1N1 influenza viruses.

DOI: 10.1039/c3mb70253g
PMID: 24056678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]