---
reference_id: "PMID:36083130"
title: "Clinicogenomic associations in childhood Langerhans cell histiocytosis: an international cohort study."
authors:
- Kemps PG
- Zondag TCE
- Arnardóttir HB
- Solleveld-Westerink N
- Borst J
- Steenwijk EC
- van Egmond D
- Swennenhuis JF
- Stelloo E
- Trambusti I
- Verdijk RM
- van Noesel CJM
- Cleven AHG
- Scheijde-Vermeulen MA
- Koudijs MJ
- Krsková L
- Hawkins C
- Egeler RM
- Brok J
- von Bahr Greenwood T
- Svojgr K
- Beishuizen A
- van Laar JAM
- Pötschger U
- Hutter C
- Sieni E
- Minkov M
- Abla O
- van Wezel T
- van den Bos C
- van Halteren AGS
journal: Blood Adv
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2022007947
keywords:
- Humans
- Cohort Studies
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- "Histiocytosis, Langerhans-Cell/genetics"
- Mutation
- Neoplasms
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinicogenomic associations in childhood Langerhans cell histiocytosis: an international cohort study.
**Authors:** Kemps PG, Zondag TCE, Arnardóttir HB, Solleveld-Westerink N, Borst J, Steenwijk EC, van Egmond D, Swennenhuis JF, Stelloo E, Trambusti I, Verdijk RM, van Noesel CJM, Cleven AHG, Scheijde-Vermeulen MA, Koudijs MJ, Krsková L, Hawkins C, Egeler RM, Brok J, von Bahr Greenwood T, Svojgr K, Beishuizen A, van Laar JAM, Pötschger U, Hutter C, Sieni E, Minkov M, Abla O, van Wezel T, van den Bos C, van Halteren AGS
**Journal:** Blood Adv (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1182/bloodadvances.2022007947](https://doi.org/10.1182/bloodadvances.2022007947)

## Content

1. Blood Adv. 2023 Feb 28;7(4):664-679. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2022007947.

Clinicogenomic associations in childhood Langerhans cell histiocytosis: an 
international cohort study.

Kemps PG(1)(2), Zondag TCE(3), Arnardóttir HB(4), Solleveld-Westerink N(1), 
Borst J(5), Steenwijk EC(5), van Egmond D(1), Swennenhuis JF(6), Stelloo E(6), 
Trambusti I(7), Verdijk RM(1)(8), van Noesel CJM(9), Cleven AHG(1)(10), 
Scheijde-Vermeulen MA(2), Koudijs MJ(2), Krsková L(11), Hawkins C(12), Egeler 
RM(5), Brok J(13), von Bahr Greenwood T(14)(15), Svojgr K(16), Beishuizen 
A(2)(17), van Laar JAM(3)(18), Pötschger U(4), Hutter C(4), Sieni E(7), Minkov 
M(4), Abla O(19), van Wezel T(1), van den Bos C(2)(20), van Halteren AGS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Princess Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine/Clinical Immunology, Erasmus Medical Center 
(Erasmus MC), Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Children's Cancer Research Institute, St Anna Kinderkrebsforschung, Medical 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(6)Cergentis BV, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(7)Pediatric Hematology/Oncology Department, Meyer Children's University 
Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(8)Department of Pathology, Erasmus MC University Medical Center Rotterdam, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(9)Department of Pathology, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(10)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The 
Netherlands.
(11)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Second Faculty of Medicine, 
Charles University and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.
(12)Department of Pathology, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(13)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen 
University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(14)Childhood Cancer Research Unit, Department of Women's and Children's Health, 
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(15)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Astrid Lindgren Children's Hospital, 
Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(16)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Second Faculty of Medicine, 
Charles University and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.
(17)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Sophia Children's Hospital, Erasmus MC, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(18)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(19)Department of Hematology/Oncology, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(20)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam 
University Medical Centers, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) is a rare neoplastic disorder caused by 
somatic genetic alterations in hematopoietic precursor cells differentiating 
into CD1a+/CD207+ histiocytes. LCH clinical manifestation is highly 
heterogeneous. BRAF and MAP2K1 mutations account for ∼80% of genetic driver 
alterations in neoplastic LCH cells. However, their clinical associations remain 
incompletely understood. Here, we present an international clinicogenomic study 
of childhood LCH, investigating 377 patients genotyped for at least BRAFV600E. 
MAPK pathway gene alterations were detected in 300 (79.6%) patients, including 
191 (50.7%) with BRAFV600E, 54 with MAP2K1 mutations, 39 with BRAF exon 12 
mutations, 13 with rare BRAF alterations, and 3 with ARAF or KRAS mutations. Our 
results confirm that BRAFV600E associates with lower age at diagnosis and higher 
prevalence of multisystem LCH, high-risk disease, and skin involvement. 
Furthermore, BRAFV600E appeared to correlate with a higher prevalence of central 
nervous system (CNS)-risk bone lesions. In contrast, MAP2K1 mutations associated 
with a higher prevalence of single-system (SS)-bone LCH, and BRAF exon 12 
deletions seemed to correlate with more lung involvement. Although BRAFV600E 
correlated with reduced event-free survival in the overall cohort, neither BRAF 
nor MAP2K1 mutations associated with event-free survival when patients were 
stratified by disease extent. Thus, the correlation of BRAFV600E with inferior 
clinical outcome is (primarily) driven by its association with disease extents 
known for high rates of progression or relapse, including multisystem LCH. These 
findings advance our understanding of factors underlying the remarkable clinical 
heterogeneity of LCH but also question the independent prognostic value of 
lesional BRAFV600E status.

© 2023 by The American Society of Hematology. Licensed under Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), 
permitting only noncommercial, nonderivative use with attribution. All other 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2022007947
PMCID: PMC9979766
PMID: 36083130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: J.F.S. and E. 
Stelloo are employees of Cergentis BV. The remaining authors declare no 
competing financial interests.