---
reference_id: "PMID:36960434"
title: "Pediatric Nemaline Myopathy: A Systematic Review Using Individual Patient Data."
authors:
- Christophers B
- Lopez MA
- Gupta VA
- Vogel H
- Baylies M
journal: J Child Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1177/08830738221096316
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric Nemaline Myopathy: A Systematic Review Using Individual Patient Data.
**Authors:** Christophers B, Lopez MA, Gupta VA, Vogel H, Baylies M
**Journal:** J Child Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1177/08830738221096316](https://doi.org/10.1177/08830738221096316)

## Content

1. J Child Neurol. 2022 Jun;37(7):652-663. doi: 10.1177/08830738221096316. Epub 
2022 Jun 7.

Pediatric Nemaline Myopathy: A Systematic Review Using Individual Patient Data.

Christophers B(1), Lopez MA(2), Gupta VA(3), Vogel H(4), Baylies M(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Weill Cornell/Rockefeller/Sloan Kettering Tri-Institutional MD-PhD Program, 
New York, NY, USA.
(2)University of Alabama Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(3)Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Stanford University, Stanford CA.
(5)Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY, USA.

Nemaline myopathy is a skeletal muscle disease that affects 1 in 50 000 live 
births. The objective of this study was to develop a narrative synthesis of the 
findings of a systematic review of the latest case descriptions of patients with 
NM. A systematic search of MEDLINE, Embase, CINAHL, Web of Science, and Scopus 
was performed using Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and 
Meta-analyses (PRISMA) guidelines using the keywords pediatric, child, NM, 
nemaline rod, and rod myopathy. Case studies focused on pediatric NM and 
published in English between January 1, 2010, and December 31, 2020, in order to 
represent the most recent findings. Information was collected about the age of 
first signs, earliest presenting neuromuscular signs and symptoms, systems 
affected, progression, death, pathologic description, and genetic changes. Of a 
total of 385 records, 55 case reports or series were reviewed, covering 101 
pediatric patients from 23 countries. We review varying presentations in 
children ranging in severity despite being caused by the same mutation, in 
addition to current and future clinical considerations relevant to the care of 
patients with NM. This review synthesizes genetic, histopathologic, and disease 
presentation findings from pediatric NM case reports. These data strengthen our 
understanding of the wide spectrum of disease seen in NM. Future studies are 
needed to identify the underlying molecular mechanism of pathology, to improve 
diagnostics, and to develop better methods to improve the quality of life for 
these patients.

DOI: 10.1177/08830738221096316
PMCID: PMC10032635
PMID: 36960434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests The authors 
declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article.