---
reference_id: "PMID:21971085"
title: "OCRL controls trafficking through early endosomes via PtdIns4,5P₂-dependent regulation of endosomal actin."
authors:
- Vicinanza M
- Di Campli A
- Polishchuk E
- Santoro M
- Di Tullio G
- Godi A
- Levtchenko E
- De Leo MG
- Polishchuk R
- Sandoval L
- Marzolo MP
- De Matteis MA
journal: EMBO J
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.354
keywords:
- Actins/metabolism
- Biological Transport
- Catalysis
- Cell Line
- Endocytosis
- "Endosomes/enzymology, metabolism"
- Humans
- Intracellular Membranes/metabolism
- "Kidney Tubules, Proximal/metabolism"
- Low Density Lipoprotein Receptor-Related Protein-2/metabolism
- "Oculocerebrorenal Syndrome/genetics, metabolism"
- "Phosphatidylinositol 4,5-Diphosphate/metabolism"
- "Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases/genetics, metabolism"
- Polymerization
content_type: abstract_only
---

# OCRL controls trafficking through early endosomes via PtdIns4,5P₂-dependent regulation of endosomal actin.
**Authors:** Vicinanza M, Di Campli A, Polishchuk E, Santoro M, Di Tullio G, Godi A, Levtchenko E, De Leo MG, Polishchuk R, Sandoval L, Marzolo MP, De Matteis MA
**Journal:** EMBO J (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/emboj.2011.354](https://doi.org/10.1038/emboj.2011.354)

## Content

1. EMBO J. 2011 Oct 4;30(24):4970-85. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.354.

OCRL controls trafficking through early endosomes via PtdIns4,5P₂-dependent
regulation of endosomal actin.

Vicinanza M(1), Di Campli A, Polishchuk E, Santoro M, Di Tullio G, Godi A,
Levtchenko E, De Leo MG, Polishchuk R, Sandoval L, Marzolo MP, De Matteis MA.

Author information:
(1)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Naples, Italy.

Mutations in the phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (PtdIns4,5P(2))
5-phosphatase OCRL cause Lowe syndrome, which is characterised by congenital
cataracts, central hypotonia, and renal proximal tubular dysfunction. Previous
studies have shown that OCRL interacts with components of the endosomal
machinery; however, its role in endocytosis, and thus the pathogenic mechanisms
of Lowe syndrome, have remained elusive. Here, we show that via its
5-phosphatase activity, OCRL controls early endosome (EE) function. OCRL
depletion impairs the recycling of multiple classes of receptors, including
megalin (which mediates protein reabsorption in the kidney) that are retained in
engorged EEs. These trafficking defects are caused by ectopic accumulation of
PtdIns4,5P(2) in EEs, which in turn induces an N-WASP-dependent increase in
endosomal F-actin. Our data provide a molecular explanation for renal proximal
tubular dysfunction in Lowe syndrome and highlight that tight control of
PtdIns4,5P(2) and F-actin at the EEs is essential for exporting cargoes that
transit this compartment.

DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2011.354
PMCID: PMC3242071
PMID: 21971085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest.
