---
reference_id: "PMID:20345718"
title: "Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia: from molecular biology to patient care."
authors:
- Dupuis-Girod S
- Bailly S
- Plauchu H
journal: J Thromb Haemost
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1111/j.1538-7836.2010.03860.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia: from molecular biology to patient care.
**Authors:** Dupuis-Girod S, Bailly S, Plauchu H
**Journal:** J Thromb Haemost (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1538-7836.2010.03860.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1538-7836.2010.03860.x)

## Content

1. J Thromb Haemost. 2010 Jul;8(7):1447-56. doi:
10.1111/j.1538-7836.2010.03860.x.  Epub 2010 Mar 19.

Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia: from molecular biology to patient care.

Dupuis-Girod S(1), Bailly S, Plauchu H.

Author information:
(1)Service de Génétique et Centre de Référence National Maladies Rares, maladie 
de Rendu-Osler, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Hôpital de l'Hôtel Dieu, Lyon, France. 
sophie.dupuis-girod@chu-lyon.fr

Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) is an autosomal dominant vascular 
disorder characterized by severe and recurrent nosebleeds, mucocutaneous 
telangiectases, and, in some cases, life-threatening visceral arteriovenous 
malformations of various types, including pulmonary, hepatic, cerebral, and 
spinal. Gastrointestinal telangiectases are frequent and may cause severe 
bleeding. HHT type 1 results from mutations in ENG on chromosome 9 (coding for 
endoglin), and HHT type 2 results from mutations in ACVRL1 on chromosome 12 
(coding for activin receptor-like kinase 1). Mutations of either of these two 
genes account for most clinical cases. In addition, mutations in MADH4 (encoding 
SMAD4), which cause a juvenile polyposis/HHT overlap syndrome, have been 
described, and recently, an HHT3 locus on chromosome 5 (5q31.3-5q32) has been 
reported. The mutated genes in HHT encode proteins that modulate transforming 
growth factor-beta superfamily signaling in vascular endothelial cells. 
Management of patients has changed considerably in the last 20 years, in terms 
of both treatment and the prevention of complications. The goal of this review 
was to describe the underlying molecular and cellular physiopathology, explore 
clinical and genetic diagnostic strategies for HHT, and present clinical 
management recommendations in order to treat symptomatic disease and to screen 
for vascular malformations.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1538-7836.2010.03860.x
PMID: 20345718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]