---
reference_id: "PMID:24048953"
title: Large Animal Models of Huntington's Disease.
authors:
- Li XJ
- Li S
journal: Curr Top Behav Neurosci
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/7854_2013_246
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Large Animal Models of Huntington's Disease.
**Authors:** Li XJ, Li S
**Journal:** Curr Top Behav Neurosci (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/7854_2013_246](https://doi.org/10.1007/7854_2013_246)

## Content

1. Curr Top Behav Neurosci. 2015;22:149-60. doi: 10.1007/7854_2013_246.

Large Animal Models of Huntington's Disease.

Li XJ(1), Li S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, 615 
Michael St 347, Atlanta, GA, 30322, USA, xli2@emory.edu.

Huntington's disease is caused by the expansion of a polyglutamine repeat (>37 
glutamines) in the disease protein huntingtin, which results in preferential 
neuronal loss in distinct brain regions. Mutant huntingtin causes late-onset 
neurological symptoms in patients in middle life, though the expression of 
mutant huntingtin is ubiquitous from early life. Thus, it is important to 
understand why mutant huntingtin selectively causes neuronal loss in an 
age-dependent manner. Transgenic animal models have been essential tools for 
uncovering the pathogenesis and therapeutic targets of neurodegenerative 
diseases. Genetic mouse models have been investigated extensively and have 
revealed the common pathological hallmark of age-dependent formation of 
aggregates or inclusions consisting of misfolded proteins. However, most genetic 
mouse models lack striking neurodegeneration that has been found in patient 
brains. Since there are considerable species differences between small and large 
animals, large animal models of Huntington's disease may allow one to identify 
the pathological features that are more similar to those in patients and also 
help uncover more effective therapeutic targets. This chapter will focus on the 
important findings from large animal models of Huntington's disease and 
discusses the use of large animal models to investigate the pathogenesis of 
Huntington's disease and develop new therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.1007/7854_2013_246
PMCID: PMC5426810
PMID: 24048953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]