---
reference_id: "PMID:39448867"
title: Dependence of PAX3-FOXO1 chromatin occupancy on ETS1 at important disease-promoting genes exposes new targetable vulnerability in Fusion-Positive Rhabdomyosarcoma.
authors:
- Hsieh J
- Danis EP
- Owens CR
- Parrish JK
- Nowling NL
- Wolin AR
- Purdy SC
- Rosenbaum SR
- Ivancevic AM
- Chuong EB
- Ford HL
- Jedlicka P
journal: Oncogene
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41388-024-03201-2
keywords:
- "Proto-Oncogene Protein c-ets-1/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics, metabolism"
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma/genetics, pathology, metabolism"
- "Chromatin/metabolism, genetics"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Animals
- Mice
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- "PAX3 Transcription Factor/genetics, metabolism"
- "Jumonji Domain-Containing Histone Demethylases/genetics, metabolism"
- Paired Box Transcription Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dependence of PAX3-FOXO1 chromatin occupancy on ETS1 at important disease-promoting genes exposes new targetable vulnerability in Fusion-Positive Rhabdomyosarcoma.
**Authors:** Hsieh J, Danis EP, Owens CR, Parrish JK, Nowling NL, Wolin AR, Purdy SC, Rosenbaum SR, Ivancevic AM, Chuong EB, Ford HL, Jedlicka P
**Journal:** Oncogene (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41388-024-03201-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41388-024-03201-2)

## Content

1. Oncogene. 2025 Jan;44(1):19-29. doi: 10.1038/s41388-024-03201-2. Epub 2024 Oct
 24.

Dependence of PAX3-FOXO1 chromatin occupancy on ETS1 at important 
disease-promoting genes exposes new targetable vulnerability in Fusion-Positive 
Rhabdomyosarcoma.

Hsieh J(1)(2)(3), Danis EP(4)(5), Owens CR(3), Parrish JK(3), Nowling NL(3), 
Wolin AR(6)(7), Purdy SC(2)(6), Rosenbaum SR(6), Ivancevic AM(8), Chuong EB(8), 
Ford HL(1)(2)(5)(6)(7), Jedlicka P(9)(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical 
Campus (UC-AMC), Aurora, CO, USA.
(2)Cancer Biology Graduate Training Program, UC-AMC, Aurora, CO, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, UC-AMC, Aurora, CO, USA.
(4)Department of Biomedical Informatics, UC-AMC, Aurora, CO, USA.
(5)University of Colorado Cancer Center, UC-AMC, Aurora, CO, USA.
(6)Department of Pharmacology, UC-AMC, Aurora, CO, USA.
(7)Molecular Biology Graduate Training Program, UC-AMC, Aurora, CO, USA.
(8)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology and BioFrontiers 
Institute, University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO, USA.
(9)Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical 
Campus (UC-AMC), Aurora, CO, USA. Paul.Jedlicka@cuanschutz.edu.
(10)Cancer Biology Graduate Training Program, UC-AMC, Aurora, CO, USA. 
Paul.Jedlicka@cuanschutz.edu.
(11)Department of Pathology, UC-AMC, Aurora, CO, USA. 
Paul.Jedlicka@cuanschutz.edu.
(12)University of Colorado Cancer Center, UC-AMC, Aurora, CO, USA. 
Paul.Jedlicka@cuanschutz.edu.

Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS), a malignancy of impaired myogenic differentiation, is 
the most common soft tissue pediatric cancer. PAX3-FOXO1 oncofusions drive the 
majority of the clinically more aggressive fusion-positive rhabdomyosarcoma 
(FP-RMS). Recent studies have established an epigenetic basis for 
PAX3-FOXO1-driven oncogenic processes. However, details of PAX3-FOXO1 epigenetic 
mechanisms, including interactions with, and dependence on, other chromatin and 
transcription factors, are incompletely understood. We previously identified a 
novel disease-promoting epigenetic axis in RMS, involving the histone 
demethylase KDM3A and the ETS1 transcription factor, and demonstrated that this 
epigenetic axis interfaces with PAX3-FOXO1 both phenotypically and 
transcriptomically, including co-regulation of biological processes and genes 
important to FP-RMS progression. In this study, we demonstrate that KDM3A and 
ETS1 colocalize with PAX3-FOXO1 to enhancers of important disease-promoting 
genes in FP-RMS, including FGF8, IL4R, and MEST, as well as PODXL, which we 
define herein as a new FP-RMS-promoting gene. We show that ETS1, which is 
induced by both PAX3-FOXO1 and KDM3A, exists in complex with PAX3-FOXO1, and 
augments PAX3-FOXO1 chromatin occupancy. We further show that the 
PAX3-FOXO1/ETS1 complex can be disrupted by the clinically relevant small 
molecule inhibitor YK-4-279. YK-4-279 displaces PAX3-FOXO1 from chromatin and 
interferes with PAX3-FOXO1-dependent gene regulation, resulting in potent 
inhibition of growth and invasive properties in FP-RMS, along with 
downregulation of FGF8, IL4R, MEST and PODXL expression. We additionally show 
that, in some FP-RMS, KDM3A also increases PAX3-FOXO1 levels. Together, our 
studies illuminate mechanisms of action of the KDM3A/ETS1 regulatory module, and 
reveal novel targetable mechanisms of PAX3-FOXO1 chromatin complex regulation, 
in FP-RMS.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41388-024-03201-2
PMCID: PMC11700839
PMID: 39448867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests. Ethics approval and consent to participate: All animal 
experiments were in compliance with ethical regulations as approved by the 
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus Institutional Animal Care and Use 
Committee.