---
reference_id: "PMID:20301397"
title: HEXA Disorders.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Toro C
- Shirvan L
- Tifft C
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HEXA Disorders.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Toro C, Shirvan L, Tifft C

## Content

1. HEXA Disorders.

Toro C(1), Shirvan L(1), Tifft C(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
1999 Mar 11 [updated 2020 Oct 1].

Author information:
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, Maryland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: HEXA disorders are best considered as a disease
continuum based on the amount of residual beta-hexosaminidase A (HEX A) enzyme
activity. This, in turn, depends on the molecular characteristics and biological
impact of the HEXA pathogenic variants. HEX A is necessary for degradation of
GM2 ganglioside; without well-functioning enzymes, GM2 ganglioside builds up in
the lysosomes of brain and nerve cells. The classic clinical phenotype is known
as Tay-Sachs disease (TSD), characterized by progressive weakness, loss of motor
skills beginning between ages three and six months, decreased visual
attentiveness, and increased or exaggerated startle response with a cherry-red
spot observable on the retina followed by developmental plateau and loss of
skills after eight to ten months. Seizures are common by 12 months with further
deterioration in the second year of life and death occurring between ages two
and three years with some survival to five to seven years. Subacute juvenile TSD
is associated with normal developmental milestones until age two years, when the
emergence of abnormal gait or dysarthria is noted followed by loss of previously
acquired skills and cognitive decline. Spasticity, dysphagia, and seizures are
present by the end of the first decade of life, with death within the second
decade of life, usually by aspiration. Late-onset TSD presents in older teens or
young adults with a slowly progressive spectrum of neurologic symptoms including
lower-extremity weakness with muscle atrophy, dysarthria, incoordination,
tremor, mild spasticity and/or dystonia, and psychiatric manifestations
including acute psychosis. Clinical variability even among affected members of
the same family is observed in both the subacute juvenile and the late-onset TSD
phenotypes.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of a HEXA disorder is established in a proband
with abnormally low HEX A activity on enzyme testing and biallelic pathogenic
variants in HEXA identified by molecular genetic testing. Targeted analysis for
certain pathogenic variants can be performed first in individuals of specific
ethnicity (e.g., French Canadian, Ashkenazi Jewish). Enzyme testing of affected
individuals identifies absent to near-absent HEX A enzymatic activity in the
serum, white blood cells, or other tissues in the presence of normal or elevated
activity of the beta-hexosaminidase B enzyme. Pseudodeficiency refers to an in
vitro phenomenon caused by specific HEXA variants that renders the enzyme unable
to process the synthetic (but not the natural) GM2 substrates, and leads to
false positive enzyme testing results.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment is mostly supportive and
directed to providing adequate nutrition and hydration, managing infectious
disease, protecting the airway, and controlling seizures. The treatment for the
subacute juvenile and late-onset Tay-Sachs phenotypes is directed to providing
the services of a physiatrist and team of physical, occupational, and speech
therapists for maximizing function and providing aids for activities of daily
living. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Positioning that increases aspiration
risk during feedings and seizure medication dosages that result in excessive
sedation for those with acute infantile TSD; situations that increase the
likelihood of contractures or pressure sores, such as extended periods of
immobility; circumstances that exacerbate the risk of falls (i.e., walking on
uneven or unstable surfaces) in those with subacute juvenile TSD; psychiatric
medications that have been associated with disease worsening, including
haloperidol, risperidone, and chlorpromazine.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Acute infantile Tay-Sachs disease (TSD), subacute juvenile
TSD, and late-onset TSD (comprising the clinical spectrum of HEXA disorders) are
inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. At conception, each sib of an
affected individual has a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an
asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier.
Heterozygotes (carriers) are asymptomatic. Once both HEXA pathogenic variants
have been identified in an affected family member, targeted analysis for the
specific familial variants can be used for carrier testing in at-risk relatives.
Molecular genetic testing and/or HEX A enzyme testing can be used for carrier
detection in individuals who do not have a family history of TSD. If both
members of a reproductive couple are known to be heterozygous for a HEXA
pathogenic variant, molecular genetic prenatal testing and preimplantation
genetic testing for the HEXA pathogenic variants identified in the parents are
possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301397
