---
reference_id: "PMID:39463598"
title: "A Comprehensive Narrative Review of Drug Interactions Between Traveler's Diarrhea Medications and Chronic Therapies: Implications for Clinical Practice."
authors:
- B S
- Satish Kumar RC
- B M
- C K KS
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.70213
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Comprehensive Narrative Review of Drug Interactions Between Traveler's Diarrhea Medications and Chronic Therapies: Implications for Clinical Practice.
**Authors:** B S, Satish Kumar RC, B M, C K KS
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.70213](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.70213)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Sep 25;16(9):e70213. doi: 10.7759/cureus.70213. eCollection 2024 
Sep.

A Comprehensive Narrative Review of Drug Interactions Between Traveler's 
Diarrhea Medications and Chronic Therapies: Implications for Clinical Practice.

B S(1), Satish Kumar RC(2)(3), B M(2), C K KS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, SRM Institute of Science and Technology, 
Chennai, IND.
(2)Clinical Trial and Research Unit, Interdisciplinary Institute of Indian 
System of Medicine, SRM Institute of Science and Technology, Chennai, IND.
(3)Sri Jayendra Saraswathi Ayurveda College and Hospital, Sri Chandrasekharendra 
Saraswathi Viswa Mahavidyalaya, Kancheepuram, IND.

Diarrhea is a common illness for travelers. Traveler's diarrhea is typically 
defined as experiencing at least three unformed stools per day during a stay 
abroad or within 10 days of returning from the destination. In this review, we 
consulted five databases, namely, Medicine Complete, Medscape, Drugs.com, 
Epocrates, and DDInter, to conduct a comprehensive drug interaction analysis. We 
selected commonly prescribed medications used for the treatment of traveler's 
diarrhea, including ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, norfloxacin, ofloxacin, 
azithromycin, rifaximin, bismuth salicylate, and loperamide. The antidiabetic 
medications chosen included metformin, glipizide, glimepiride, sitagliptin, 
linagliptin, dapagliflozin, empagliflozin, and acarbose. The chosen 
antihypertensive drugs were telmisartan, olmesartan, amlodipine, nifedipine, 
enalapril, ramipril, metoprolol, and propranolol. Aspirin, clopidogrel, 
ticagrelor, rivaroxaban, warfarin, atorvastatin, and rosuvastatin were also 
chosen as they play an essential role in cardiovascular treatment. We performed 
comprehensive interaction checks across all five databases for each combination 
of a traveler's diarrhea medication and medication from one of the three 
comorbid conditions (antidiabetic, antihypertensive, or cardioprotective). We 
categorized the severity of interactions as mild, moderate, or severe. 
Similarly, we used colors to highlight the number of databases reporting drug 
interactions, providing insights into the reliability of these interactions 
across sources. Interactions with antidiabetic drugs revealed that 
fluoroquinolones and sulfonylureas produce severe interaction effects. 
Comparatively, rifaximin can be safer as it exhibited mild interaction only with 
metformin, whereas the other antidiabetic drugs showed no interaction effect. 
Levofloxacin was found to be the safest drug among hypertensive individuals as 
it exerted no interaction effects with any of the antihypertensive medications. 
Levofloxacin and rifaximin were considered to be safe as these drugs interacted 
with only two cardioprotective drugs. This review features the importance of a 
precise approach in prescribing medications for traveler's diarrhea, especially 
for patients with chronic comorbidities. These findings play a pivotal role in 
improving awareness and providing tailored treatment for the interaction to 
ensure patient well-being.

Copyright © 2024, B et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.70213
PMCID: PMC11512002
PMID: 39463598

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the 
ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: 
Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no financial support was 
received from any organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships: 
All authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present 
or within the previous three years with any organizations that might have an 
interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All authors have declared 
that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have 
influenced the submitted work.