---
reference_id: "PMID:34611831"
title: Systematic Review and Meta-analysis of the Most Common Genetic Mutations in Esophageal Squamous Cell Carcinoma.
authors:
- Naseri A
- Salehi-Pourmehr H
- Majidazar R
- Seraji P
- Rezazadeh-Gavgani E
- Zehtabi M
- Kiani-Kezbin H
- Salehnia F
- Hassannezhad S
- Hajikamanj A
- Raeisi M
journal: J Gastrointest Cancer
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s12029-021-00721-y
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- Female
- Esophageal Squamous Cell Carcinoma/genetics
- "Esophageal Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- Class I Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systematic Review and Meta-analysis of the Most Common Genetic Mutations in Esophageal Squamous Cell Carcinoma.
**Authors:** Naseri A, Salehi-Pourmehr H, Majidazar R, Seraji P, Rezazadeh-Gavgani E, Zehtabi M, Kiani-Kezbin H, Salehnia F, Hassannezhad S, Hajikamanj A, Raeisi M
**Journal:** J Gastrointest Cancer (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12029-021-00721-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12029-021-00721-y)

## Content

1. J Gastrointest Cancer. 2022 Dec;53(4):1040-1049. doi:
10.1007/s12029-021-00721-y. Epub 2021 Oct 6.

Systematic Review and Meta-analysis of the Most Common Genetic Mutations in
Esophageal Squamous Cell Carcinoma.

Naseri A(1)(2), Salehi-Pourmehr H(3), Majidazar R(1), Seraji P(1),
Rezazadeh-Gavgani E(1), Zehtabi M(4), Kiani-Kezbin H(3), Salehnia F(3),
Hassannezhad S(1), Hajikamanj A(1), Raeisi M(5).

Author information:
(1)Student Research Committee, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz,
Iran.
(2)Aging Research Institute, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz,
Iran.
(3)Research Center for Evidence Based-Medicine, Iranian EBM Center: A Joanna
Briggs Institute Center of Excellence, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences,
Tabriz, Iran.
(4)Liver and Gastrointestinal Diseases Research Center, Tabriz University of
Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(5)Hematology and Oncology Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical
Sciences, Tabriz, Iran. raeisim@tbzmed.ac.ir.

PURPOSE: Esophageal cancer is the second most common cancer among men and women.
There is a need to systematically assess the current evidence to map out the
contribution of genetic factors in the development of esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC).
METHODS: A literature search was carried out on published and unpublished
studies up to August 2021 in Medline (PubMed), Embase (Ovid), Scopus, Proquest,
Web of Science, and Google scholar. Studies that have reported the frequency of
genetic mutations in ESCC were included in this study.
RESULTS: A total of 1238 titles were retrieved through searches, and finally, 56
articles, including 8114 samples, met our predefined inclusion criteria. Of the
included studies, 31 were conducted in China, 12 in Japan, and the remaining
were conducted in various nations, including Brazil, Korea, and Iran. Most of
our included studies evaluated the TP53 (n = 37 studies) and PIK3CA (n = 30
studies) gene mutations. TP53 (68.6%; 95% CI: 61.6-74.9), CCND1 (39.3%; 95% CI:
26.2-54.1), MDM2 (24.9%; 95% CI: 9.5-51.0), NOTCH1/2/3 (17.9%; 95% CI:
15.0-21.2), KMT2D (17.4%; 95% CI: 12.4-23.8), CDKN2A (15.0%; 95% CI: 8.1-26.1),
PIK3CA (13.8%; 95% CI: 10.3-18.1), FAT1 (13.3%; 95% CI: 11.7-15.0), and EGFR
(9.9%; 95% CI: 5.6-17.0) were the most common involved genetic factors in
developing ESCC.
CONCLUSION: This systematic review and meta-analysis revealed that more than 10%
of ESCC patients had changes in TP53, CCND1, MDM2, NOTCH1/2/3, KMT2D, CDKN2A,
PIK3CA, and FAT1 genes, which can highlight their role in developing ESCC. TP53,
CCND1, and MDM2 are the most prevalent, demonstrating 68.6%, 39.3%, and 24.9% of
the mutations in ESCC patients.

© 2021. Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12029-021-00721-y
PMID: 34611831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
