---
reference_id: "PMID:36177969"
title: "Epilepsy in Coffin-Siris syndrome: A report from the international CSS registry and review of the literature."
authors:
- Ciliberto M
- Skjei K
- Vasko A
- Schrier Vergano S
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62979
keywords:
- Humans
- "Micrognathism/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/complications, diagnosis, genetics"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Intellectual Disability/diagnosis
- Face/abnormalities
- Neck/abnormalities
- Genetic Association Studies
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- "Epilepsy/complications, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Seizures/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epilepsy in Coffin-Siris syndrome: A report from the international CSS registry and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Ciliberto M, Skjei K, Vasko A, Schrier Vergano S
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.62979](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.62979)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2023 Jan;191(1):22-28. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62979. Epub 2022 
Sep 30.

Epilepsy in Coffin-Siris syndrome: A report from the international CSS registry 
and review of the literature.

Ciliberto M(1), Skjei K(2), Vasko A(3), Schrier Vergano S(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Stead Family Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, 
USA.
(2)The El Paso Center for Seizures and Epilepsy, El Paso, Texas, USA.
(3)Children's Hospital of the King's Daughters, Norfolk, Virginia, USA.
(4)Eastern Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, Virginia, USA.

Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS, MIM135900) is a rare multiple congenital anomaly 
syndrome caused by pathogenic variants in the BAF complex; up to 28% of patients 
have previously been reported to have seizures, however, a comprehensive review 
of epilepsy has not been undertaken in this population. The International CSS 
Patient Report Database was queried for patients with self-reported seizures, 
epilepsy, and EEG results. Data gathered included demographic data, pathogenic 
gene variants, seizure characteristics and treatments, and EEG findings. In 
addition, a PubMed search was performed using keywords "Coffin-Siris syndrome" 
and "epilepsy," "seizures," or "EEG." Results from relevant papers are reported. 
Twenty-four (7.2%) of 334 patients in the database reported having seizures, EEG 
abnormalities, and/or epilepsy. Median age of seizure onset was 2. 7 years. 
Fifteen of the 23 patients with seizures or epilepsy had an ARID1B causative 
variant. Seventeen patients (5.1%) reported EEG abnormalities, the majority of 
which were described as focal or multifocal (87.5%). In all but one patient, 
seizures were controlled on antiseizure medications (ASMs). The literature 
review yielded 311 unique CSS patients, 82 of which (26.4%) carried diagnoses of 
seizures or epilepsy. Details on seizure type(s), EEG findings, and response to 
treatment were limited.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62979
PMID: 36177969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]