---
reference_id: "PMID:31083875"
title: "Apophysitis and Osteochondrosis: Common Causes of Pain in Growing Bones."
authors:
- Achar S
- Yamanaka J
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '2019'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Athletic Injuries/diagnostic imaging, prevention & control"
- Bone Development
- Calcaneus/diagnostic imaging
- Child
- "Cumulative Trauma Disorders/diagnostic imaging, prevention & control"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Osteochondrosis/diagnostic imaging, prevention & control"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Apophysitis and Osteochondrosis: Common Causes of Pain in Growing Bones.
**Authors:** Achar S, Yamanaka J
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (2019)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 2019 May 15;99(10):610-618.

Apophysitis and Osteochondrosis: Common Causes of Pain in Growing Bones.

Achar S(1), Yamanaka J(2).

Author information:
(1)Rady Children's 360 Sports Medicine, University of California San Diego 
School of Medicine, San Diego, CA, USA.
(2)Fairview Sports and Orthopedic Care, Blaine, MN, USA.

Apophysitis and osteochondrosis are common causes of pain in growing bones but 
have differing etiologies and required management. Apophysitis results from a 
traction injury to the cartilage and bony attachment of tendons in children and 
adolescents. Most often it is an overuse injury in children who are growing and 
have tight or inflexible muscle tendon units. Although apophysitis occurs in 
upper and lower extremities, it occurs more often in the lower extremities, with 
common locations including the patellar tendon attachment at the patella or 
tibia (i.e., Larsen-Johansson and Osgood-Schlatter diseases), the calcaneus 
(i.e., Sever disease), and multiple locations around the hip, including the 
anterior inferior iliac spine. Other locations include the medial epicondyle, 
which is common in patients who throw or participate in racket sports, and more 
rarely at the base of the fifth metatarsal (i.e., Iselin disease). Radiography 
can be helpful in evaluating for other pathologies but is usually not necessary. 
Treatment includes stretching the affected muscle groups, relative rest, 
offloading the affected tendon, icing after activity, and limited use of 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. Osteochondrosis presents less commonly and 
refers to degenerative changes in the epiphyseal ossification centers of growing 
bones. Unlike apophysitis, the etiology of osteochondrosis is unknown. Multiple 
possible etiologies have been explored, including genetic causes, hormonal 
imbalances, mechanical factors, repetitive trauma, and vascular abnormalities. 
Other locations of osteochondrosis include the second metatarsal head (i.e., 
Freiberg disease), the navicular bone (i.e., Köhler bone disease), the femoral 
head (i.e., Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease), and the capitellum (i.e., Panner 
disease). Radiography results may be normal initially; magnetic resonance 
imaging is more sensitive to early changes. Osteochondrosis generally resolves 
with relative rest, but close monitoring is needed to ensure resolution. Surgery 
is rarely needed for either apophysitis or osteochondrosis.

PMID: 31083875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]