---
reference_id: "PMID:11264541"
title: Interference by huntingtin and atrophin-1 with cbp-mediated transcription leading to cellular toxicity.
authors:
- Nucifora FC Jr
- Sasaki M
- Peters MF
- Huang H
- Cooper JK
- Yamada M
- Takahashi H
- Tsuji S
- Troncoso J
- Dawson VL
- Dawson TM
- Ross CA
journal: Science
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1126/science.1056784
keywords:
- Animals
- Brain/metabolism
- CREB-Binding Protein
- Cell Nucleus/metabolism
- Cell Survival
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Humans
- Huntingtin Protein
- "Huntington Disease/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Mutation
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Neurons/cytology, metabolism"
- "Nuclear Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Peptides/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Repetitive Sequences, Amino Acid"
- "Trans-Activators/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Transcription, Genetic"
- Transfection
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interference by huntingtin and atrophin-1 with cbp-mediated transcription leading to cellular toxicity.
**Authors:** Nucifora FC Jr, Sasaki M, Peters MF, Huang H, Cooper JK, Yamada M, Takahashi H, Tsuji S, Troncoso J, Dawson VL, Dawson TM, Ross CA
**Journal:** Science (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1056784](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1056784)

## Content

1. Science. 2001 Mar 23;291(5512):2423-8. doi: 10.1126/science.1056784.

Interference by huntingtin and atrophin-1 with cbp-mediated transcription
leading to cellular toxicity.

Nucifora FC Jr(1), Sasaki M, Peters MF, Huang H, Cooper JK, Yamada M, Takahashi
H, Tsuji S, Troncoso J, Dawson VL, Dawson TM, Ross CA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurobiology, Department of Psychiatry, The Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205-2196, USA.

Expanded polyglutamine repeats have been proposed to cause neuronal degeneration
in Huntington's disease (HD) and related disorders, through abnormal
interactions with other proteins containing short polyglutamine tracts such as
the transcriptional coactivator CREB binding protein, CBP. We found that CBP was
depleted from its normal nuclear location and was present in polyglutamine
aggregates in HD cell culture models, HD transgenic mice, and human HD
postmortem brain. Expanded polyglutamine repeats specifically interfere with
CBP-activated gene transcription, and overexpression of CBP rescued
polyglutamine-induced neuronal toxicity. Thus, polyglutamine-mediated
interference with CBP-regulated gene transcription may constitute a genetic gain
of function, underlying the pathogenesis of polyglutamine disorders.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1056784
PMID: 11264541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
