---
reference_id: "PMID:39679710"
title: Rickettsia disrupts and reduces endothelial tight junction protein zonula occludens-1 in association with inflammasome activation.
authors:
- Velatooru LR
- Arroyave E
- Rippee-Brooks MD
- Burch M
- Yang E
- Zhu B
- Walker DH
- Zhang Y
- Fang R
journal: Infect Immun
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1128/iai.00468-24
keywords:
- "Zonula Occludens-1 Protein/metabolism, genetics"
- Inflammasomes/metabolism
- Humans
- "Endothelial Cells/microbiology, metabolism"
- Rickettsia conorii/physiology
- "NLR Family, Pyrin Domain-Containing 3 Protein/metabolism"
- Caspase 1/metabolism
- Tight Junctions/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rickettsia disrupts and reduces endothelial tight junction protein zonula occludens-1 in association with inflammasome activation.
**Authors:** Velatooru LR, Arroyave E, Rippee-Brooks MD, Burch M, Yang E, Zhu B, Walker DH, Zhang Y, Fang R
**Journal:** Infect Immun (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1128/iai.00468-24](https://doi.org/10.1128/iai.00468-24)

## Content

1. Infect Immun. 2025 Jan 31;93(1):e0046824. doi: 10.1128/iai.00468-24. Epub 2024
 Dec 16.

Rickettsia disrupts and reduces endothelial tight junction protein zonula 
occludens-1 in association with inflammasome activation.

Velatooru LR(#)(1), Arroyave E(#)(1), Rippee-Brooks MD(1), Burch M(1), Yang 
E(1), Zhu B(1), Walker DH(1)(2)(3), Zhang Y(4), Fang R(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, 
Texas, USA.
(2)Center for Biodefense and Emerging Infectious Diseases, The University of 
Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA.
(3)Institute for Human Infections and Immunity, The University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmacological and Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of 
Pharmacy, University of Houston, Houston, Texas, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Rickettsia spp. cause life-threatening diseases in humans. The fundamental 
pathophysiological changes in fatal rickettsial diseases are disrupted 
endothelial barrier and increased microvascular permeability. However, it 
remains largely unclear how rickettsiae induce microvascular endothelial injury. 
In the present study, we demonstrated that Rickettsia conorii infection disrupts 
the continuous immunofluorescence expression of the interendothelial tight 
junction protein, zonula occludens-1 (ZO-1), in infected monolayers of 
microvascular endothelial cells (MVECs), accompanied by significantly diminished 
total expression levels of ZO-1. Interestingly, R. conorii activated 
inflammasome in MVECs, as evidenced by cleaved caspase-1 and IL-1β in the cell 
lysates in association with significantly elevated expression levels of 
nucleotide binding and oligomerization domain, leucine-rich repeat, and pyrin 
containing protein 3 (NLRP3). Furthermore, selective inhibition of NLRP3 by 
MCC950 significantly suppressed the activation and cleavage of caspase-1 induced 
by R. conorii in endothelial cells, which further prevented the disruption of 
interendothelial junctions and reduction of ZO-1 expression. Of note, 
pharmaceutical inhibition of NLRP3 mitigated the disrupted endothelial integrity 
caused by R. conorii, measured by fluorescein isothiocyanate-dextran passage in 
a Transwell assay, independent of bacterial growth and cellular cytotoxicity. 
Taken together, our results suggest that R. conorii affected microvascular 
endothelial junction integrity likely via diminishing and interrupting the 
junctional protein ZO-1 in association with activating NLRP3 inflammasome. These 
data not only highlight the potential of ZO-1 as a biomarker for 
Rickettsia-induced microvascular injury but also provide insight into targeting 
NLRP3 inflammasome/ZO-1 signaling as a potentially adjunctive therapeutic 
approach for severe rickettsioses.

DOI: 10.1128/iai.00468-24
PMCID: PMC11784141
PMID: 39679710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.