---
reference_id: "PMID:8202715"
title: Digenic retinitis pigmentosa due to mutations at the unlinked peripherin/RDS and ROM1 loci.
authors:
- Kajiwara K
- Berson EL
- Dryja TP
journal: Science
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1126/science.8202715
keywords:
- Alleles
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- Electroretinography
- "Eye Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- Female
- "Genes, Dominant"
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genetic Linkage
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Intermediate Filament Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- Male
- Membrane Glycoproteins
- "Membrane Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Nerve Tissue Proteins
- Pedigree
- Peripherins
- Retinitis Pigmentosa/genetics
- Rod Cell Outer Segment/chemistry
- Tetraspanins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Digenic retinitis pigmentosa due to mutations at the unlinked peripherin/RDS and ROM1 loci.
**Authors:** Kajiwara K, Berson EL, Dryja TP
**Journal:** Science (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.8202715](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.8202715)

## Content

1. Science. 1994 Jun 10;264(5165):1604-8. doi: 10.1126/science.8202715.

Digenic retinitis pigmentosa due to mutations at the unlinked peripherin/RDS and
ROM1 loci.

Kajiwara K(1), Berson EL, Dryja TP.

Author information:
(1)Berman-Gund Laboratory for the Study of Retinal Degenerations, Harvard
Medical School, Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Boston 02114.

In spite of recent advances in identifying genes causing monogenic human
disease, very little is known about the genes involved in polygenic disease.
Three families were identified with mutations in the unlinked
photoreceptor-specific genes ROM1 and peripherin/RDS, in which only double
heterozygotes develop retinitis pigmentosa (RP). These findings indicate that
the allelic and nonallelic heterogeneity known to be a feature of monogenic RP
is complicated further by interactions between unlinked mutations causing
digenic RP. Recognition of the inheritance pattern exemplified by these three
families might facilitate the identification of other examples of digenic
inheritance in human disease.

DOI: 10.1126/science.8202715
PMID: 8202715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
