---
reference_id: "PMID:22560055"
title: Downregulation of GPR83 in the hypothalamic preoptic area reduces core body temperature and elevates circulating levels of adiponectin.
authors:
- Dubins JS
- Sanchez-Alavez M
- Zhukov V
- Sanchez-Gonzalez A
- Moroncini G
- Carvajal-Gonzalez S
- Hadcock JR
- Bartfai T
- Conti B
journal: Metabolism
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2012.03.015
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Downregulation of GPR83 in the hypothalamic preoptic area reduces core body temperature and elevates circulating levels of adiponectin.
**Authors:** Dubins JS, Sanchez-Alavez M, Zhukov V, Sanchez-Gonzalez A, Moroncini G, Carvajal-Gonzalez S, Hadcock JR, Bartfai T, Conti B
**Journal:** Metabolism (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.metabol.2012.03.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.metabol.2012.03.015)

## Content

1. Metabolism. 2012 Oct;61(10):1486-93. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2012.03.015. Epub 
2012 May 4.

Downregulation of GPR83 in the hypothalamic preoptic area reduces core body 
temperature and elevates circulating levels of adiponectin.

Dubins JS(1), Sanchez-Alavez M, Zhukov V, Sanchez-Gonzalez A, Moroncini G, 
Carvajal-Gonzalez S, Hadcock JR, Bartfai T, Conti B.

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular, Metabolic and Endocrine Diseases, Pfizer Global Research and 
Development, Groton, CT 06340, USA.

The G protein-coupled receptor 83 (GPR83) was recently demonstrated in warm 
sensitive neurons (WSN) of the hypothalamic preoptic area (POA) that participate 
in temperature homeostasis. Thus, we investigated whether GPR83 may have a role 
in regulating core body temperature (CBT) by reducing its expression in the POA. 
Dissipation of energy in the form of heat is the primary mode of energy 
expenditure in mammals and can ultimately affect energy homeostasis. Thus, we 
also measured the level of important regulators of metabolism. Downregulation of 
GPR83 was obtained by lentiviral short-hairpin RNAs (shGPR83) vectors designed 
and selected for their ability to reduce GPR83 levels in vitro. Mice received 
POA injection of shGPR83 or non-silencing vectors and were monitored for CBT, 
motor activity, food intake body weight and circulating levels of IGF-1, 
insulin, leptin and adiponectin. Down-regulation of GPR83 in the POA resulted in 
a small (0.15°C) but significant reduction of CBT during the dark/active cycle 
of the day. Temperature reduction was followed by increased body weight gain 
independent of caloric intake. shGPR83 mice also had increased level of 
circulating adiponectin (31916±952 pg/mL vs. 23474±1507 pg/mL, P<.01) while no 
change was observed for insulin, IGF-1 or leptin. GPR83 may participate in 
central thermoregulation and the central control of circulating adiponectin. 
Further work is required to determine how GPR83 can affect POA WSN and what are 
the long term metabolic consequences of its down-regulation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.metabol.2012.03.015
PMCID: PMC3415578
PMID: 22560055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]