---
reference_id: "PMID:25607549"
title: Autophagy in the fight against tuberculosis.
authors:
- Bento CF
- Empadinhas N
- Mendes V
journal: DNA Cell Biol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1089/dna.2014.2745
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autophagy in the fight against tuberculosis.
**Authors:** Bento CF, Empadinhas N, Mendes V
**Journal:** DNA Cell Biol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1089/dna.2014.2745](https://doi.org/10.1089/dna.2014.2745)

## Content

1. DNA Cell Biol. 2015 Apr;34(4):228-42. doi: 10.1089/dna.2014.2745. Epub 2015
Jan  21.

Autophagy in the fight against tuberculosis.

Bento CF(1), Empadinhas N, Mendes V.

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Medical Genetics, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, 
University of Cambridge , Cambridge, United Kingdom .

Tuberculosis (TB), a chronic infectious disease mainly caused by the tubercle 
bacillus Mycobacterium tuberculosis, is one of the world's deadliest diseases 
that has afflicted humanity since ancient times. Although the number of people 
falling ill with TB each year is declining, its incidence in many developing 
countries is still a major cause of concern. Upon invading host cells by 
phagocytosis, M. tuberculosis can replicate within infected cells by arresting 
the maturation of the phagosome whose function is to target the pathogen for 
elimination. Host cells have mechanisms of controlling this evasion by inducing 
autophagy, an elaborate cellular process that targets bacteria for progressive 
elimination, decreasing bacterial loads within infected cells. In addition, 
autophagy activation also aids in the control of inflammation, contributing to a 
more efficient innate immune response against M. tuberculosis. Several 
innovative TB therapies have been envisaged based on autophagy manipulation, 
with some of them revealing high potential for future clinical trials and 
eventual implementation in healthcare systems. Thus, this review highlights the 
recent advances on the innate immune response regulation by autophagy upon M. 
tuberculosis infection and the promising new autophagy-based therapies for TB.

DOI: 10.1089/dna.2014.2745
PMCID: PMC4390021
PMID: 25607549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]