---
reference_id: "PMID:33490112"
title: "Mechanisms of Podocyte Detachment, Podocyturia, and Risk of Progression of Glomerulopathies."
authors:
- Trimarchi H
journal: Kidney Dis (Basel)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1159/000507997
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms of Podocyte Detachment, Podocyturia, and Risk of Progression of Glomerulopathies.
**Authors:** Trimarchi H
**Journal:** Kidney Dis (Basel) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000507997](https://doi.org/10.1159/000507997)

## Content

1. Kidney Dis (Basel). 2020 Sep;6(5):324-329. doi: 10.1159/000507997. Epub 2020
May  27.

Mechanisms of Podocyte Detachment, Podocyturia, and Risk of Progression of 
Glomerulopathies.

Trimarchi H(1).

Author information:
(1)Nephrology Service, Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Británico de 
Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

BACKGROUND: Glomerulopathies are the main cause of ESRD. Primary or secondary 
causes of glomerular diseases comprise more than 70% of cases that end up in 
renal replacement therapies.
SUMMARY: The total glomerular mass that each individual contains is key to 
maintaining normal kidney function. Diabetes, hypertension, and any primary or 
secondary glomerulopathy may threaten the normal glomerular function. In fact, 
any glomerular insult may alter the glomerular filtration barrier, which in turn 
is composed by the podocyte, the glomerular basement membrane, and the capillary 
endothelial cell. Deposition of immune complexes, antibodies, or complement 
components at the subepithelial, intramembranous, or subendothelial space, and 
mutations in podocyte, slit diaphragm, or glomerular basement membrane proteins 
or enzymes are the main etiologies of glomerular alterations. Podocytes are 
glomerular cells that do not divide under normal circumstances. In this respect, 
maintenance of the absolute podocyte number per glomer-ulus is critical for 
normal glomerular function. As the insult progresses, podocytes start to detach 
from the glomerular basement membrane. When the podocyte loss is over 40% in a 
glomerulus, glomerulosclerosis develops, and obliteration of the glomerulus is 
the rule. In clinical grounds, this phenomenon is diagnosed mainly by 
proteinuria and a decline in glomerular filtration rate.
KEY MESSAGES: In this review article, the impact of podocyturia in glomerular 
diseases and the main mechanisms of podocyte detachment are discussed. Finally, 
potential targets of therapeutic approach are suggested.

Copyright © 2020 by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000507997
PMCID: PMC7745660
PMID: 33490112

Conflict of interest statement: The author has no conflicts of interest to 
declare.