---
reference_id: "PMID:37774068"
title: Low Frequency of Aflatoxin Induced TP53 Gene Codon 249 Mutation in Hepatocellular Carcinoma from Egyptian Patients Living in the Nile Delta Region.
authors:
- Mosbeh A
- Abdelmaguid W
- Ezzat S
- Kohla M
- Sultan MM
- Abdel-Rahman MH
journal: Asian Pac J Cancer Prev
year: '2023'
doi: 10.31557/APJCP.2023.24.9.3165
keywords:
- Humans
- Rabbits
- Animals
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/chemically induced, genetics, pathology"
- Aflatoxins/adverse effects
- "Genes, p53"
- Egypt/epidemiology
- "Liver Neoplasms/chemically induced, genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- Aflatoxin B1/adverse effects
- Codon/genetics
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Low Frequency of Aflatoxin Induced TP53 Gene Codon 249 Mutation in Hepatocellular Carcinoma from Egyptian Patients Living in the Nile Delta Region.
**Authors:** Mosbeh A, Abdelmaguid W, Ezzat S, Kohla M, Sultan MM, Abdel-Rahman MH
**Journal:** Asian Pac J Cancer Prev (2023)
**DOI:** [10.31557/APJCP.2023.24.9.3165](https://doi.org/10.31557/APJCP.2023.24.9.3165)

## Content

1. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2023 Sep 1;24(9):3165-3168. doi:
10.31557/APJCP.2023.24.9.3165.

Low Frequency of Aflatoxin Induced TP53 Gene Codon 249 Mutation in
Hepatocellular Carcinoma from Egyptian Patients Living in the Nile Delta Region.

Mosbeh A(1)(2), Abdelmaguid W(2), Ezzat S(3), Kohla M(4), Sultan MM(1),
Abdel-Rahman MH(1)(2)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, National Liver Institute, Menoufia University,
Egypt.
(2)National Liver Institute Sustainable Sciences Institute Collaborative
Research Center, Egypt.
(3)Department of Public Health, National Liver Institute, Menoufia University,
Egypt.
(4)Department of Hepatology, National Liver Institute, Menoufia University,
Egypt.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine Division of Human Genetics and James
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center,
Columbus, (OH), USA.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, The Ohio State University
Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, (OH), USA.

OBJECTIVE: Study the frequency of codon 7 (c.747 G>T, p. R249S) mutation
associated with Aflatoxin B1 (AFB1) exposure in Egyptian patients with
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
METHODS: We utilized restriction fragment polymorphism and direct sequencing to
assess codon 7 mutations in 104 hepatocellular carcinomas. The expression of
TP53 protein in the tumors were assessed in 44 tumors by a monoclonal rabbit
antibody.
RESULTS: We identified a single 1/104 (1%) with c.747 G>T, p. R249S variant.
28/44 (63.6%) tumors showed no or occasional (less than < 5%) nuclear staining;
9/44 (20.4%) showed mild to moderate (5-49%) and 7/44 (15.9%) showed strong ≥
50% staining.
CONCLUSION: We observed much lower frequency of TP53 gene than previously
published results suggesting geographical alterations in AFB1 exposure in Egypt.

DOI: 10.31557/APJCP.2023.24.9.3165
PMCID: PMC10762730
PMID: 37774068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors report no conflict of interest.
