---
reference_id: "PMID:34331946"
title: Clinical efficacy of thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin detection for diagnosing Graves' disease and predictors of responsiveness to methimazole.
authors:
- Liu K
- Fu Y
- Li T
- Liu S
- Chen D
- Zhao C
- Shi Y
- Cai Y
- Yang T
- Zheng X
journal: Clin Biochem
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2021.07.014
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical efficacy of thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin detection for diagnosing Graves' disease and predictors of responsiveness to methimazole.
**Authors:** Liu K, Fu Y, Li T, Liu S, Chen D, Zhao C, Shi Y, Cai Y, Yang T, Zheng X
**Journal:** Clin Biochem (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2021.07.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2021.07.014)

## Content

1. Clin Biochem. 2021 Nov;97:34-40. doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2021.07.014. Epub 
2021 Jul 28.

Clinical efficacy of thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin detection for diagnosing 
Graves' disease and predictors of responsiveness to methimazole.

Liu K(1), Fu Y(2), Li T(3), Liu S(1), Chen D(1), Zhao C(1), Shi Y(1), Cai Y(1), 
Yang T(1), Zheng X(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, the First Affiliated Hospital of 
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China.
(2)Department of Nuclear Medicine, the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing 
Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, the First Affiliated Hospital of 
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China; Department of Critical Care 
Medicine, Nanjing Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, 
Nanjing 210003, China.
(4)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, the First Affiliated Hospital of 
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China. Electronic address: 
zhengxuqin@njmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: As thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins (TSI) are a sign of Graves' 
disease (GD), measuring TSI titers is becoming increasingly important for GD 
diagnosis. This study evaluated the diagnostic accuracy of a new fully automated 
TSI immunoassay (Immulite™ TSI assay) in GD patients and compared it to the 
third generation thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor antibody (TRAb) 
electrochemiluminescence assay (Elecsys Anti-TSHR assay). Additionally, clinical 
characteristics associated with responsiveness to methimazole in patients with 
newly diagnosed GD were preliminarily explored.
METHODS: This study involved 324 subjects, comprising patients with untreated GD 
(GD-UT), Graves' ophthalmopathy (GO) patients, GD patients who had been treated 
for > 12 months (GD-T), autoimmune thyroiditis (AIT) patients, and healthy 
subjects (HS). The Immulite™ TSI and Elecsys Anti-TSHR assay were performed on 
all samples. According to their responsiveness to methimazole, the GD-UT 
patients were divided into rapid and slow responder groups, and their clinical 
characteristics were compared.
RESULTS: A receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis of GD-UT 
patients showed that the optimal TSI cut-off value was 0.57 IU/L. Logistic 
regression revealed that age and initial FT4 and TSI levels in the middle-dose 
methimazole group were related to a rapid response, while the initial FT4 level, 
but not TSI, in the high-dose group was also associated with a rapid response.
CONCLUSIONS: The clinical diagnostic performance of the Immulite™ TSI assay for 
diagnosing GD was comparable to that of the Elecsys Anti-TSHR assay. The initial 
FT4 and TSI levels can be used as predictors of the responsiveness to 
methimazole in patients with newly diagnosed GD.

Copyright © 2021 The Canadian Society of Clinical Chemists. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2021.07.014
PMID: 34331946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]