---
reference_id: "PMID:37863037"
title: "HD and SCA1: Tales from two 30-year journeys since gene discovery."
authors:
- Thompson LM
- Orr HT
journal: Neuron
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2023.09.036
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HD and SCA1: Tales from two 30-year journeys since gene discovery.
**Authors:** Thompson LM, Orr HT
**Journal:** Neuron (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2023.09.036](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2023.09.036)

## Content

1. Neuron. 2023 Nov 15;111(22):3517-3530. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2023.09.036. Epub
 2023 Oct 19.

HD and SCA1: Tales from two 30-year journeys since gene discovery.

Thompson LM(1), Orr HT(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Department of Neurobiology and 
Behavior, Department of Biological Chemistry, Institute of Memory Impairments 
and Neurological Disorders, Sue and Bill Gross Stem Cell Center, University of 
California Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Institute for Translational 
Neuroscience, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis and Saint Paul, MN 55455, 
USA. Electronic address: orrxx002@umn.edu.

One of the more transformative findings in human genetics was the discovery that 
the expansion of unstable nucleotide repeats underlies a group of inherited 
neurological diseases. A subset of these unstable repeat neurodegenerative 
diseases is due to the expansion of a CAG trinucleotide repeat encoding a 
stretch of glutamines, i.e., the polyglutamine (polyQ) repeat neurodegenerative 
diseases. Among the CAG/polyQ repeat diseases are Huntington's disease (HD) and 
spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1), in which the expansions are within widely 
expressed proteins. Although both HD and SCA1 are autosomal dominantly 
inherited, and both typically cause mid- to late-life-onset movement disorders 
with cognitive decline, they each are characterized by distinct clinical 
characteristics and predominant sites of neuropathology. Importantly, the 
respective affected proteins, Huntingtin (HTT, HD) and Ataxin 1 (ATXN1, SCA1), 
have unique functions and biological properties. Here, we review HD and SCA1 
with a focus on how their disease-specific and shared features may provide 
informative insights.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2023.09.036
PMCID: PMC10842341
PMID: 37863037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]