---
reference_id: "PMID:15301673"
title: "Adult bacterial meningitis: aetiology, penicillin susceptibility, risk factors, prognostic factors and guidelines for empirical antibiotic treatment."
authors:
- Meyer CN
- Samuelsson IS
- Galle M
- Bangsborg JM
journal: Clin Microbiol Infect
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1111/j.1469-0961.2004.00925.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adult bacterial meningitis: aetiology, penicillin susceptibility, risk factors, prognostic factors and guidelines for empirical antibiotic treatment.
**Authors:** Meyer CN, Samuelsson IS, Galle M, Bangsborg JM
**Journal:** Clin Microbiol Infect (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1469-0961.2004.00925.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-0961.2004.00925.x)

## Content

1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2004 Aug;10(8):709-17. doi: 
10.1111/j.1469-0961.2004.00925.x.

Adult bacterial meningitis: aetiology, penicillin susceptibility, risk factors, 
prognostic factors and guidelines for empirical antibiotic treatment.

Meyer CN(1), Samuelsson IS, Galle M, Bangsborg JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine F, Gentofte Hospital, Hellerup, Denmark. 
cnm@dadlnet.dk

Episodes of adult bacterial meningitis (ABM) at a Danish hospital in 1991-2000 
were identified from the databases of the Department of Clinical Microbiology, 
and compared with data from the Danish National Patient Register and the Danish 
National Notification System. Reduced penicillin susceptibility occurred in 21 
(23%) of 92 cases of known aetiology, compared to an estimated 6% in nationally 
notified cases (p < 0.001). Ceftriaxone plus penicillin as empirical treatment 
was appropriate in 97% of ABM cases in the study population, and in 99.6% of 
nationally notified cases. The notification rate was 75% for 
penicillin-susceptible episodes, and 24% for penicillin-non-susceptible episodes 
(p < 0.001). Cases involving staphylococci, Pseudomonas spp. and 
Enterobacteriaceae were under-reported. Among 51 ABM cases with no identified 
risk factors, nine of 11 cases with penicillin-non-susceptible bacteria were 
community-acquired. Severe sequelae correlated independently with age, 
penicillin non-susceptibility, mechanical ventilation and non-transferral to a 
tertiary hospital (p < 0.05; logistic regression). Other factors that correlated 
with severe sequelae by univariate analysis only were inappropriate clinical 
handling, abnormal consciousness, convulsions and nosocomial infection. Overall, 
the data indicated that neither age alone, community-acquired infection nor 
absence of identified risk factors can predict susceptibility to penicillin 
accurately. Recommendations for empirical antibiotic treatment for ABM should 
not be based exclusively on clinical notification systems with possible 
unbalanced under-reporting.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-0961.2004.00925.x
PMID: 15301673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]