---
reference_id: "PMID:24299315"
title: Transcriptome profiling of malignant transformed rat hepatic stem-like cells by aflatoxin B1.
authors:
- Yang L
- Ji J
- Chen Z
- Wang H
- Li J
journal: Neoplasma
year: '2014'
doi: 10.4149/neo_2014_025
keywords:
- Aflatoxin B1/toxicity
- Animals
- "Carcinogenesis/drug effects, metabolism"
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/chemically induced, metabolism, pathology"
- "Cell Transformation, Neoplastic/chemically induced, metabolism, pathology"
- Gene Expression Profiling
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic/drug effects"
- Humans
- "Liver Neoplasms/chemically induced, metabolism, pathology"
- "Liver Neoplasms, Experimental/chemically induced, metabolism, pathology"
- Neoplastic Stem Cells/metabolism
- Rats
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcriptome profiling of malignant transformed rat hepatic stem-like cells by aflatoxin B1.
**Authors:** Yang L, Ji J, Chen Z, Wang H, Li J
**Journal:** Neoplasma (2014)
**DOI:** [10.4149/neo_2014_025](https://doi.org/10.4149/neo_2014_025)

## Content

1. Neoplasma. 2014;61(2):193-204. doi: 10.4149/neo_2014_025.

Transcriptome profiling of malignant transformed rat hepatic stem-like cells by
aflatoxin B1.

Yang L, Ji J, Chen Z, Wang H, Li J.

Exposure to aflatoxins is strongly associated with hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC). Hepatic progenitor cells have been suggested to participate in the
development of HCC. To further explore the molecular basis of aflatoxin-induced
carcinogenesis, we utilized transcriptome profiles to examine the global gene
expression alterations of malignant transformed rat hepatic stem-like cells.
WB-F344 cells were treated with continuous exposure to AFB1 (0.03, 0.1 and
0.2μM), and gained certain characteristics of transformed cells identified by
soft agar assay. Microarray analyses of the transformed cells found that 785,
625, and 751 differentially expressed genes were detected in each exposure
group, respectively. Hierarchical Clustering revealed that the effect of 0.1 and
0.2μM exposure on the cells was conformable. Importantly, Gene Ontology analysis
showed that malignant transformation of the hepatic stem-like cells was closely
correlated to biological process, related to cell motion, cell adhesion, immune
response and signal transduction. Accordingly, biological pathways was focused
mainly on focal adhesion, regulation of actin cytoskeleton, ECM-receptor
interaction, MAPK, TGF-β and chemokine signaling pathway. A few genes involved
in these pathways exhibited a dose response, including Cav2, Itgb3, Ccl2,
Cx3cl1, Pdgfrb and Tmsb4x. These findings would contribute to a growing
knowledgebase on the mechanism of aflatoxin-induced hepatocarcinogenesis.

DOI: 10.4149/neo_2014_025
PMID: 24299315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
