---
reference_id: "PMID:15191637"
title: Congenital and acquired long QT syndrome. Current concepts and management.
authors:
- Chiang CE
journal: Cardiol Rev
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1097/01.crd.0000123842.42287.cf
keywords:
- Adrenergic beta-Antagonists/therapeutic use
- Anti-Arrhythmia Agents/therapeutic use
- "Cardiac Pacing, Artificial/methods"
- Chromosome Disorders/genetics
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac/etiology"
- Electrocardiography
- Female
- Genetic Therapy
- Heart Rate/drug effects
- Humans
- Ion Channels/physiopathology
- "Jervell-Lange Nielsen Syndrome/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Long QT Syndrome/congenital, diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Male
- "Romano-Ward Syndrome/genetics, physiopathology"
- Sympathectomy
- Syncope/physiopathology
- Torsades de Pointes/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital and acquired long QT syndrome. Current concepts and management.
**Authors:** Chiang CE
**Journal:** Cardiol Rev (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.crd.0000123842.42287.cf](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.crd.0000123842.42287.cf)

## Content

1. Cardiol Rev. 2004 Jul-Aug;12(4):222-34. doi:
10.1097/01.crd.0000123842.42287.cf.

Congenital and acquired long QT syndrome. Current concepts and management.

Chiang CE(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan. cechiang@vghtpe.gov.tw

Congenital long QT syndrome (LQTS) is a rare but potentially lethal disease,
characterized by prolongation of QT interval, recurrent syncope, and sudden
death. In the pregenomic era (1959-1991), sympathetic imbalance was thought to
be responsible for this disease. Since 1991 (postgenomic era), 7 LQTS genes have
been discovered and more than 300 mutations have been identified to account for
approximately 70% of patients affected. Despite the advancement in molecular
genetic knowledge, diagnosis of congenital LQTS is still based on
electrocardiographic and clinical characteristics. Beta-blockers remain the
mainstay treatment. For high-risk patients, the implantable
cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) offer an effective therapeutic option to reduce
mortality. Gene-based specific therapy is still preliminary. Further studies are
required to investigate new strategies for targeting the defective genes or
mutant channels. For acquired LQTS, it is generally believed that the main issue
is the blockade of the slow component of the delayed rectifier K+ current (IKr).
These IKr blockers have a "reverse frequency-dependent" effect on the QTc
interval and increase the dispersion in repolarization. In the presence of risk
factors such as female gender, slow heart rate, and hypokalemia, these IKr
blockers have a high propensity to induce torsades de pointes. For patients with
a history of drug-induced LQTS, care must be taken to avoid further exposure to
QT-prolonging drugs or conditions. Molecular genetic analysis could be useful to
unravel subclinical mutations or polymorphisms. Physicians not only need to be
aware of the pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic interactions of various
important drugs, but also need to update their knowledge.

Copyright 2004 Lippincott Williams and Wilkins

DOI: 10.1097/01.crd.0000123842.42287.cf
PMID: 15191637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
