---
reference_id: "PMID:15482221"
title: Treatment of staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome.
authors:
- Patel GK
journal: Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1586/14787210.2.4.575
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome.
**Authors:** Patel GK
**Journal:** Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1586/14787210.2.4.575](https://doi.org/10.1586/14787210.2.4.575)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther. 2004 Aug;2(4):575-87. doi: 
10.1586/14787210.2.4.575.

Treatment of staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome.

Patel GK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Wales College of Medicine, Heath 
Park, Cardiff CF14 4XN, UK. patelgk@cf.ac.uk.

Humans are a natural reservoir for Staphylococcal aureus. Colonization begins 
soon after birth and predisposes to infection. S. aureus is one of the most 
common causes of skin infection, giving rise to folliculitis, furunculosis, 
carbuncles, ecthyma, impetigo, cellulitis and abscesses. In addition, S. aureus 
may cause a number of toxin-mediated life-threatening diseases, including 
staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (SSSS). Epidermolytic toxins released by 
certain S. aureus strains cause SSSS by cleaving the epidermal cell adhesion 
molecule, desmogelin-1, resulting in superficial skin erosion. Recent 
experiments have revealed similarities in the pathophysiology of SSSS and 
pemphigus foliaceus, an autoimmune disorder that is characterized by antibodies 
targeting the same epidermal attachment protein. SSSS typically affects neonates 
and infants but may also occur in predisposed adults. It is painful and 
distressing for the patient and parents, although most cases respond to 
antibiotic treatment. Mortality is low in infants but can be as high as 67% in 
adults, and is dependent on the extent of skin involvement and the comorbid 
state. Thus, the management of adults who develop SSSS remains a major 
therapeutic challenge. The antibody response against the toxins neutralizes 
their effect and prevents recurrence or limits the effects to the area of 
infection, which is known as bullous impetigo.

DOI: 10.1586/14787210.2.4.575
PMID: 15482221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]