---
reference_id: "PMID:32279173"
title: "Strictures in Crohn's Disease: From Pathophysiology to Treatment."
authors:
- Crespi M
- Dulbecco P
- De Ceglie A
- Conio M
journal: Dig Dis Sci
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s10620-020-06227-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Strictures in Crohn's Disease: From Pathophysiology to Treatment.
**Authors:** Crespi M, Dulbecco P, De Ceglie A, Conio M
**Journal:** Dig Dis Sci (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10620-020-06227-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10620-020-06227-0)

## Content

1. Dig Dis Sci. 2020 Jul;65(7):1904-1916. doi: 10.1007/s10620-020-06227-0. Epub 
2020 Apr 11.

Strictures in Crohn's Disease: From Pathophysiology to Treatment.

Crespi M(1), Dulbecco P(2), De Ceglie A(1), Conio M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, General Hospital-ASL 1 Imperiese, Sanremo, 
IM, Italy.
(2)SC Gastroenterologia ed Endoscopia Digestiva, Ospedale San Paolo ASL 2 
Savonese, Savona, SV, Italy.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, General Hospital-ASL 1 Imperiese, Sanremo, 
IM, Italy. mxconio@tim.it.

Despite recent advances aimed to treat transmural inflammation in Crohn's 
disease (CD) patients, the progression to a structuring behavior still 
represents an issue for clinicians. As inflammation becomes chronic and severe, 
the attempt to repair damaged tissue can result in an excessive production of 
extracellular matrix components and deposition of connective tissue, thus 
favoring the formation of strictures. No specific and accurate clinical 
predictors or diagnostic tools for intestinal fibrosis exist, and to date, no 
genetic or serological marker is in routine clinical use. Therefore, intestinal 
fibrosis is usually diagnosed when it becomes clinically evident and strictures 
have already occurred. Anti-fibrotic agents such as tranilast, peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor gamma agonists, rho kinase inhibitors, and 
especially mesenchymal stem cell therapy have provided interesting results, but 
most of the evidence has been derived from studies performed in vitro. 
Therefore, current therapy of fibrotic strictures relies mainly on endoscopic 
and surgical procedures. Although its long-term outcomes may be debated, 
endoscopic balloon dilation appears to be the safest and most effective approach 
to treat appropriately selected strictures. The use of endoscopic stricturotomy 
is currently limited by the expertise needed to perform it and by the few data 
available in the literature. Some good results have been achieved by the 
positioning of self-expandable metal stents (SEMS). However, there is no 
concordance regarding the type of stent to use and for how long it should be 
left in place. The development of new specific SEMS may lead to better outcomes 
and to an increased use of this alternative in CD-related strictures.

DOI: 10.1007/s10620-020-06227-0
PMID: 32279173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]