---
reference_id: "PMID:28566407"
title: Pelvic reconstruction following resection of malignant bone tumours using a stemmed acetabular pedestal cup.
authors:
- Hipfl C
- Stihsen C
- Puchner SE
- Kaider A
- Dominkus M
- Funovics PT
- Windhager R
journal: Bone Joint J
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1302/0301-620X.99B6.BJJ-2016-0944.R1
keywords:
- "Acetabulum/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Arthroplasty, Replacement, Hip/adverse effects, instrumentation, methods"
- "Bone Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- Follow-Up Studies
- Hip Prosthesis/adverse effects
- Humans
- "Limb Salvage/adverse effects, methods"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Middle Aged
- Postoperative Complications
- Prosthesis Design
- Prosthesis Failure
- Retrospective Studies
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pelvic reconstruction following resection of malignant bone tumours using a stemmed acetabular pedestal cup.
**Authors:** Hipfl C, Stihsen C, Puchner SE, Kaider A, Dominkus M, Funovics PT, Windhager R
**Journal:** Bone Joint J (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1302/0301-620X.99B6.BJJ-2016-0944.R1](https://doi.org/10.1302/0301-620X.99B6.BJJ-2016-0944.R1)

## Content

1. Bone Joint J. 2017 Jun;99-B(6):841-848. doi: 
10.1302/0301-620X.99B6.BJJ-2016-0944.R1.

Pelvic reconstruction following resection of malignant bone tumours using a 
stemmed acetabular pedestal cup.

Hipfl C(1), Stihsen C(1), Puchner SE(1), Kaider A(1), Dominkus M(1), Funovics 
PT(1), Windhager R(1).

Author information:
(1)Vienna General Hospital, Waehringer Gürtel 18-20, 1090 Vienna, Austria.

AIMS: Pelvic reconstruction after the resection of a tumour around the 
acetabulum is a challenging procedure due to the complex anatomy and 
biomechanics. Several pelvic endoprostheses have been introduced, but the rates 
of complication remain high. Our aim was to review the use of a stemmed 
acetabular pedestal cup in the management of these patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The study involved 48 patients who underwent 
periacetabular reconstruction using a stemmed pedestal cup (Schoellner cup; 
Zimmer Biomet Inc., Warsaw, Indiana) between 2000 and 2013. The indications for 
treatment included a primary bone tumour in 27 patients and metastatic disease 
in 21 patients. The mean age of the patients at the time of surgery was 52 years 
(16 to 83).
RESULTS: At a median follow-up of 6.6 years (95% confidence interval 4.6 to 
8.2), local control was achieved in all patients; 19 patients had died (16 of 
disease). Complications occurred in 19 patients (40%), of which deep infection 
was the most common, affecting eight patients (17%). Seven patients (15%) had a 
dislocation of the hip. Aseptic loosening was found in three patients (6%). Two 
(4%) underwent hindquarter amputation for non-oncological reasons. The risk of 
revision, with death being treated as a competing event, was 28% at one year, 
39% at five years and 48% at ten years post-operatively. The mean 
Musculoskeletal Tumour Society Score at final follow-up was 71% (27% to 93%).
CONCLUSION: This type of reconstruction is a satisfactory option for the 
treatment of patients with a periacetabular tumour. There remains, however, a 
high rate of complication, which may be reduced by future modifications of the 
device such as silver coating and tripolar articulation. Cite this article: Bone 
Joint J 2017;99-B:841-8.

©2017 The British Editorial Society of Bone & Joint Surgery.

DOI: 10.1302/0301-620X.99B6.BJJ-2016-0944.R1
PMID: 28566407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]