---
reference_id: "PMID:37844487"
title: "Endometriosis: Classification, pathophysiology, and treatment options."
authors:
- Pašalić E
- Tambuwala MM
- Hromić-Jahjefendić A
journal: Pathol Res Pract
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2023.154847
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- "Endometriosis/therapy, pathology"
- Endometrium/pathology
- Hysterectomy/adverse effects
- Inflammation/pathology
- "Pain/complications, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endometriosis: Classification, pathophysiology, and treatment options.
**Authors:** Pašalić E, Tambuwala MM, Hromić-Jahjefendić A
**Journal:** Pathol Res Pract (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.prp.2023.154847](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.prp.2023.154847)

## Content

1. Pathol Res Pract. 2023 Nov;251:154847. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2023.154847. Epub
2023  Oct 4.

Endometriosis: Classification, pathophysiology, and treatment options.

Pašalić E(1), Tambuwala MM(2), Hromić-Jahjefendić A(3).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, Genetics and Bioengineering
Department, Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, International
University of Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
(2)Lincoln Medical School, University of Lincoln, Brayford Pool Campus, Lincoln
LN6 7TS, UK. Electronic address: MTambuwala@lincoln.ac.uk.
(3)Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, Genetics and Bioengineering
Department, Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, International
University of Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina. Electronic address:
ahromic@ius.edu.ba.

The human endometrium is a complex hormone-target tissue consisting of two
layers: the lower basalis, and the upper functionalis. The latter of the two
goes through a cycle of thickening and shedding without residual scarring or
loss of function. This cycle, known as the menstrual cycle, occurs on a monthly
basis in most of healthy reproductive-age women. It is, however, associated with
a number of reproductive diseases, endometriosis being one of them.
Endometriosis is defined as the presence of endometrium at ectopic sites within
the peritoneum or, more rarely, other locations outside the abdominal area. It
affects around 6-10% of reproductive-age women in the world and causes
debilitating pain, heavy menstrual bleeding, pain during penetrative sex, and
infertility. The etiology of the disease is not yet fully understood but the
generally accepted theory is that the endometriotic lesions originate from
viable eutopic endometrial cells that flow back into the peritoneum through the
process of retrograde menstruation. Endometriosis is usually classified into
four stages: minimal, mild, moderate, and severe, though it is important to note
that the presentation of symptoms does not necessarily correspond to the disease
progression. The immune system plays an important role in supporting the
viability and growth of ectopic endometriotic tissue, all the while promoting
chronic inflammation at the lesion sites, which causes prolonged pain. There is
no definitive cure for endometriosis, but there are several options for symptom
management, including laparoscopy, hormonal therapy, the use of NSAIDs, dietary
changes, exercise, and, in cases when all conservative treatments fail,
hysterectomy.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier GmbH.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.prp.2023.154847
PMID: 37844487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare no conflict of interest.
