---
reference_id: "PMID:23817881"
title: Dengue infections.
authors:
- Burnett MW
journal: J Spec Oper Med
year: '2013'
doi: 10.55460/3O8A-579J
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue infections.
**Authors:** Burnett MW
**Journal:** J Spec Oper Med (2013)
**DOI:** [10.55460/3O8A-579J](https://doi.org/10.55460/3O8A-579J)

## Content

1. J Spec Oper Med. 2013 Summer;13(2):64-68. doi: 10.55460/3O8A-579J.

Dengue infections.

Burnett MW.

Dengue fever is one of the most common mosquito-borne viral illnesses in the 
world. It is usually transmitted to humans through the bite of an infected Aedes 
aegypti or Aedes albopictus mosquito. Dengue infections are caused by four 
antigenically distinct but closely related viruses (DEN 1?4). Infection with any 
one of the viruses is thought to provide lifetime immunity to future infections 
from the same virus but only short-term cross-immunity to the other types, 
leading to the possibility of secondary infections. Dengue hemorrhagic 
fever/dengue shock syndrome (DHF/DSS), more severe types of dengue infections, 
sometimes result when an individual is subsequently infected with a second virus 
serotype during their lifetime. The most commonly accepted theory for the 
development of these more severe dengue infections is that of antibody-dependent 
enhancement, although other factors likely play a role. Infections complicated 
by DHF/DSS in areas where dengue is endemic are most often seen in the later 
half of the first year of life, when waning maternal antibodies may enhance the 
development of a more severe infection, and in young school-age children 
experiencing secondary infections. Widespread infections are most commonly seen 
during the rainy season of endemic areas when the breeding habitat of the Aedes 
mosquito is most favorable.

2013.

DOI: 10.55460/3O8A-579J
PMID: 23817881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]