---
reference_id: "PMID:15907145"
title: "Bacterial meningitis in children: critical review of current concepts."
authors:
- Yogev R
- Guzman-Cottrill J
journal: Drugs
year: '2005'
doi: 10.2165/00003495-200565080-00005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bacterial meningitis in children: critical review of current concepts.
**Authors:** Yogev R, Guzman-Cottrill J
**Journal:** Drugs (2005)
**DOI:** [10.2165/00003495-200565080-00005](https://doi.org/10.2165/00003495-200565080-00005)

## Content

1. Drugs. 2005;65(8):1097-112. doi: 10.2165/00003495-200565080-00005.

Bacterial meningitis in children: critical review of current concepts.

Yogev R(1), Guzman-Cottrill J.

Author information:
(1)Feinberg School of Medicine, Children's Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois 
60614, USA. ryogev@childrensmemorial.org

Acute bacterial meningitis is still an important cause of morbidity and 
mortality in children worldwide. Recently, Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib), 
once a common cause of meningitis, has virtually disappeared in developed 
nations, reflecting the overwhelming success of Hib vaccination. Unfortunately, 
Hib remains a significant pathogen in resource-poor countries. The introduction 
of the conjugated pneumococcal vaccine in 2000 may lead to similar future trends 
as witnessed with Hib. As the resistance of Streptococcus pneumoniae to 
penicillin and cephalosporins continues to evolve, vancomycin has become an 
important antibacterial in the treatment of bacterial meningitis. The unreliable 
penetration of this agent into cerebrospinal fluid is of concern, which is 
compounded by the controversial use of corticosteroids in paediatric meningitis. 
Some data suggest that in certain situations the addition of rifampicin 
(rifampin) to ceftriaxone may be a better choice. While dexamethasone is now 
considered the standard adjunctive therapy in the treatment of pneumococcal 
meningitis in adult patients, the benefit in children is not so clear and 
remains controversial; thus, there is no definitive paediatric recommendation. 
Several anti-inflammatory agents currently under investigation may be used in 
the future as adjunctive therapy for bacterial meningitis. It is clear that the 
current concepts in the treatment of childhood bacterial meningitis are 
evolving, and other antibacterial options and possible alternatives such as 
carbapenems and fluoroquinolones should be considered. Fluid restriction because 
of the Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuretic Hormone Secretion is widely 
advocated and used. Yet, this practice was recently challenged. It seems that 
most patients with meningitis do not need fluid restriction. The overwhelming 
success of the conjugated Hib vaccine and the encouraging results of the new 
conjugated pneumococcal and meningococcal vaccines suggest that the ideal 
management of bacterial meningitis is prevention and vaccines development 
against the most common bacterial agents are the best solution.

DOI: 10.2165/00003495-200565080-00005
PMID: 15907145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]