---
reference_id: "PMID:32883660"
title: "Achondroplasia Foramen Magnum Score: screening infants for stenosis."
authors:
- Cheung MS
- Irving M
- Cocca A
- Santos R
- Shaunak M
- Dougherty H
- Siddiqui A
- Gringras P
- Thompson D
journal: Arch Dis Child
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1136/archdischild-2020-319625
keywords:
- "Achondroplasia/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- Algorithms
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Constriction, Pathologic/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- Decision Trees
- "Decompression, Surgical"
- Female
- Foramen Magnum/pathology
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Neonatal Screening
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Achondroplasia Foramen Magnum Score: screening infants for stenosis.
**Authors:** Cheung MS, Irving M, Cocca A, Santos R, Shaunak M, Dougherty H, Siddiqui A, Gringras P, Thompson D
**Journal:** Arch Dis Child (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1136/archdischild-2020-319625](https://doi.org/10.1136/archdischild-2020-319625)

## Content

1. Arch Dis Child. 2021 Feb;106(2):180-184. doi:
10.1136/archdischild-2020-319625.  Epub 2020 Sep 3.

Achondroplasia Foramen Magnum Score: screening infants for stenosis.

Cheung MS(1), Irving M(2), Cocca A(3), Santos R(4), Shaunak M(3), Dougherty 
H(3), Siddiqui A(5), Gringras P(6), Thompson D(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Evelina London Children's Hospital, 
London, UK Moira.Cheung@gstt.nhs.uk.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, 
London, UK.
(3)Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Evelina London Children's Hospital, 
London, UK.
(4)Department of Paediatric Radiology, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation 
Trust, London, UK.
(5)Department of Neuroradiology, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, 
London, UK.
(6)Department of Sleep and Neurodisability, Evelina London Children's Hospital, 
London, UK.
(7)Department of Paediatric Neurosurgery, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, 
UK.

BACKGROUND: Achondroplasia is associated with foramen magnum stenosis (FMS) and 
significant risk of morbidity and sudden death in infants. A sensitive and 
reliable method of detecting infants who require decompressive surgery is 
required. This study aims to describe the incidence and severity of FMS in an 
unselected, sequential series of infants using a novel MRI score and 
retrospectively correlate severity with clinical examination and 
cardiorespiratory sleep (CRS) studies.
METHODS: The Achondroplasia Foramen Magnum Score (AFMS) was developed and scores 
were retrospectively correlated with clinical and CRS data over a 3-year period.
RESULTS: Of 36 infants (M:F, 18:18), 2 (5.6%) did not have FMS (AFMS0); 13 
(36.1%) had FMS with preservation of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) spaces 
(AFMS1); 3 (8.3%) had FMS with loss of the CSF space but no spinal cord 
distortion (AFMS2); 13 (36.1%) had FMS with flattening of the cervical cord 
without signal change (AFMS3); and 5 (13.9%) had FMS resulting in cervical cord 
signal change (AFMS4). Mean Total Apnea and Hypopnea Index (TAHI) for AFMS0-4 
was 3.4, 6.41, 2.97, 10.5 and 25.8, respectively. Severe TAHI had a specificity 
of 89% but only a 59% sensitivity for AFMS3-4. Neurological examination was 
normal in 34/36 (94%) patients. Overall, 9/36 (25%) infants required 
neurosurgery with minimal surgical complications.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinical examination and CRS have a low sensitivity for predicting 
the effects of foramen stenosis on the spinal cord. Routine screening with MRI 
using AFMS can aid in detecting early spinal cord changes and has the potential 
to reduce infant morbidity and mortality.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/archdischild-2020-319625
PMID: 32883660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.