---
reference_id: "PMID:38337479"
title: A Risk of Gonadoblastoma in Familial Swyer Syndrome-A Case Report and Literature Review.
authors:
- Rudnicka E
- Jaroń A
- Kruszewska J
- Smolarczyk R
- Jażdżewski K
- Derlatka P
- Kucharska AM
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/jcm13030785
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Risk of Gonadoblastoma in Familial Swyer Syndrome-A Case Report and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Rudnicka E, Jaroń A, Kruszewska J, Smolarczyk R, Jażdżewski K, Derlatka P, Kucharska AM
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm13030785](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm13030785)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2024 Jan 30;13(3):785. doi: 10.3390/jcm13030785.

A Risk of Gonadoblastoma in Familial Swyer Syndrome-A Case Report and Literature 
Review.

Rudnicka E(1), Jaroń A(2), Kruszewska J(3), Smolarczyk R(1), Jażdżewski K(4), 
Derlatka P(5), Kucharska AM(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynecological Endocrinology, Medical University of Warsaw, 
02-091 Warszawa, Poland.
(2)Students Scientific Group of Department of Pediatrics and Endocrinology, 
Medical University of Warsaw, 02-091 Warszawa, Poland.
(3)Students Scientific Group of Department of Gynecological Endocrinology, 
Medical University of Warsaw, 02-091 Warszawa, Poland.
(4)Human Cancer Genetics, Biological and Chemical Research Center University of 
Warsaw, 02-089 Warszawa, Poland.
(5)Second Department Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Medical University of Warsaw, 
02-091 Warszawa, Poland.
(6)Department of Pediatrics and Endocrinology, Medical University of Warsaw, 
02-091 Warszawa, Poland.

A complete gonadal dysgenesis (CGD) with 46,XY karyotype is known as the Swyer 
syndrome and belongs to the group of 46,XY differences of sex development (DSD). 
The main problem in patients with Swyer syndrome is the delayed puberty and 
primary amenorrhea. Moreover, intrabdominal dysgenetic gonads in the patient 
with genetic material of a Y chromosome may conduce to the development of 
gonadal tumors, such as gonadoblastoma or germinoma. The management of such 
patients is based on preventive excision of dysgenetic gonads and long-term 
hormonal replacement therapy. Sporadic cases are considered more common than 
familial cases. This paper presents two siblings with Swyer syndrome in whom 
gonadoblastoma was found. A thorough review of familial CGD with 46,XY DSD in 
the literature from the last 15 years suggests that the risk of gonadal tumors 
could be increased in familial compared to sporadic cases (66.6% vs. 15-45%, 
respectively).

DOI: 10.3390/jcm13030785
PMCID: PMC10856735
PMID: 38337479

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.