---
reference_id: "PMID:37517413"
title: "Momelotinib versus danazol in symptomatic patients with anaemia and myelofibrosis previously treated with a JAK inhibitor (MOMENTUM): an updated analysis of an international, double-blind, randomised phase 3 study."
authors:
- Gerds AT
- Verstovsek S
- Vannucchi AM
- Al-Ali HK
- Lavie D
- Kuykendall AT
- Grosicki S
- Iurlo A
- Goh YT
- Lazaroiu MC
- Egyed M
- Fox ML
- McLornan D
- Perkins A
- Yoon SS
- Gupta V
- Kiladjian JJ
- Granacher N
- Lee SE
- Ocroteala L
- Passamonti F
- Harrison CN
- Oh S
- Klencke BJ
- Yu J
- Donahue R
- Kawashima J
- Mesa R
journal: Lancet Haematol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/S2352-3026(23)00174-6
keywords:
- Humans
- "Anemia/drug therapy, etiology"
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols
- Danazol/therapeutic use
- Double-Blind Method
- Janus Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Primary Myelofibrosis/complications, drug therapy"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Benzamides
- Pyrimidines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Momelotinib versus danazol in symptomatic patients with anaemia and myelofibrosis previously treated with a JAK inhibitor (MOMENTUM): an updated analysis of an international, double-blind, randomised phase 3 study.
**Authors:** Gerds AT, Verstovsek S, Vannucchi AM, Al-Ali HK, Lavie D, Kuykendall AT, Grosicki S, Iurlo A, Goh YT, Lazaroiu MC, Egyed M, Fox ML, McLornan D, Perkins A, Yoon SS, Gupta V, Kiladjian JJ, Granacher N, Lee SE, Ocroteala L, Passamonti F, Harrison CN, Oh S, Klencke BJ, Yu J, Donahue R, Kawashima J, Mesa R
**Journal:** Lancet Haematol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2352-3026(23)00174-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2352-3026(23)00174-6)

## Content

1. Lancet Haematol. 2023 Sep;10(9):e735-e746. doi: 10.1016/S2352-3026(23)00174-6.
 Epub 2023 Jul 27.

Momelotinib versus danazol in symptomatic patients with anaemia and 
myelofibrosis previously treated with a JAK inhibitor (MOMENTUM): an updated 
analysis of an international, double-blind, randomised phase 3 study.

Gerds AT(1), Verstovsek S(2), Vannucchi AM(3), Al-Ali HK(4), Lavie D(5), 
Kuykendall AT(6), Grosicki S(7), Iurlo A(8), Goh YT(9), Lazaroiu MC(10), Egyed 
M(11), Fox ML(12), McLornan D(13), Perkins A(14), Yoon SS(15), Gupta V(16), 
Kiladjian JJ(17), Granacher N(18), Lee SE(19), Ocroteala L(20), Passamonti 
F(21), Harrison CN(13), Oh S(22), Klencke BJ(23), Yu J(24), Donahue R(23), 
Kawashima J(23), Mesa R(25).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Cleveland Clinic Taussig 
Cancer Institute, Cleveland, OH, USA. Electronic address: gerdsa@ccf.org.
(2)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Department of Hematology, University of Florence, Florence, Italy; Center of 
Research and Innovation of Myeloproliferative Neoplasms, AOU Careggi, Florence, 
Italy.
(4)Krukenberg Cancer Center, University Hospital of Halle, Halle, Germany.
(5)Department of Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation, Hadassah-Hebrew 
University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(6)Department of Malignant Hematology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL, USA.
(7)Department of Hematology and Cancer Prevention, Medical University of 
Silesia, Katowice, Poland.
(8)Hematology Division, Foundation IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore 
Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(9)Department of Haematology, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore.
(10)Department of Hematology, Policlinica de Diagnostic Rapid Brasov, Brasov, 
Romania.
(11)Department of Hematology, Somogy County Mór Kaposi General Hospital, 
Kaposvár, Hungary.
(12)Department of Haematology, Vall d'Hebron Hospital Universitari, Experimental 
Hematology, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology, Vall d'Hebron Barcelona 
Hospital Campus, Barcelona, Spain.
(13)Department of Haematology, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, 
London, UK.
(14)Department of Haematology, Alfred Hospital, Monash University, Melbourne, 
VIC, Australia.
(15)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of 
Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, South Korea.
(16)Department of Medicine, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, ON, 
Canada.
(17)Université de Paris, AP-HP, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Centre d'Investigations 
Cliniques, INSERM, CIC1427, Paris, France.
(18)Department of Hematology, Ziekenhuis Netwerk Antwerpen, Antwerp, Belgium.
(19)Department of Hematology, Seoul St Mary's Hospital, College of Medicine, The 
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, South Korea.
(20)Department of Hematology, Filantropia Hospital, Craiova, Romania.
(21)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Insubria, Varese, Italy.
(22)Division of Hematology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
MO, USA.
(23)Sierra Oncology, San Mateo, CA, USA.
(24)GSK, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(25)Atrium Health Wake Forest Baptist Comprehensive Cancer Center, Wake Forest 
University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, USA.

Comment in
    Lancet Haematol. 2023 Sep;10(9):e697-e699. doi: 
10.1016/S2352-3026(23)00208-9.

BACKGROUND: The MOMENTUM study met all key endpoints at week 24, demonstrating 
symptom, spleen, and anaemia benefits with momelotinib versus danazol in 
patients with myelofibrosis. In this updated analysis, we report duration of 
week 24 responses and new responses with momelotinib through week 48.
METHODS: MOMENTUM is an international, double-blind, randomised, phase 3 study 
done at 107 sites across 21 countries. Patients were 18 years or older with 
primary, post-polycythaemia vera, or post-essential thrombocythaemia 
myelofibrosis, previously treated with an approved Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitor 
for 90 days or more (≥28 days with haematological complications), and had an 
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of 2 or less. Patients 
were randomly assigned (2:1) to either the momelotinib group (200 mg orally once 
per day) or danazol group (300 mg orally twice per day) through week 24 via 
non-deterministic biased coin minimisation and an interactive response system. 
Stratification factors were Total Symptom Score (TSS; <22 vs ≥22), spleen size 
(<12 cm vs ≥12 cm), transfusion burden (0 units vs 1-4 units vs ≥5 units), and 
study site. After week 24, all patients initially randomly assigned to either 
group who remained on the study received open-label momelotinib. The primary 
endpoint, which has already been reported, was Myelofibrosis Symptom Assessment 
Form TSS response rate at week 24. Predefined secondary endpoints were duration 
of week 24 TSS and transfusion independence responses, safety, and survival, 
which are summarised post hoc at the week 48 data cutoff (May 17, 2022). TSS, 
transfusion independence, and splenic responses at week 48 were defined post hoc 
and assessed in all evaluable patients who entered the open-label period and 
provided sufficient data. The timing of this updated analysis was defined post 
hoc after all patients had the opportunity to complete their week 48 
assessments, as most patients entered an extended access study (NCT03441113) 
after week 48. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number 
NCT04173494, and is now complete.
FINDINGS: Between April 24, 2020, and Dec 3, 2021, a total of 195 patients were 
randomised (130 [67%] in the momelotinib group and 65 [33%] in the danazol 
group). 93 (72%) of 130 patients in the momelotinib group and 41 (63%) of 65 in 
the danazol group entered the momelotinib open-label extension period. Median 
follow-up was 48·4 weeks (IQR 40·6-55·7). Among TSS-evaluable patients at week 
48, 30 (45%) of 67 patients in the momelotinib group who continued treatment and 
15 (50%) of 30 in the danazol group who crossed over were responders. TSS 
responders at any time during the open-label period by week 48 were 46 (61%) of 
75 evaluable patients in the momelotinib group who continued and 19 (59%) of 32 
in the danazol group who crossed over, including most week 24 responders plus 
new responders after week 24. No new safety signals emerged with long-term 
follow-up. The most common non-haematological treatment-emergent adverse events 
in momelotinib-treated patients over the entire study period as of the data 
cutoff were diarrhoea (45 [26%] of 171) and asthenia (28 [16%]); the most common 
grades 3-4 treatment-emergent adverse events were thrombocytopenia (33 [19%]) 
and anaemia (19 [11%]). Serious treatment-emergent adverse events were reported 
in 79 (46%) of 171 patients, and fatal treatment-emergent adverse events were 
reported in 30 (18%); two fatal treatment-emergent adverse events were 
considered possibly related to momelotinib (rotaviral enteritis and 
Staphylococcus pneumonia).
INTERPRETATION: Momelotinib was associated with durable symptom, spleen, and 
anaemia benefits, late responses after week 24, and favourable safety through 
week 48. These results highlight the potential benefits of treatment with 
momelotinib in patients with myelofibrosis, particularly those with anaemia.
FUNDING: Sierra Oncology, a GSK company.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2352-3026(23)00174-6
PMID: 37517413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests ATG reports consulting 
fees from AbbVie, Bristol Myers Squibb, Constellation/MorphoSys, CTI Biopharma, 
Imago Biosciences/Merck, Incyte, Pharma Essentia, Sierra Oncology/GSK, and 
Telios. SV reports consulting fees from GSK. AMV reports payment or honoraria 
from AbbVie, AOP Health, Bristol Myers Squibb, GSK, Incyte, Novartis, and Roche. 
HKA-A reports research grants from Bristol Myers Squibb and Incyte; honoraria 
from AbbVie, Bristol Myers Squibb, GSK, and Novartis; and advisory board 
participation with AbbVie, Bristol Myers Squibb, GSK, and Novartis. DL reports 
consulting fees from AbbVie, Medisson, and Takeda; payment or honoraria from 
AbbVie, Novartis, Roche, and Takeda; travel support from AbbVie; and advisory 
board participation with AbbVie and Medisson. ATK reports consulting fees from 
CTI Biopharma, GSK, and Imago Biosciences; payment or honoraria from Bristol 
Myers Squibb, Incyte, and MorphoSys; travel support from AbbVie and MorphoSys; 
and advisory board participation with Incyte. AI reports payment or honoraria 
from Bristol Myers Squibb, GSK, Incyte, Novartis, and Pfizer; and advisory board 
participation with AOP Health, Incyte, and Novartis. YTG reports consulting fees 
from AstraZeneca, GSK, Novartis, and Pfizer; and payment or honoraria from 
AbbVie. MLF reports consulting fees from AbbVie, GSK, Novartis, and Sierra 
Oncology; payment or honoraria from Bristol Myers Squibb and Novartis; and 
travel support from AbbVie. DM reports a research grant from Imago Biosciences; 
payment or honoraria from AbbVie, Bristol Myers Squibb, Jazz Pharma, and 
Novartis; participation on a data safety monitoring board for the UK ALL-RIC 
trial; and a leadership or fiduciary role as a member of the EBMT Scientific 
Council and chair of the EBMT Chronic Malignancies Working Party. S-SY reports 
grants or contracts from Roche-Genentech, Kyowa Hakko Kirin, and Yuhan Pharma; 
payment or honoraria from Celgene, Janssen, and Novartis; and advisory board 
participation with Amgen, Antengene, and Takeda. VG reports consulting fees from 
AbbVie, Bristol Myers Squibb/Celgene, Constellation Biopharma, CTI Biopharma, 
GSK, Novartis, Pfizer, and Sierra Oncology; payment or honoraria from Bristol 
Myers Squibb/Celgene and Novartis; and advisory board participation with AbbVie, 
Bristol Myers Squibb/Celgene, CTI Biopharma, Pfizer, Roche, and Sierra Oncology. 
J-JK reports advisory board participation with AbbVie, AOP Health, Bristol Myers 
Squibb, GSK, Incyte, and Novartis. FP reports grants or contracts from Bristol 
Myers Squibb; consulting fees from AbbVie, AOP Orphan, Bristol Myers 
Squibb/Celgene, Kartos, Karyopharm, Kyowa Kirin and MEI, Novartis, Roche, Sierra 
Oncology, and Sumimoto; and payment or honoraria from AbbVie, AOP Orphan, 
Bristol Myers Squibb/Celgene, Novartis, and Roche. CNH reports payment for study 
conduct and advisory board participation, related to the present manuscript; 
consulting fees from DISC, Galecto, and Keros; payment or honoraria from Bristol 
Myers Squibb, CTI Biopharma, GSK, Novartis, and Sierra Oncology; advisory board 
participation with AOP, Keros, Sumimoto, and Telios; and a leadership or 
fiduciary role with EHA, HemaSphere, and MPN Voice. SO reports consulting fees 
from AbbVie, Bristol Myers Squibb, Cogent, Constellation, CTI Biopharma, Geron, 
Incyte, Protagonist, and Sierra Oncology. BJK and RD employment and stock/stock 
options with Sierra Oncology, a GSK company. JY reports employment and stock or 
stock options with GSK. JK reports employment and stock or stock options with 
Sierra Oncology, a GSK company; and stock or stock options with Gilead. RM 
reports consulting fees from AbbVie, Blueprint, Bristol Myers Squibb, CTI, 
Genentech, Geron, GSK, Incyte, MorphoSys, Novartis, Sierra Oncology, and Telios. 
All authors received medical writing support related to the present manuscript, 
funded by GSK. SG, MCL, ME, NG, AP, S-EL, and LO declare no other competing 
interests.