---
reference_id: "PMID:30550360"
title: "Molecular diagnostics of disorders of sexual development: an Indian survey and systems biology perspective."
authors:
- Nagaraja MR
- Gubbala SP
- Delphine Silvia CRW
- Amanchy R
journal: Syst Biol Reprod Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1080/19396368.2018.1549619
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular diagnostics of disorders of sexual development: an Indian survey and systems biology perspective.
**Authors:** Nagaraja MR, Gubbala SP, Delphine Silvia CRW, Amanchy R
**Journal:** Syst Biol Reprod Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1080/19396368.2018.1549619](https://doi.org/10.1080/19396368.2018.1549619)

## Content

1. Syst Biol Reprod Med. 2019 Apr;65(2):105-120. doi: 
10.1080/19396368.2018.1549619. Epub 2018 Dec 14.

Molecular diagnostics of disorders of sexual development: an Indian survey and 
systems biology perspective.

Nagaraja MR(1), Gubbala SP(2), Delphine Silvia CRW(1), Amanchy R(2).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Biochemistry , Akash Institute of Medical Sciences & Research 
Centre , Bangalore , India.
(2)b Division of Pharmacology and Toxicology , CSIR- Indian Institute of 
Chemical Technology , Hyderabad , India.

We aimed to survey the monogenic causes of disorders of sex development (DSD) 
and thereby its prevalence in India. This study revealed mutations resulting in 
androgen insensitivity syndrome, 5α-reductase type 2 deficiency, and gonadal 
dysgenesis were commonly reported. Intriguingly, AR deficits were the most 
prevalent (32 mutations) and of 11/26 missense mutations were in exons 4-8 
(encoding ligand binding domain). The unique features of SRD5A2 defects were 
p.R246Q (most prevalent) and p.G196S could be mutational hotspots, dual gene 
defects (p.A596T in AR and p.G196S in SRD5A2) in a patient with hypospadias and 
novel 8 nucleotide deletion (exon 1) found in a patient with perineal 
hypospadias. Deficits in SRY, WT1, DHH, NR5A1, and DMRT1 caused 46,XY gonadal 
dysgenesis. Notably, mutations in AR, SRD5A2, MAMLD1, WT1, and MAP3K1 have led 
to hypospadias and only one CYP19A1 mutation caused aromatase deficiency was 
reported to date. Data mining from various databases has not only reinforced the 
role of well-established genes (e.g., SRY, WT1, DHH, NR5A1, DMRT1, AR, SRD5A2, 
MAMLD1) involved in DSD but also provided us 12 more potential candidate genes 
(ACVR1, AMHR2, CTNNB1, CYP11A1, CYP19A1, FGFR2, FGF9, PRKACA, PRKACG, SMAD9, 
TERT, ZFPM2), which benefit from a close association with the well-established 
genes involved in DSD and might be useful to screen owing to their direct 
gene-phenotype relationship or through direct functional interaction. As more 
genes have been revealed in relation to DSD, we believe ultimately it holds a 
better scenario for therapeutic regimen. Despite the advances in translational 
medicine, hospitals are yet to adopt genetic testing and counseling facilities 
in India that shall have potential impact on clinical diagnosis. Abbreviations: 
5α-RD2: 5α-Reductase type 2; AIS: androgen insensitivity syndrome; AMH: 
antimullerian hormone; AMHR: antimullerian hormone receptor; AR: androgen 
receptor gene; CAH: congenital adrenal hyperplasia; CAIS: complete AIS; CAH: 
congenital adrenal hyperplasia; CHH: congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism; 
CXORF6: chromosome X open reading frame 6 gene; CYP19A1: cytochrome P450 family 
19 subfamily A member 1 gene; DHT: dihydrotestosterone; DMRT1: double sex and 
mab-3 related transcription factor 1 gene; DSD: disorders of sexual development; 
GD: gonadal dysgenesis; HGMD: human gene mutation database; IH: isolated 
hypospadias; MAMLD1: mastermind like domain containing 1 gene; MIS: mullerian 
inhibiting substance; NTD: N-terminal domain; OT DSD: ovotesticular DSD; PAIS: 
partial AIS; SOX9: SRY-related HMG-box 9 gene; SRY: sex-determining region Y 
gene; STAR: steroidogenic acute regulatory protein gene; SRD5A2: steroid 5 
alpha-reductase 2 gene; T DSD: testicular DSD; T: testosterone; WNT4: Wnt family 
member 4 gene; WT1: Wilms tumor 1 gene; Δ4: androstenedione.

DOI: 10.1080/19396368.2018.1549619
PMID: 30550360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]