---
reference_id: "PMID:38664000"
title: Systematic study of ophthalmological findings in 10 patients with PEX1-mediated Zellweger spectrum disorder.
authors:
- Karuntu JS
- Klouwer FCC
- Engelen M
- Boon CJF
journal: Ophthalmic Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/13816810.2024.2330389
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Adult
- Adolescent
- Visual Acuity/physiology
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- "Zellweger Syndrome/genetics, diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Young Adult
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Phenotype
- Peroxins/genetics
- Ophthalmoscopy
- ATPases Associated with Diverse Cellular Activities/genetics
- Mutation
- Visual Fields/physiology
- Visual Field Tests
- Electroretinography
- Pedigree
- Membrane Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systematic study of ophthalmological findings in 10 patients with PEX1-mediated Zellweger spectrum disorder.
**Authors:** Karuntu JS, Klouwer FCC, Engelen M, Boon CJF
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/13816810.2024.2330389](https://doi.org/10.1080/13816810.2024.2330389)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Genet. 2024 Aug;45(4):351-362. doi: 10.1080/13816810.2024.2330389.
Epub 2024 Apr 25.

Systematic study of ophthalmological findings in 10 patients with PEX1-mediated
Zellweger spectrum disorder.

Karuntu JS(1), Klouwer FCC(2), Engelen M(2), Boon CJF(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Paediatric Neurology/Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam
University Medical Centers, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.

PURPOSE: This cross-sectional study describes the ophthalmological and general
phenotype of 10 patients from six different families with a comparatively mild
form of Zellweger spectrum disorder (ZSD), a rare peroxisomal disorder.
METHODS: Ophthalmological assessment included best-corrected visual acuity
(BCVA), perimetry, microperimetry, ophthalmoscopy, fundus photography,
spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT), and fundus
autofluorescence (FAF) imaging. Medical records were reviewed for medical
history and systemic manifestations of ZSD.
RESULTS: Nine patients were homozygous for c.2528 G > A (p.Gly843Asp) variants
in PEX1 and one patient was compound heterozygous for c.2528 G>A (p.Gly843Asp)
and c.2097_2098insT (p.Ile700TyrfsTer42) in PEX1. Median age was 22.6 years
(interquartile range (IQR): 15.9 - 29.9 years) at the most recent examination,
with a median symptom duration of 22.1 years. Symptom onset was variable with
presentations of hearing loss (n = 7) or nyctalopia/reduced visual acuity
(n = 3) at a median age of 6 months (IQR: 1.9-8.3 months). BCVA (median of 0.8
logMAR; IQR: 0.6-0.9 logMAR) remained stable over 10.8 years and all patients
were hyperopic. Fundus examination revealed a variable retinitis pigmentosa
(RP)-like phenotype with rounded hyperpigmentations as most prominent feature in
six out of nine patients. Electroretinography, visual field measurements, and
microperimetry further established the RP-like phenotype. Multimodal imaging
revealed significant intraretinal fluid cavities on SD-OCT and a remarkable
pattern of hyperautofluorescent abnormalities on FAF in all patients.
CONCLUSION: This study highlights the ophthalmological phenotype resembling RP
with moderate to severe visual impairment in patients with mild ZSD. These
findings can aid ophthalmologists in diagnosing, counselling, and managing
patients with mild ZSD.

DOI: 10.1080/13816810.2024.2330389
PMID: 38664000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
