---
reference_id: "PMID:22367996"
title: Loss of junctophilin-3 contributes to Huntington disease-like 2 pathogenesis.
authors:
- Seixas AI
- Holmes SE
- Takeshima H
- Pavlovich A
- Sachs N
- Pruitt JL
- Silveira I
- Ross CA
- Margolis RL
- Rudnicki DD
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/ana.22598
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- "Huntington Disease/etiology, genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- "Membrane Proteins/biosynthesis, deficiency, genetics"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Neuropsychological Tests
- "Oligonucleotides, Antisense/genetics"
- "Prefrontal Cortex/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of junctophilin-3 contributes to Huntington disease-like 2 pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Seixas AI, Holmes SE, Takeshima H, Pavlovich A, Sachs N, Pruitt JL, Silveira I, Ross CA, Margolis RL, Rudnicki DD
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.22598](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.22598)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2012 Feb;71(2):245-57. doi: 10.1002/ana.22598.

Loss of junctophilin-3 contributes to Huntington disease-like 2 pathogenesis.

Seixas AI(1), Holmes SE, Takeshima H, Pavlovich A, Sachs N, Pruitt JL, Silveira
I, Ross CA, Margolis RL, Rudnicki DD.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurobiology, Department of Psychiatry, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Huntington disease-like 2 (HDL2) is a progressive, late onset
autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disorder, with remarkable similarities to
Huntington disease (HD). HDL2 is caused by a CTG/CAG repeat expansion. In the
CTG orientation, the repeat is located within the alternatively spliced exon 2A
of junctophilin-3 (JPH3), potentially encoding polyleucine and polyalanine,
whereas on the strand antisense to JPH3, the repeat is in frame to encode
polyglutamine. The JPH3 protein product serves to stabilize junctional membrane
complexes and regulate neuronal calcium flux. We have previously demonstrated
the potential pathogenic properties of JPH3 transcripts containing expanded CUG
repeats. The aim of this study was to test the possibility that loss of JPH3
expression or expanded amino acid tracts also contribute to HDL2 pathogenesis.
METHODS: Transcripts from the HDL2 locus, and their protein products, were
examined in HDL2, HD, and control frontal cortex. The effect of loss of Jph3 was
examined in mice with partial or complete loss of Jph3.
RESULTS: Bidirectional transcription occurs at the HDL2 locus, although
expression of antisense transcripts with expanded CAG repeats is limited.
Protein products with expanded amino acid tracts were not detected in HDL2
brain. However, JPH3 transcripts and full-length JPH3 protein are decreased in
HDL2 brain, and Jph3 hemizygous and null mice exhibit abnormal motor function.
INTERPRETATION: Our results suggest that the pathogenic mechanism of HDL2 is
multifactorial, involving both a toxic gain of function of JPH3 RNA and a toxic
loss of JPH3 expression.

Copyright © 2012 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.22598
PMID: 22367996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
