---
reference_id: "PMID:39807213"
title: "Diagnosing Late-Onset Tay-Sachs Through Next Generation Sequencing and Functional Enzyme Testing: From Genes to Enzymes."
authors:
- Tupil AR
- Rivlin W
- Mccombe PA
- Henderson RD
- Rodgers J
- Vadlamudi L
journal: Neurol Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200205
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosing Late-Onset Tay-Sachs Through Next Generation Sequencing and Functional Enzyme Testing: From Genes to Enzymes.
**Authors:** Tupil AR, Rivlin W, Mccombe PA, Henderson RD, Rodgers J, Vadlamudi L
**Journal:** Neurol Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1212/NXG.0000000000200205](https://doi.org/10.1212/NXG.0000000000200205)

## Content

1. Neurol Genet. 2024 Oct 23;10(6):e200205. doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200205.
eCollection 2024 Dec.

Diagnosing Late-Onset Tay-Sachs Through Next Generation Sequencing and
Functional Enzyme Testing: From Genes to Enzymes.

Tupil AR(1), Rivlin W(1), Mccombe PA(1), Henderson RD(1), Rodgers J(1),
Vadlamudi L(1).

Author information:
(1)From the School of Medicine (A.R.T., J.R.), The University of Queensland;
Department of Neurology (W.R., P.A.M., R.D.H., L.V.), Royal Brisbane & Women's
Hospital; The University of Queensland (P.A.M., R.D.H., L.V.), UQ Centre for
Clinical Research; and Genetic Health Queensland (J.R.), Royal Brisbane &
Women's Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

Tay-Sachs disease is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by progressive
neurologic impairment due to pathogenic variants in the HEXA gene that codes for
the alpha subunit of β-hexosaminidase. We report 2 cases of adult-onset
progressive weakness, ataxia, and neuropsychiatric symptoms in a 30-year-old man
and 37-year-old woman. Both patients had compound heterozygosity in the HEXA
gene with 4 distinct variants. The first patient had subsequent confirmatory
functional enzyme testing displaying reduced hexosaminidase concentration, and
the second patient had functional enzyme testing before genetic testing,
exemplifying alternative avenues for the diagnosis of late-onset Tay-Sachs
(LOTS) disease.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200205
PMCID: PMC11727987
PMID: 39807213

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no relevant disclosures. Go
to Neurology.org/NG for full disclosures.
