---
reference_id: "PMID:32143456"
title: Conventional and Unconventional Therapeutic Strategies for Sialidosis Type I.
authors:
- Mosca R
- van de Vlekkert D
- Campos Y
- Fremuth LE
- Cadaoas J
- Koppaka V
- Kakkis E
- Tifft C
- Toro C
- Allievi S
- Gellera C
- Canafoglia L
- Visser G
- Annunziata I
- "d'Azzo A"
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3390/jcm9030695
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Conventional and Unconventional Therapeutic Strategies for Sialidosis Type I.
**Authors:** Mosca R, van de Vlekkert D, Campos Y, Fremuth LE, Cadaoas J, Koppaka V, Kakkis E, Tifft C, Toro C, Allievi S, Gellera C, Canafoglia L, Visser G, Annunziata I, d'Azzo A
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm9030695](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm9030695)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2020 Mar 4;9(3):695. doi: 10.3390/jcm9030695.

Conventional and Unconventional Therapeutic Strategies for Sialidosis Type I.

Mosca R(1), van de Vlekkert D(1), Campos Y(1), Fremuth LE(1)(2), Cadaoas J(3),
Koppaka V(3), Kakkis E(3), Tifft C(4), Toro C(5), Allievi S(6)(7), Gellera
C(6)(7), Canafoglia L(7), Visser G(8), Annunziata I(1), d'Azzo A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN
38105, USA.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, College of Graduate Health Sciences,
University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN 38163, USA.
(3)Ultragenyx Pharmaceutical, Novato, CA 94949, USA.
(4)Office of the Clinical Director & Medical Genetics Branch, National Human
Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health (NHGRI), Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.
(5)Undiagnosed Disease Network, National Human Genome Research Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(6)Unit of Genetics of Neurodegenerative and Metabolic Diseases, Fondazione
IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, 20133 Milan, Italy.
(7)Neurophysiopathology, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta,
20133 Milan, Italy.
(8)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, University
Medical Center Utrecht, 3584 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Congenital deficiency of the lysosomal sialidase neuraminidase 1 (NEU1) causes
the lysosomal storage disease, sialidosis, characterized by impaired
processing/degradation of sialo-glycoproteins and sialo-oligosaccharides, and
accumulation of sialylated metabolites in tissues and body fluids. Sialidosis is
considered an ultra-rare clinical condition and falls into the category of the
so-called orphan diseases, for which no therapy is currently available. In this
study we aimed to identify potential therapeutic modalities, targeting primarily
patients affected by type I sialidosis, the attenuated form of the disease. We
tested the beneficial effects of a recombinant protective protein/cathepsin A
(PPCA), the natural chaperone of NEU1, as well as pharmacological and dietary
compounds on the residual activity of mutant NEU1 in a cohort of patients'
primary fibroblasts. We observed a small, but consistent increase in NEU1
activity, following administration of all therapeutic agents in most of the
fibroblasts tested. Interestingly, dietary supplementation of betaine, a natural
amino acid derivative, in mouse models with residual NEU1 activity mimicking
type I sialidosis, increased the levels of mutant NEU1 and resolved the
oligosacchariduria. Overall these findings suggest that carefully balanced,
unconventional dietary compounds in combination with conventional therapeutic
approaches may prove to be beneficial for the treatment of sialidosis type I.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm9030695
PMCID: PMC7141319
PMID: 32143456

Conflict of interest statement: Authors declare no conflicts of interest.
