---
reference_id: "PMID:28634439"
title: Inconsistency in Abnormal Brain Activity across Cohorts of ADHD-200 in Children with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder.
authors:
- Wang JB
- Zheng LJ
- Cao QJ
- Wang YF
- Sun L
- Zang YF
- Zhang H
journal: Front Neurosci
year: '2017'
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2017.00320
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inconsistency in Abnormal Brain Activity across Cohorts of ADHD-200 in Children with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder.
**Authors:** Wang JB, Zheng LJ, Cao QJ, Wang YF, Sun L, Zang YF, Zhang H
**Journal:** Front Neurosci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnins.2017.00320](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2017.00320)

## Content

1. Front Neurosci. 2017 Jun 6;11:320. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2017.00320. eCollection 
2017.

Inconsistency in Abnormal Brain Activity across Cohorts of ADHD-200 in Children 
with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder.

Wang JB(1)(2)(3), Zheng LJ(1)(2)(3), Cao QJ(4), Wang YF(4), Sun L(4), Zang 
YF(1)(2)(3), Zhang H(5).

Author information:
(1)Center for Cognition and Brain Disorders and the Affiliated Hospital, 
Hangzhou Normal UniversityHangzhou, China.
(2)Zhejiang Key Laboratory for Research in Assessment of Cognitive 
ImpairmentsHangzhou, China.
(3)Institutes of Psychological Sciences, College of Education, Hangzhou Normal 
UniversityHangzhou, China.
(4)Institute of Mental Health, The Sixth Hospital, Peking UniversityBeijing, 
China.
(5)Paul C. Lauterbur Research Centers for Biomedical Imaging, Shenzhen 
Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of SciencesShenzhen, China.

Many papers have shown results from the multi-site dataset of resting-state fMRI 
(rs-fMRI) in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), a data-sharing 
project named ADHD-200. However, few studies have illustrated that to what 
extent the pooled findings were consistent across cohorts. The present study 
analyzed three voxel-wise whole-brain metrics, i.e., amplitude of low-frequency 
fluctuation (ALFF), regional homogeneity (ReHo), and degree centrality (DC) 
based on the pooled dataset as well as individual cohort of ADHD-200. In 
addition to the conventional frequency band of 0.01-0.08 Hz, sub-frequency bands 
of 0-0.01, 0.01-0.027, 0.027-0.073, 0.073-0.198, and 0.198-0.25 Hz, were 
assessed. While the pooled dataset showed abnormal activity in some brain 
regions, e.g., the bilateral sensorimotor cortices, bilateral cerebellum, and 
the bilateral lingual gyrus, these results were highly inconsistent across 
cohorts, even across the three cohorts from the same research center. The 
standardized effect size was rather small. These findings suggested a high 
heterogeneity of spontaneous brain activity in ADHD. Future studies based on 
multi-site large-sample dataset should be performed on pooled data and single 
cohort data, respectively and the effect size must be shown.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2017.00320
PMCID: PMC5459906
PMID: 28634439