---
reference_id: "PMID:33851804"
title: "Fetoscopic laser ablation in twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome: tips for counselling."
authors:
- Pajno C
- "D'Ambrosio V"
- "D'Alisa R"
- DI Mascio D
- Vena F
- Corno S
- Spiniello L
- Martinino A
- Manicone F
- Muzii L
- Brunelli R
- Giancotti A
journal: Minerva Obstet Gynecol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.23736/S2724-606X.20.04714-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fetoscopic laser ablation in twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome: tips for counselling.
**Authors:** Pajno C, D'Ambrosio V, D'Alisa R, DI Mascio D, Vena F, Corno S, Spiniello L, Martinino A, Manicone F, Muzii L, Brunelli R, Giancotti A
**Journal:** Minerva Obstet Gynecol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.23736/S2724-606X.20.04714-0](https://doi.org/10.23736/S2724-606X.20.04714-0)

## Content

1. Minerva Obstet Gynecol. 2021 Apr;73(2):247-252. doi: 
10.23736/S2724-606X.20.04714-0.

Fetoscopic laser ablation in twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome: tips for 
counselling.

Pajno C(1), D'Ambrosio V(2), D'Alisa R(1), DI Mascio D(1), Vena F(1), Corno 
S(1), Spiniello L(1), Martinino A(1), Manicone F(1), Muzii L(1), Brunelli R(1), 
Giancotti A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Maternal and Child Health and Urological Sciences, Sapienza 
University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Maternal and Child Health and Urological Sciences, Sapienza 
University of Rome, Rome, Italy - dr.valentina.dambrosio@gmail.com.

Twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS) is a serious complication that affects 
approximately 10-15% of monochorionic twin pregnancies. The most important role 
for the development of this condition is the presence of an unbalanced flow 
through the inter-twin vascular anastomoses. Depending on the number, type and 
direction of the connecting vessels, blood can be transfused disproportionately 
from one twin (the donor) to the other twin (the recipient). The diagnosis is 
defined prenatally by ultrasound and involves of two main criteria: the presence 
of a monochorionic diamniotic (MCDA) pregnancy; and the presence of 
oligohydramnios in the donor's sac- deep vertical pocket (DVP) 2 cm - and 
polyhydramnios in the recipient's sac- DVP>8 cm. Once diagnosed, TTTS is usually 
graded by using the Quintero staging system, that is composed by five stages, 
from oligohydramnios in the donor and polyhydramnios in the recipient twin to 
fetal demise in one or both twins. Photocoagulation of the anastomotic vessels, 
usually followed by equatorial dichorionization, it has currently become the 
most common fetoscopic operation today and is considered as the gold standard 
for stage II-IV TTTS. pPROM, chorioamniotic separation and iatrogenic preterm 
birth are among the most common complications of fetoscopic laser ablation, and 
the mean gestational age at delivery after laser procedure is about 31 weeks.

DOI: 10.23736/S2724-606X.20.04714-0
PMID: 33851804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]