---
reference_id: "PMID:24507511"
title: Immune regulation of multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Hartung HP
- Aktas O
- Menge T
- Kieseier BC
journal: Handb Clin Neurol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-52001-2.00001-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immune regulation of multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Hartung HP, Aktas O, Menge T, Kieseier BC
**Journal:** Handb Clin Neurol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/B978-0-444-52001-2.00001-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-52001-2.00001-7)

## Content

1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2014;122:3-14. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-52001-2.00001-7.

Immune regulation of multiple sclerosis.

Hartung HP(1), Aktas O(2), Menge T(2), Kieseier BC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine University, 
Düsseldorf, Germany. Electronic address: Hans-Peter.Hartung@uni-duesseldorf.de.
(2)Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine University, 
Düsseldorf, Germany.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is considered a prototype inflammatory autoimmune 
disorder of the central nervous system (CNS). The etiology of this disease 
remains unknown, but an interplay between as yet unidentified environmental 
factors and susceptibility genes appears most likely. In consequence, these 
factors trigger a cascade, involving an inflammatory response within the CNS 
that results in demyelination, oligodendrocyte death, axonal damage, gliosis, 
and neurodegeneration. How these complex traits translate into the clinical 
presentation of the disease is a focus of ongoing research. The central 
hypothesis is that T lymphocytes with receptors for CNS myelin components are 
driving the disease. The initial activation of autoreactive lymphocytes is 
thought to take place in the systemic lymphoid organs, most likely through 
molecular mimickry or nonspecifically through bystander activation. These 
autoreactive lymphocytes can migrate to the CNS where they become reactivated 
upon encountering their target antigen, initiating an autoimmune inflammatory 
attack. This ultimately leads to demyelination and axonal damage. This chapter 
focuses on the role of T and B lymphocytes in the immunopathogenesis of MS.

© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-444-52001-2.00001-7
PMID: 24507511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]