---
reference_id: "PMID:35985955"
title: Identification and management of acute alcohol intoxication.
authors:
- Mirijello A
- Sestito L
- Antonelli M
- Gasbarrini A
- Addolorato G
journal: Eur J Intern Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2022.08.013
keywords:
- Humans
- "Alcoholic Intoxication/diagnosis, therapy"
- "Alcoholism/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- Ethanol
- Blood Alcohol Content
- Alcohol Drinking
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification and management of acute alcohol intoxication.
**Authors:** Mirijello A, Sestito L, Antonelli M, Gasbarrini A, Addolorato G
**Journal:** Eur J Intern Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejim.2022.08.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejim.2022.08.013)

## Content

1. Eur J Intern Med. 2023 Feb;108:1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2022.08.013. Epub 2022
 Aug 16.

Identification and management of acute alcohol intoxication.

Mirijello A(1), Sestito L(2), Antonelli M(2), Gasbarrini A(2), Addolorato G(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San 
Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.
(2)Department of Medical Sciences, Hepatology and Gastroenterology Unit, 
Catholic University of Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Medical Sciences, Hepatology and Gastroenterology Unit, 
Catholic University of Rome, Italy. Electronic address: 
giovanni.addolorato@unicatt.it.

Comment in
    Eur J Intern Med. 2023 Feb;108:25-27. doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2023.01.010.

Acute alcohol intoxication (AAI) is a harmful clinical condition, potentially 
life-threatening, secondary to the intake of large amounts of alcohol. Clinical 
manifestations of AAI are characterized by behavioural and neurological 
symptoms, even if its effects involve several organs and apparatus. Moreover, 
severe alcohol intoxication can produce a global neurological impairment leading 
to autonomic dysfunction, respiratory depression, coma and cardiac arrest. The 
evaluation of blood alcohol concentrations (BAC) is useful to confirm the 
suspicion of intoxication, both for clinical and legal reasons. Most of patients 
with AAI are referred to Emergency Departments due to behavioural, social, 
traumatic or clinical complications. Patient's stabilization is the first step 
in the management of AAI, in order to support vital functions and to prevent 
complications. Metadoxine represents a useful drug to increase ethanol 
metabolism and elimination. Given that AAI could represent a sentinel event of 
chronic alcohol abuse, patients presenting with acute intoxication should be 
screened for the presence of an underlying alcohol use disorder and referred to 
and an alcohol addiction unit to start a multidisciplinary treatment to achieve 
long term alcohol abstinence. The present review will focus on clinical 
features, diagnostic criteria and treatment strategies of AAI.

Copyright © 2022 European Federation of Internal Medicine. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejim.2022.08.013
PMID: 35985955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None.