---
reference_id: "PMID:38977146"
title: "Facing an un-met need in lung cancer screening: The never smokers."
authors:
- Arrieta O
- Arroyo-Hernández M
- Soberanis-Piña PD
- Viola L
- Del Re M
- Russo A
- de Miguel-Perez D
- Cardona AF
- Rolfo C
journal: Crit Rev Oncol Hematol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2024.104436
keywords:
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/diagnosis, etiology, epidemiology"
- Early Detection of Cancer/methods
- Risk Factors
- "Smoking/adverse effects, epidemiology"
- "Non-Smokers/statistics & numerical data"
- Male
- Female
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Facing an un-met need in lung cancer screening: The never smokers.
**Authors:** Arrieta O, Arroyo-Hernández M, Soberanis-Piña PD, Viola L, Del Re M, Russo A, de Miguel-Perez D, Cardona AF, Rolfo C
**Journal:** Crit Rev Oncol Hematol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.critrevonc.2024.104436](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.critrevonc.2024.104436)

## Content

1. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2024 Oct;202:104436. doi:
10.1016/j.critrevonc.2024.104436. Epub 2024 Jul 6.

Facing an un-met need in lung cancer screening: The never smokers.

Arrieta O(1), Arroyo-Hernández M(2), Soberanis-Piña PD(2), Viola L(3), Del Re
M(4), Russo A(5), de Miguel-Perez D(4), Cardona AF(6), Rolfo C(7).

Author information:
(1)Thoracic Oncology Unit, Instituto Nacional de Cancerología (INCan), Mexico
City, Mexico. Electronic address: ogar@unam.mx.
(2)Thoracic Oncology Unit, Instituto Nacional de Cancerología (INCan), Mexico
City, Mexico.
(3)Thoracic Oncology Unit, Fundación Neumológica Colombiana, Bogotá, Colombia.
(4)Center for Thoracic Oncology, The Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, Mount Sinai Health System, New York, NY, USA.
(5)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Milan, Italy.
(6)Luis Carlos Sarmiento Angulo Cancer Treatment and Research Center 1/
Foundation for Clinical and Applied Cancer Research (FICMAC)/ Molecular Oncology
and Biology Systems Research Group (Fox‑G), Universidad El
Bosque, Bogotá, Colombia.
(7)Center for Thoracic Oncology, The Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, Mount Sinai Health System, New York, NY, USA.
Electronic address: christian.rolfo@mssm.edu.

Lung cancer (LC) is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide and the
second most common cancer in both men and women. In addition to smoking, other
risk factors, such as environmental tobacco smoke, air pollution, biomass
combustion, radon gas, occupational exposure, lung disease, family history of
cancer, geographic variability, and genetic factors, play an essential role in
developing LC. Current screening guidelines and eligibility criteria have
limited efficacy in identifying LC cases (50 %), as most screening programs
primarily target subjects with a smoking history as the leading risk factor.
Implementing LC screening programs in people who have never smoked (PNS) can
significantly impact cancer-specific survival and early disease detection.
However, the available evidence regarding the feasibility and effectiveness of
such programs is limited. Therefore, further research on LC screening in PNS is
warranted to determine the necessary techniques for accurately identifying
individuals who should be included in screening programs.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.critrevonc.2024.104436
PMID: 38977146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be
considered as potential competing interests: OA reports a relationship with
Pfizer that includes: funding grants. OA reports a relationship with Lilly that
includes: funding grants. OA reports a relationship with Merck & Co Inc that
includes: funding grants. OA reports a relationship with Bristol Myers Squibb Co
that includes: funding grants. OA reports a relationship with AstraZeneca that
includes: funding grants. OA reports a relationship with Boehringer Ingelheim
that includes: funding grants. OA reports a relationship with Roche that
includes: funding grants. AFC reports a relationship with Merck Sharp & Dohme
that includes: funding grants. AFC reports a relationship with Boehringer
Ingelheim that includes: funding grants. AFC reports a relationship with Roche
that includes: funding grants. AFC reports a relationship with Bristol-Myers
Squibb that includes: funding grants. AFC reports a relationship with FICMAC
that includes: funding grants. AFC reports a relationship with Pfizer that
includes: funding grants. AFC reports a relationship with AstraZeneca that
includes: funding grants. AFC reports a relationship with Celldex that includes:
funding grants. AFC reports a relationship with Novartis that includes: funding
grants. AFC reports a relationship with Lilly that includes: funding grants.
MA-H reports a relationship with AstraZeneca that includes: funding grants. MA-H
reports a relationship with Bristol that includes: funding grants. MA-H reports
a relationship with Roche that includes: funding grants. LV reports a
relationship with Merck sharp & Dohme that includes: funding grants. LV reports
a relationship with Bristol-Myers Squibb that includes: funding grants. LV
reports a relationship with AstraZeneca that includes: funding grants. LV
reports a relationship with MegaLabs that includes: funding grants. LV reports a
relationship with Boehringer Ingelheim that includes: funding grants. LV reports
a relationship with GSK that includes: funding grants. LV reports a relationship
with Bayer that includes: funding grants. LV reports a relationship with Sanofi
that includes: funding grants. If there are other authors, they declare that
they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that
could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
