---
reference_id: "PMID:40344186"
title: Understanding brain calcification via N-terminal acetylation at the Golgi apparatus.
authors:
- Siggervåg A
- Bekkelund ÅK
- Saraste J
- Aksnes H
journal: Brain
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awaf175
keywords:
- Humans
- "Golgi Apparatus/metabolism, pathology"
- "Calcinosis/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Acetylation
- "Brain Diseases/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Animals
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- "Acetyltransferases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Sodium-Phosphate Cotransporter Proteins, Type III/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Understanding brain calcification via N-terminal acetylation at the Golgi apparatus.
**Authors:** Siggervåg A, Bekkelund ÅK, Saraste J, Aksnes H
**Journal:** Brain (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awaf175](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awaf175)

## Content

1. Brain. 2025 Sep 3;148(9):3085-3094. doi: 10.1093/brain/awaf175.

Understanding brain calcification via N-terminal acetylation at the Golgi 
apparatus.

Siggervåg A(1), Bekkelund ÅK(1), Saraste J(1), Aksnes H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, 5020 Bergen, Norway.

Primary familial brain calcification (PFBC) provides valuable insights into the 
mechanisms underlying brain calcification as it singles out the proteins that 
potentially are involved in the relevant cellular pathways. To date, seven genes 
have been linked to PFBC, and studying their encoded proteins marks an exciting 
new era in understanding the disease mechanisms, which may ultimately lead to 
therapeutic strategies to prevent brain calcification. With each new gene found 
to be associated with PFBC due to pathogenic variants, an additional level of 
understanding is achieved. Here, we highlight the most recently discovered PFBC 
gene, encoding the Golgi-localized N-terminal acetyltransferase NAA60. We 
explore the novel perspectives gained from the understanding of this enzyme's 
molecular, cellular and physiological properties. Interestingly, NAA60 shares a 
critical role with the most frequent PFBC gene, SLC20A2. Both these proteins 
seem to be involved in maintaining the structural integrity of the Golgi 
apparatus, as deficiency in either protein leads to Golgi fragmentation. Altered 
Golgi morphology is therefore emerging as a new significant topic in PFBC 
research, and we here discuss this topic in relation to existing knowledge 
regarding Golgi rearrangements and dysfunction as a factor in neurodegenerative 
diseases.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awaf175
PMCID: PMC12404772
PMID: 40344186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no competing interests.