---
reference_id: "PMID:38643104"
title: "Predictors of quality of life, functional status, depression and fatigue in early arthritis: comparison between clinically suspect arthralgia, unclassified arthritis and rheumatoid arthritis."
authors:
- Torlinska B
- Raza K
- Filer A
- Jutley G
- Sahbudin I
- Singh R
- de Pablo P
- Rankin E
- Rhodes B
- Amft N
- Justice E
- McGrath C
- Baskar S
- Trickey J
- Calvert M
- Falahee M
journal: BMC Musculoskelet Disord
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12891-024-07446-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predictors of quality of life, functional status, depression and fatigue in early arthritis: comparison between clinically suspect arthralgia, unclassified arthritis and rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Torlinska B, Raza K, Filer A, Jutley G, Sahbudin I, Singh R, de Pablo P, Rankin E, Rhodes B, Amft N, Justice E, McGrath C, Baskar S, Trickey J, Calvert M, Falahee M
**Journal:** BMC Musculoskelet Disord (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12891-024-07446-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12891-024-07446-6)

## Content

1. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2024 Apr 20;25(1):307. doi: 
10.1186/s12891-024-07446-6.

Predictors of quality of life, functional status, depression and fatigue in 
early arthritis: comparison between clinically suspect arthralgia, unclassified 
arthritis and rheumatoid arthritis.

Torlinska B(1)(2), Raza K(3)(4)(5)(6), Filer A(4)(5)(6), Jutley G(3)(4), 
Sahbudin I(3)(4)(7), Singh R(3)(4), de Pablo P(3)(4), Rankin E(7), Rhodes B(7), 
Amft N(7), Justice E(7), McGrath C(8), Baskar S(3), Trickey J(9), Calvert 
M(1)(2)(5)(10)(11), Falahee M(12).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Patient-Reported Outcomes Research, Institute of Applied Health 
Research, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(2)Birmingham Health Partners Centre for Regulatory Science and Innovation, 
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, Sandwell and West Birmingham NHS Trust, 
Birmingham, UK.
(4)Rheumatology Research Group, Institute of Inflammation and Ageing, College of 
Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 2WB, UK.
(5)NIHR Birmingham Biomedical Research Centre, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, UK.
(6)MRC Versus Arthritis Centre for Musculoskeletal Ageing Research and the 
Research into Inflammatory Arthritis Centre Versus Arthritis, University of 
Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(7)Department of Rheumatology, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation 
Trust, Birmingham, UK.
(8)Department of Rheumatology, Frimley Park Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, 
Camberley, UK.
(9)Department of Rheumatology, The County Hospital, Wye Valley NHS Trust, 
Hereford, UK.
(10)National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Applied Research Centre West 
Midlands, Birmingham, UK.
(11)Health Data Research UK, London, UK.
(12)Rheumatology Research Group, Institute of Inflammation and Ageing, College 
of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 2WB, 
UK. m.falahee@bham.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is often preceded by symptomatic phases 
during which classification criteria are not fulfilled. The health burden of 
these "at-risk" stages is not well described. This study assessed health-related 
quality of life (HRQoL), function, fatigue and depression in newly presenting 
patients with clinically suspect arthralgia (CSA), unclassified arthritis (UA) 
or RA.
METHODS: Cross-sectional analysis of baseline Patient-Reported Outcome Measures 
(PROMs) was conducted in patients from the Birmingham Early Arthritis Cohort. 
HRQoL, function, depression and fatigue at presentation were assessed using 
EQ-5D, HAQ-DI, PHQ-9 and FACIT-F. PROMs were compared across CSA, UA and RA and 
with population averages from the HSE with descriptive statistics. Multivariate 
linear regression assessed associations between PROMs and clinical and 
sociodemographic variables.
RESULTS: Of 838 patients included in the analysis, 484 had RA, 200 had CSA and 
154 had UA. Patients with RA reported worse outcomes for all PROMs than those 
with CSA or UA. However, "mean EQ-5D utilities were 0.65 (95%CI: 0.61 to 0.69) 
in CSA, 0.61 (0.56 to 0.66) in UA and 0.47 (0.44 to 0.50) in RA, which was lower 
than in general and older (≥ 65 years) background populations." In patients with 
CSA or UA, HRQoL was comparable to chronic conditions such as heart failure, 
severe COPD or mild angina. Higher BMI and older age (≥ 60 years) predicted 
worse depression (PHQ-9: -2.47 (-3.85 to -1.09), P < 0.001) and fatigue 
(FACIT-F: 5.05 (2.37 to 7.73), P < 0.001). Women were more likely to report 
worse function (HAQ-DI: 0.13 (0.03 to 0.21), P = 0.01) and fatigue (FACIT-F: 
-3.64 (-5.59 to -1.70), P < 0.001), and residents of more deprived areas 
experienced decreased function (HAQ-DI: 0.23 (0.10 to 0.36), P = 0.001), greater 
depression (PHQ-9: 1.89 (0.59 to 3.18), P = 0.004) and fatigue (FACIT-F: -2.60 
(-5.11 to 0.09), P = 0.04). After adjustments for confounding factors, 
diagnostic category was not associated with PROMs, but disease activity and 
polypharmacy were associated with poorer performance across all PROMs.
CONCLUSIONS: Patient-reported outcomes were associated with disease activity and 
sociodemographic characteristics. Patients presenting with RA reported a higher 
health burden than those with CSA or UA, however HRQoL in the pre-RA groups was 
significantly lower than population averages.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12891-024-07446-6
PMCID: PMC11031996
PMID: 38643104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Yes, the authors have competing interests as 
defined by BMC, or other interests that might be perceived to influence the 
results and/or discussion reported in this paper. “BR, EJ, ER, GJ, IS, JT, MF, 
NA, PP, RS, SB have no conflicts of interest to declare. BT receives funding 
from the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR). BT is also employed by 
Visible Analytics Ltd. KR declares personal fees from Abbvie and Sanofi and 
grant/research support from Bristol Myers Squibb, all outside the submitted 
work. AF declares personal fees from Abbvie, Roche and Janssen and 
grant/research support from Roche, UCB, Nascient, Mestag, GSK and Janssen, all 
outside the submitted work. CMG declares support for conference attendance from 
Eli Lilly. MC is Director of the Birmingham Health Partners Centre for 
Regulatory Science and Innovation, Director of the Centre for the Centre for 
Patient Reported Outcomes Research and is a National Institute for Health 
Research (NIHR) Senior Investigator. MC receives funding from NIHR, UK Research 
and Innovation (UKRI), NIHR Birmingham Biomedical Research Centre, the NIHR 
Surgical Reconstruction and Microbiology Research Centre and NIHR ARC West 
Midlands UK SPINE and Health Data Research UK at the at the University of 
Birmingham and University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, NIHR/UKRI, 
Health Data Research UK, Innovate UK (part of UK Research and Innovation), 
Macmillan Cancer Support, UCB Pharma, Janssen, GSK and Gilead. MC has received 
personal fees from Astellas, Aparito Ltd, CIS Oncology, Takeda, Merck, Daiichi 
Sankyo, Glaukos, GSK and the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute 
(PCORI) outside the submitted work. The views expressed in this article are 
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the NIHR, or the Department of 
Health and Social Care.”