---
reference_id: "PMID:40789540"
title: Recurrent Acrodysostosis-Related PKA RIα Mutant Reveals a Novel Mechanism of Aberrant PKA Deactivation.
authors:
- Della Libera L
- Martinez Pomier K
- Akimoto M
- Anand GS
- Taylor SS
- Melacini G
journal: J Mol Biol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2025.169381
keywords:
- "Dysostoses/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cyclic AMP-Dependent Protein Kinase RIalpha Subunit/genetics, metabolism, chemistry"
- Humans
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Cyclic AMP/metabolism
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cyclic AMP-Dependent Protein Kinases/metabolism, genetics"
- "Models, Molecular"
- "Crystallography, X-Ray"
- Protein Conformation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recurrent Acrodysostosis-Related PKA RIα Mutant Reveals a Novel Mechanism of Aberrant PKA Deactivation.
**Authors:** Della Libera L, Martinez Pomier K, Akimoto M, Anand GS, Taylor SS, Melacini G
**Journal:** J Mol Biol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jmb.2025.169381](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmb.2025.169381)

## Content

1. J Mol Biol. 2025 Dec 1;437(23):169381. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2025.169381. Epub
2025  Aug 9.

Recurrent Acrodysostosis-Related PKA RIα Mutant Reveals a Novel Mechanism of 
Aberrant PKA Deactivation.

Della Libera L(1), Martinez Pomier K(1), Akimoto M(1), Anand GS(2), Taylor 
SS(3), Melacini G(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, McMaster University, Hamilton, 
ON, Canada.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
and The Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences, The Pennsylvania State University, 
University Park, PA 16802, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacology and Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92037-0654, USA.
(4)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, McMaster University, Hamilton, 
ON, Canada; Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada. Electronic address: melacin@mcmaster.ca.

Protein kinase A (PKA) is essential in converting extracellular signals into 
tightly regulated cellular responses controlling vital processes such as growth, 
development, and gene expression. Activation of PKA is controlled by the binding 
of cAMP to the regulatory subunit of PKA (R). Several mutations in the 
ubiquitous RIα isoform of R cause Acrodysostosis 1 (ACRO), a disease 
characterized by resistance to thyroid-stimulating and parathyroid hormones 
leading to severe congenital malformations. This work examines the recurrent 
R366X truncation ACRO mutant, which exhibits severe PKA hypoactivation due to 
loss of sensitivity to cAMP and the impairment of allosteric networks. The R366X 
RIα mutant has been previously studied via X-ray crystallography, but the 
crystal structure only captured the inhibited state and showed minimal 
difference from the wild type structure. Additionally, previous studies only 
examined the effects of ACRO mutants on the activation cycle of PKA (i.e. 
sensitivity to cAMP binding). Here we focus on the less understood signal 
termination cycle. We hypothesize that R366X acts by perturbing dynamic 
intermediates relevant to the PKA deactivation cycle, which are not fully 
recapitulated by static structures. To test our hypothesis, we combined low- and 
high-resolution approaches for probing protein-ligand binging, mutant stability, 
and identifying regions exhibiting aberrant allosteric behaviors. Based on our 
results, we propose a novel mechanism whereby R366X not only impairs 
physiological PKA activation but also accelerates PKA deactivation by increasing 
the rate of phosphodiesterase-catalyzed cAMP hydrolysis to 5'-AMP. Our studies 
shed new light on the current understanding of PKA dysregulation and ACRO's 
molecular etiology, outlining a multi-resolution experimental design which is 
transferable to other ACRO mutants.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2025.169381
PMCID: PMC12851291
PMID: 40789540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.