---
reference_id: "PMID:31479584"
title: Treatment and outcomes of arthrogryposis in the lower extremity.
authors:
- Hamdy RC
- van Bosse H
- Altiok H
- Abu-Dalu K
- Kotlarsky P
- Fafara A
- Eidelman M
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31734
keywords:
- "Arthrogryposis/surgery, therapy"
- Humans
- Lower Extremity/surgery
- Physical Therapy Modalities
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment and outcomes of arthrogryposis in the lower extremity.
**Authors:** Hamdy RC, van Bosse H, Altiok H, Abu-Dalu K, Kotlarsky P, Fafara A, Eidelman M
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.31734](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.31734)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2019 Sep;181(3):372-384. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.c.31734. Epub 2019 Sep 3.

Treatment and outcomes of arthrogryposis in the lower extremity.

Hamdy RC(1)(2), van Bosse H(3), Altiok H(4), Abu-Dalu K(5), Kotlarsky P(5), 
Fafara A(6)(7), Eidelman M(5).

Author information:
(1)Shriners Hospitals for Children, Montreal, Québec, Canada.
(2)Department of Pediatric Orthopaedic Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, McGill 
University, Montreal, Québec, Canada.
(3)Shriners Hospitals for Children, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(4)Shriners Hospitals for Children, Chicago, Illinois.
(5)Pediatric Orthopedics, Technion Faculty of Medicine, Ruth Children's 
Hospital, Haifa, Israel.
(6)Faculty of Health Science, Institute of Physiotherapy, Jagiellonian 
University Medical College, Krakow, Poland.
(7)Arthrogryposis Treatment Centre, University Children's Hospital, Krakow, 
Poland.

In this multiauthored article, the management of lower limb deformities in 
children with arthrogryposis (specifically Amyoplasia) is discussed. Separate 
sections address various hip, knee, foot, and ankle issues as well as orthotic 
treatment and functional outcomes. The importance of very early and aggressive 
management of these deformities in the form of intensive physiotherapy (with its 
various modalities) and bracing is emphasized. Surgical techniques commonly used 
in the management of these conditions are outlined. The central role of a 
multidisciplinary approach involving all stakeholders, especially the families, 
is also discussed. Furthermore, the key role of functional outcome tools, 
specifically patient reported outcomes, in the continuous monitoring and 
evaluation of these deformities is addressed. Children with arthrogryposis 
present multiple problems that necessitate a multidisciplinary approach. 
Specific guidelines are necessary in order to inform patients, families, and 
health care givers on the best approach to address these complex conditions.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31734
PMID: 31479584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]