---
reference_id: "PMID:39160853"
title: "ALM Resuscitation With Brain and Multiorgan Protection for Far-Forward Operations: Survival at Hypotensive Pressures."
authors:
- Dobson GP
- Morris JL
- Letson HL
journal: Mil Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/milmed/usae090
keywords:
- Animals
- Swine
- Resuscitation/methods
- Rats
- "Hypotension/etiology, physiopathology"
- "Adenosine/administration & dosage, pharmacology"
- "Lidocaine/pharmacology, therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- Female
- "Shock, Hemorrhagic/therapy, complications, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ALM Resuscitation With Brain and Multiorgan Protection for Far-Forward Operations: Survival at Hypotensive Pressures.
**Authors:** Dobson GP, Morris JL, Letson HL
**Journal:** Mil Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/milmed/usae090](https://doi.org/10.1093/milmed/usae090)

## Content

1. Mil Med. 2024 Aug 19;189(Suppl 3):268-275. doi: 10.1093/milmed/usae090.

ALM Resuscitation With Brain and Multiorgan Protection for Far-Forward
Operations: Survival at Hypotensive Pressures.

Dobson GP(1), Morris JL(1), Letson HL(1).

Author information:
(1)Heart and Trauma Research Laboratory, College of Medicine and Dentistry,
James Cook University, Queensland, Queensland 4811, Australia.

INTRODUCTION: Non-compressible torso hemorrhagic (NCTH) shock is the leading
cause of potentially survivable trauma on the battlefield. New hypotensive drug
therapies are urgently required to resuscitate and protect the heart and brain
following NCTH. Our aim was to examine the strengths and limitations of
permissive hypotension and discuss the development of small-volume adenosine,
lidocaine, and Mg2+ (ALM) fluid resuscitation in rats and pigs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: For review of permissive hypotension, a literature search
was performed from inception up to November 2023 using PubMed, Cochrane, and
Embase databases, with inclusion of animal studies, clinical trials and reviews
with military and clinical relevance. For the preclinical study, adult female
pigs underwent laparoscopic liver resection. After 30 minutes of bleeding,
animals were resuscitated with 4 mL/kg 3% NaCl ± ALM bolus followed 60 minutes
later with 4 h 3 mL/kg/h 0.9% NaCl ± ALM drip (n = 10 per group), then blood
transfusion. Mean arterial pressure (MAP) and cardiac output (CO) were
continuously measured via a left ventricular pressure catheter and pulmonary
artery catheter, respectively. Systemic vascular resistance (SVR) was calculated
using the formula: 80 × (MAP - CVP)/CI. Oxygen delivery was calculated as the
product of CO and arterial oxygen content.
RESULTS: Targeting a MAP of ∼50 mmHg can be harmful or beneficial, depending on
how CO and SVR are regulated. A theoretical example shows that for the same MAP
of 50 mmHg, a higher CO and lower SVR can lead to a nearly 2-fold increase in O2
supply. We further show that in animal models of NCTH, 3% NaCl ALM bolus and
0.9% NaCl ALM drip induce a hypotensive, high flow, vasodilatory state with
maintained tissue O2 supply and neuroprotection. ALM therapy increases survival
by resuscitating the heart, reducing internal bleeding by correcting
coagulopathy, and decreasing secondary injury.
CONCLUSIONS: In rat and pig models of NCTH, small-volume ALM therapy
resuscitates at hypotensive pressures by increasing CO and reducing SVR. This
strategy is associated with heart and brain protection and maintained tissue O2
delivery. Translational studies are required to determine reproducibility and
optimal component dosing. ALM therapy may find wide utility in prehospital and
far-forward military environments.

© The Association of Military Surgeons of the United States 2024. All rights
reserved. For commercial re-use, please contact reprints@oup.com for reprints
and translation rights for reprints. All other permissions can be obtained
through our RightsLink service via the Permissions link on the article page on
our site–for further information please contact journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/milmed/usae090
PMID: 39160853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
