---
reference_id: "PMID:12646579"
title: Transforming growth factor-beta induces secretion of activated ADAMTS-2. A procollagen III N-proteinase.
authors:
- Wang WM
- Lee S
- Steiglitz BM
- Scott IC
- Lebares CC
- Allen ML
- Brenner MC
- Takahara K
- Greenspan DS
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M300767200
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transforming growth factor-beta induces secretion of activated ADAMTS-2. A procollagen III N-proteinase.
**Authors:** Wang WM, Lee S, Steiglitz BM, Scott IC, Lebares CC, Allen ML, Brenner MC, Takahara K, Greenspan DS
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M300767200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M300767200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 23;278(21):19549-57. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M300767200. Epub 
2003 Mar 19.

Transforming growth factor-beta induces secretion of activated ADAMTS-2. A 
procollagen III N-proteinase.

Wang WM(1), Lee S, Steiglitz BM, Scott IC, Lebares CC, Allen ML, Brenner MC, 
Takahara K, Greenspan DS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin, Madison, 
Wisconsin 53706, USA.

The metalloproteinase ADAMTS-2 has procollagen I N-proteinase activity capable 
of cleaving procollagens I and II N-propeptides in vitro, whereas mutations in 
the ADAMTS-2 gene in dermatosparaxis and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome VIIC show this 
enzyme to be responsible in vivo for most biosynthetic processing of procollagen 
I N-propeptides in skin. Yet despite its important role in the regulation of 
collagen deposition, information regarding regulation and substrate specificity 
of ADAMTS-2 has remained sparse. Here we demonstrate that ADAMTS-2 can, like the 
procollagen C-proteinases, be regulated by transforming growth factor-beta 1 
(TGF-beta 1), with implications for mechanisms whereby this growth factor 
effects net increases in formation of extracellular matrix. TGF-beta 1 induced 
ADAMTS-2 mRNA approximately 8-fold in MG-63 osteosarcoma cells in a dose- and 
time-dependent, cycloheximide-inhibitable manner, which appeared to operate at 
the transcriptional level. Secreted ADAMTS-2 protein induced by TGF-beta 1 was 
132 kDa and was identical in size to the fully processed, active form of the 
protease. Biosynthetic processing of ADAMTS-2 to yield the 132-kDa form is shown 
to be a two-step process involving sequential cleavage by furin-like convertases 
at two sites. Surprisingly, purified recombinant ADAMTS-2 is shown to cleave 
procollagen III N-propeptides as effectively as those of procollagens I and II, 
whereas processing of procollagen III is shown to be decreased in Ehlers-Danlos 
VIIC. Thus, the dogma that procollagen I and procollagen III N-proteinase 
activities are provided by separate enzymes appears to be false, whereas the 
phenotypes of dermatosparaxis and Ehlers-Danlos VIIC may arise from defects in 
both type I and type III collagen biosynthesis.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M300767200
PMID: 12646579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]