---
reference_id: "PMID:34740806"
title: A systematic review of spinal cord ischemia prevention and management after open and endovascular aortic repair.
authors:
- Lella SK
- Waller HD
- Pendleton A
- Latz CA
- Boitano LT
- Dua A
journal: J Vasc Surg
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2021.10.039
keywords:
- Algorithms
- "Aorta, Thoracic/physiopathology, surgery"
- "Aortic Diseases/mortality, physiopathology, surgery"
- "Blood Vessel Prosthesis Implantation/adverse effects, mortality"
- Decision Support Techniques
- "Endovascular Procedures/adverse effects, mortality"
- Humans
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
- "Spinal Cord Ischemia/etiology, mortality, physiopathology, prevention & control"
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A systematic review of spinal cord ischemia prevention and management after open and endovascular aortic repair.
**Authors:** Lella SK, Waller HD, Pendleton A, Latz CA, Boitano LT, Dua A
**Journal:** J Vasc Surg (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jvs.2021.10.039](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvs.2021.10.039)

## Content

1. J Vasc Surg. 2022 Mar;75(3):1091-1106. doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2021.10.039. Epub
2021  Nov 2.

A systematic review of spinal cord ischemia prevention and management after open
and endovascular aortic repair.

Lella SK(1), Waller HD(2), Pendleton A(2), Latz CA(2), Boitano LT(2), Dua A(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Department of Surgery,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Mass. Electronic address:
srihari.lella@mgh.harvard.edu.
(2)Division of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Department of Surgery,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Mass.

OBJECTIVE: Spinal cord ischemia (SCI) is one of the most devastating
complications after descending thoracic aortic (DTA) and thoracoabdominal aortic
(TAA) repairs. Patients who develop SCI have a poor prognosis, with mortality
rates reaching 75% within the first year after surgery. Many factors have been
shown to increase the risk of this complication, including the extent of TAA
repair, length of aortic and collateral network coverage, embolization, and
reduced spinal cord perfusion pressure. As a result, a variety of treatment
strategies have been developed. We aimed to provide an up-to-date review of SCI
rates with associated treatment algorithms from open and endovascular DTA and
TAA repair.
METHODS: Using PRISMA (preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and
meta-analyses) guidelines, a literature review with the MeSH (medical subject
headings) terms "spinal cord ischemia," "spinal cord ischemia prevention and
mitigation strategies," "spinal cord ischemia rates," and "spinal cord
infarction" was performed in the Cochrane and PubMed databases to find all
peer-reviewed studies of DTA and TAA repair with SCI complications reported. The
search was limited to 2012 to 2021 and English-language reports. MeSH
subheadings, including diagnosis, complications, physiopathology, surgery,
mortality, and therapy, were used to further restrict the included studies.
Studies were excluded if they were not of humans, had not pertained to SCI after
DTA or TAA operative repair, and if the study had primarily discussed
neuromonitoring techniques. Additionally, studies with <40 patients or limited
information regarding SCI protection strategies were excluded. Each study was
individually reviewed by two of us (S.L. and A.D.) to assess the type and extent
of aortic pathology, operative technique, SCI protection or mitigation
strategies, rates of overall and permanent SCI symptoms, associations with SCI
on multivariate analysis, and mortality.
RESULTS: Of the 450 studies returned by the MeSH search strategy, 41 met the
inclusion criteria and were included in the final analysis. For the endovascular
DTA repair patients, the overall SCI rates ranged from 0% to 10.6%, with
permanent SCI symptoms ranging from 0% to 5.1%. The rate of overall SCI after
endovascular and open TAA repair was 0% to 35%. The permanent SCI symptom rate
was reported by only one study of open repair at 1.1%. The permanent SCI symptom
rate after endovascular TAA repair was 2% to 20.5%.
CONCLUSIONS: The present review has provided an up-to-date review of the current
rates of SCI and the prevention and mitigation strategies used during DTA and
TAA repair. We found that a multimodal approach, including a bundled
institutional protocol, staging of multiple repairs, preservation of the
collateral blood flow network, augmented spinal cord perfusion, selective
cerebrospinal fluid drainage, and distal aortic perfusion during open TAA
repairs, appears to be important in reducing the risk of SCI.

Copyright © 2021 Society for Vascular Surgery. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2021.10.039
PMID: 34740806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
