---
reference_id: "PMID:40056919"
title: "Mapping the global prevalence, incidence, and mortality of Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax malaria, 2000-22: a spatial and temporal modelling study."
authors:
- Weiss DJ
- Dzianach PA
- Saddler A
- Lubinda J
- Browne A
- McPhail M
- Rumisha SF
- Sanna F
- Gelaw Y
- Kiss JB
- Hafsia S
- Jayaseelen R
- Baggen HS
- Amratia P
- Bertozzi-Villa A
- Nesbit O
- Whisnant J
- Battle KE
- Nguyen M
- Alene KA
- Cameron E
- Penny MA
- Bhatt S
- Smith DL
- Symons TL
- Mosser JF
- Murray CJL
- Hay SI
- Gething PW
journal: Lancet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(25)00038-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mapping the global prevalence, incidence, and mortality of Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax malaria, 2000-22: a spatial and temporal modelling study.
**Authors:** Weiss DJ, Dzianach PA, Saddler A, Lubinda J, Browne A, McPhail M, Rumisha SF, Sanna F, Gelaw Y, Kiss JB, Hafsia S, Jayaseelen R, Baggen HS, Amratia P, Bertozzi-Villa A, Nesbit O, Whisnant J, Battle KE, Nguyen M, Alene KA, Cameron E, Penny MA, Bhatt S, Smith DL, Symons TL, Mosser JF, Murray CJL, Hay SI, Gething PW
**Journal:** Lancet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(25)00038-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(25)00038-8)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2025 Mar 22;405(10483):979-990. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(25)00038-8.
Epub  2025 Mar 5.

Mapping the global prevalence, incidence, and mortality of Plasmodium falciparum 
and Plasmodium vivax malaria, 2000-22: a spatial and temporal modelling study.

Weiss DJ(1), Dzianach PA(2), Saddler A(2), Lubinda J(2), Browne A(2), McPhail 
M(2), Rumisha SF(3), Sanna F(2), Gelaw Y(4), Kiss JB(2), Hafsia S(2), Jayaseelen 
R(2), Baggen HS(2), Amratia P(3), Bertozzi-Villa A(5), Nesbit O(6), Whisnant 
J(6), Battle KE(5), Nguyen M(7), Alene KA(4), Cameron E(4), Penny MA(8), Bhatt 
S(9), Smith DL(6), Symons TL(4), Mosser JF(6), Murray CJL(6), Hay SI(6), Gething 
PW(4).

Author information:
(1)Curtin University, Bentley, WA, Australia; The Kids Research Institute 
Australia, Nedlands, WA, Australia. Electronic address: dan.weiss@curtin.edu.au.
(2)The Kids Research Institute Australia, Nedlands, WA, Australia.
(3)The Kids Research Institute Australia, Nedlands, WA, Australia; Ifakara 
Health Institute, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
(4)Curtin University, Bentley, WA, Australia; The Kids Research Institute 
Australia, Nedlands, WA, Australia.
(5)Institute for Disease Modeling, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Seattle, WA, 
USA.
(6)The Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(7)Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.
(8)The Kids Research Institute Australia, Nedlands, WA, Australia; University of 
Western Australia, Crawley, WA, Australia.
(9)University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; Imperial College London, 
London, UK.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2025 Mar 22;405(10483):952-953. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(25)00418-0.

BACKGROUND: Malaria remains a leading cause of illness and death globally, with 
countries in sub-Saharan Africa bearing a disproportionate burden. Global 
high-resolution maps of malaria prevalence, incidence, and mortality are crucial 
for tracking spatially heterogeneous progress against the disease and to inform 
strategic malaria control efforts. We present the latest such maps, the first 
since 2019, which cover the years 2000-22. The maps are accompanied by 
administrative-level summaries and include estimated COVID-19 pandemic-related 
impacts on malaria burden.
METHODS: We initially modelled prevalence of Plasmodium falciparum malaria 
infection in children aged 2-10 years in high-burden African countries using a 
geostatistical modelling framework. The model was trained on a large database of 
spatiotemporal observations of community infection prevalence; environmental and 
anthropogenic covariates; and modelled intervention coverages for 
insecticide-treated bednets, indoor residual spraying, and effective treatment 
with an antimalarial drug. We developed an additional model to incorporate 
disruptions to malaria case management caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. The 
resulting high-resolution maps of infection prevalence from 2000 to 2022 were 
subsequently translated to estimates of case incidence and malaria mortality. 
For other malaria-endemic countries and for Plasmodium vivax estimates, we used 
routine surveillance data to model annual case incidence at administrative 
levels. We then converted these estimates to infection prevalence and malaria 
mortality, and spatially disaggregated administrative-level results to produce 
high-resolution maps. Lastly, we combined the modelled outputs to produce global 
maps and summarised tables that are suitable for assessing changing malaria 
burden from subnational to global scales.
FINDINGS: We found an ongoing plateau in rates of malaria infection prevalence 
and case incidence within sub-Saharan Africa, with consistent year-on-year 
improvements not evident since 2015. Due to the concentration of malaria burden 
in sub-Saharan Africa and the region's rapid population growth relative to other 
endemic regions, we estimate that 2022 had 234·8 (95% uncertainty interval 
179·2-299·0) million clinical cases of P falciparum malaria, the most since 
2004. Despite these findings, deaths from malaria continued to decline in 
sub-Saharan Africa and consequently globally after 2015, except for the 
COVID-19-impacted years of 2020-22. Similarly, progress in reducing P falciparum 
and P vivax morbidity outside Africa continued despite stalled progress 
globally. However, a major malaria outbreak in Pakistan following intense 
flooding in 2022 resulted in a reversal in this improving trend and contributed 
heavily to the global total of 12·4 (10·7-14·8) million clinical cases of P 
vivax malaria. Within Africa, we found that the plateau in infection prevalence 
occurred earlier in more densely populated areas, whereas more sparsely 
populated regions have continued a trajectory of modest improvement.
INTERPRETATION: The unprecedented investment in malaria control since the early 
2000s has averted an enormous amount of malaria burden. However, case incidence 
rates in Africa have flattened, and with a rapidly growing population at risk, 
the number of P falciparum cases in Africa, and thus globally, is now comparable 
to levels before the surge of investment. Outside Africa progress against 
malaria morbidity continued after 2015, but a resurgence of P vivax cases in 
2022 underscores the fragility of progress against malaria in the face of 
climatic shocks. COVID-19-related disruptions led to increased malaria cases and 
deaths, but the impact was less severe than feared, in part because endemic 
countries continued to prioritise malaria control during the pandemic. 
Nevertheless, improved tools and strategies remain urgently needed to regain 
momentum against this disease.
FUNDING: Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and Australian National Health and 
Medical Research Council.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open 
Access article under the CC BY 4.0 license. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(25)00038-8
PMCID: PMC11928297
PMID: 40056919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests We declare no competing 
interests.