---
reference_id: "PMID:20301456"
title: Hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Hakim A
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Hakim A

## Content

1. Hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome.

Hakim A(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2025.
2004 Oct 22 [updated 2024 Feb 22].

Author information:
(1)The Harley Street Clinic, HCA Healthcare, London UK

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (hEDS) is 
characterized by generalized joint hypermobility, joint instability, pain, soft 
and hyperextensible skin with atrophic scars and easy bruising, dental crowding, 
abdominal hernias, pelvic organ prolapse, marfanoid body habitus, mitral valve 
prolapse, and aortic root dilatation. Subluxations, dislocations, and soft 
tissue injury are common; they may occur spontaneously or with minimal trauma 
and can be acutely painful. Degenerative joint and chronic soft tissue disorders 
may arise due to repeated injury. Chronic pain, distinct from that associated 
with acute injury, is common and often neuropathic in nature. Chronic fatigue, 
functional bowel disorders, cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction, swallow and 
phonation disorders, sleep disorders including apnea, migraine, entrapment and 
peripheral neuropathies, inflammation from mast cell activation disorders, 
anxiety disorders, and urogynecologic disorders are common. Mitral valve 
prolapse and aortic root dilatation, when present, are typically of a mild 
degree with no increased risk of cardiac complications.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of hEDS is established in an adult proband 
based on 2017 international clinical diagnostic criteria. Currently, no 
underlying genetic, epigenetic, or metabolomic etiology has been identified for 
hEDS.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Tailored treatment with exercise to 
increase core and extremity muscle strength and tone, proprioception, and joint 
stability; braces and splints to improve alignment and control; occupational 
therapy for assistive devices (e.g., wide-grip writing utensils, home and work 
ergonomics); physical therapy for assistive devices (e.g., wheelchair or 
scooter, suitable mattress, soft neck collar); pain management tailored to cause 
and symptoms; platelet disorders may respond to tranexamic or mefenamic acid; 
nutrition advice for micronutrient deficiencies; gastritis, gastroparesis, and 
gastroesophageal reflux disease may require intensive pharmacotherapy; therapies 
for other gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, ocular, neurologic, and 
urogynecologic manifestations; orthodontic, maxillofacial, and ENT management 
for narrow palate, crowded teeth, temporomandibular joint laxity and 
dysfunction, and disorders of swallow and phonation; standard treatment of 
periodontal disease; avoidance of triggers for mast cell activation disorder and 
pharmacotherapy or monoclonal biologic therapy as needed; counseling and 
pharmacotherapy for neurobehavioral and psychiatric manifestations. 
Surveillance: Assess for joint manifestations, pain, disability, bleeding 
issues, functional bowel disorders, autonomic dysfunction, oral health needs, 
phonation and respiratory issues, sleep issues, vision issues, headaches and 
other neurologic manifestations, inflammatory disease, neurobehavioral and 
psychiatric manifestations, and urogynecologic manifestations annually or at 
each visit. Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry in those with height loss greater 
than one inch, atypical/low trauma fractures, or radiographs suggestive of 
osteopenia. Follow-up echocardiography in those with aortic root dilatation. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: High-impact activity may increase the risk of 
acute subluxation/dislocation and acute and chronic pain. Chiropractic 
adjustment and yoga are not contraindicated but like all other physical 
treatments must be performed in ways that avoid iatrogenic subluxations or 
dislocations. Autonomic concerns, gastrointestinal disorders, and intolerances 
may preclude use of medications or their excipients (e.g., common analgesics in 
someone with slow gastrointestinal transit, vasodilator in a person with 
orthostatic intolerance). Pregnancy management: Preconceptual (e.g., 
musculoskeletal health and medication use), antenatal (e.g., joint instability, 
pelvic strength, hernias, and pain management), intrapartum (e.g., birth 
choices, mobility in labor, anesthesia), and postpartum (e.g., wound healing, 
pelvic health, newborn/infant care) issues should all be addressed.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Hypermobile EDS is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner 
with variable expression of signs and variable severity of symptoms among 
affected family members. Most individuals diagnosed with hEDS have an affected 
parent, although a detailed history and examination of the parents is often 
necessary to recognize that a parent has a current or prior history of joint 
laxity, easy bruising, and skin manifestations despite the absence of serious 
complications. Each child of an individual with hEDS has a 50% chance of 
inheriting hEDS. Because the gene(s) and pathogenic variant(s) responsible for 
hEDS have not been identified, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are 
not possible.

Copyright © 1993-2025, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301456