---
reference_id: "PMID:31390645"
title: "Social Life in the Schizophrenia Spectrum: A Phenomenological Study of Five Patients."
authors:
- Nilsson LS
- Urfer Parnas A
- Nordgaard J
journal: Psychopathology
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1159/000501833
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Social Life in the Schizophrenia Spectrum: A Phenomenological Study of Five Patients.
**Authors:** Nilsson LS, Urfer Parnas A, Nordgaard J
**Journal:** Psychopathology (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000501833](https://doi.org/10.1159/000501833)

## Content

1. Psychopathology. 2019;52(4):232-239. doi: 10.1159/000501833. Epub 2019 Aug 7.

Social Life in the Schizophrenia Spectrum: A Phenomenological Study of Five 
Patients.

Nilsson LS(1)(2)(3), Urfer Parnas A(4), Nordgaard J(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Psychiatric Center North Zealand, University Hospital of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Center for Subjectivity Research, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(4)Psychiatric Center Amager, University Hospital of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
(5)Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, julie_nordgaard@hotmail.com.
(6)Psychiatric Center Amager, University Hospital of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark, julie_nordgaard@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Social difficulties are a hallmark of schizophrenia spectrum 
conditions, yet their background and exact nature remain contested. Previous 
pivotal studies on chronically ill patients have suggested that a position of 
"positive withdrawal" is associated with a decreased tendency to 
rehospitalization. This concept designates an essentially withdrawn but not 
negatively experienced position balanced by elements relating the individual to 
the social world.
OBJECTIVES: To explore a less ill subgroup of schizophrenia spectrum patients' 
ways of navigating the social world and examine potential links to anomalous 
self-experiences by applying key insights from phenomenology and anthropology.
METHOD: The present study was part of a 5-year follow-up on a group of 
first-admission schizophrenia spectrum patients. From this sample of 48 
patients, 5 were selected for qualitative evaluation following the principles of 
thematic analysis.
RESULTS: A "positively withdrawn" position characterizes a wider group of 
patients than originally reported. Further, we identified a preference for 
partaking in social activities in particular circumstances with clearly 
circumscribed goals or social roles and rules. This alleviated social discomfort 
and helped patients stay embedded in a social milieu. All patients experienced 
high levels of self-disorders.
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest that certain aspects of social impairment may, in fact, 
reflect meaningful compensatory mechanisms, and argue that this 
conceptualization of social difficulties is relevant to various 
psychotherapeutic interventions.

© 2019 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000501833
PMID: 31390645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]