---
reference_id: "PMID:33075355"
title: "Toenails as a biomarker of exposure to arsenic: A review."
authors:
- Signes-Pastor AJ
- Gutiérrez-González E
- García-Villarino M
- Rodríguez-Cabrera FD
- López-Moreno JJ
- Varea-Jiménez E
- Pastor-Barriuso R
- Pollán M
- Navas-Acien A
- Pérez-Gómez B
- Karagas MR
journal: Environ Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2020.110286
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Toenails as a biomarker of exposure to arsenic: A review.
**Authors:** Signes-Pastor AJ, Gutiérrez-González E, García-Villarino M, Rodríguez-Cabrera FD, López-Moreno JJ, Varea-Jiménez E, Pastor-Barriuso R, Pollán M, Navas-Acien A, Pérez-Gómez B, Karagas MR
**Journal:** Environ Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.envres.2020.110286](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2020.110286)

## Content

1. Environ Res. 2021 Apr;195:110286. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2020.110286. Epub 2020
 Oct 16.

Toenails as a biomarker of exposure to arsenic: A review.

Signes-Pastor AJ(1), Gutiérrez-González E(2), García-Villarino M(3), 
Rodríguez-Cabrera FD(4), López-Moreno JJ(4), Varea-Jiménez E(5), Pastor-Barriuso 
R(6), Pollán M(6), Navas-Acien A(7), Pérez-Gómez B(8), Karagas MR(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Geisel School of Medicine, Dartmouth College, 1 
Medical Center Dr, Williamson Translational Research Bldg, Lebanon NH, 03756, 
USA. Electronic address: antonio.j.signes-pastor@dartmouth.edu.
(2)Spanish Agency of Food Safety and Nutrition, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, 
Alcalá, 56, 28014, Madrid, Spain; Consortium for Biomedical Research in 
Epidemiology & Public Health (CIBER en Epidemiología y Salud Pública - 
CIBERESP), Monforte de Lemos 5, 28029, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Consortium for Biomedical Research in Epidemiology & Public Health (CIBER en 
Epidemiología y Salud Pública - CIBERESP), Monforte de Lemos 5, 28029, Madrid, 
Spain; Unit of Molecular Cancer Epidemiology, University Institute of Oncology 
of the Principality of Asturias (IUOPA) - Department of Medicine, University of 
Oviedo, Julian Clavería Street s/n, 33006, Oviedo, Asturias, Spain.
(4)Public Health Teaching Unit, National School of Public Health, Carlos III 
Institute of Health, Monforte de Lemos 5, 28029. Madrid, Spain.
(5)Department of Epidemiology of Chronic Diseases, National Centre for 
Epidemiology, Carlos III Institute of Health, Monforte de Lemos 5, 28029, 
Madrid, Spain.
(6)Consortium for Biomedical Research in Epidemiology & Public Health (CIBER en 
Epidemiología y Salud Pública - CIBERESP), Monforte de Lemos 5, 28029, Madrid, 
Spain; Department of Epidemiology of Chronic Diseases, National Centre for 
Epidemiology, Carlos III Institute of Health, Monforte de Lemos 5, 28029, 
Madrid, Spain.
(7)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Columbia University Mailman 
School of Public Health, New York, NY, USA.
(8)Consortium for Biomedical Research in Epidemiology & Public Health (CIBER en 
Epidemiología y Salud Pública - CIBERESP), Monforte de Lemos 5, 28029, Madrid, 
Spain; Public Health Teaching Unit, National School of Public Health, Carlos III 
Institute of Health, Monforte de Lemos 5, 28029. Madrid, Spain; Department of 
Epidemiology of Chronic Diseases, National Centre for Epidemiology, Carlos III 
Institute of Health, Monforte de Lemos 5, 28029, Madrid, Spain.
(9)Department of Epidemiology, Geisel School of Medicine, Dartmouth College, 1 
Medical Center Dr, Williamson Translational Research Bldg, Lebanon NH, 03756, 
USA.

This systematic review summarizes the current evidence related to the 
reliability of toenail total arsenic concentrations (thereafter "arsenic") as a 
biomarker of long-term exposure. Specifically, we reviewed literature on 
consistency of repeated measures over time, association with other biomarkers 
and metal concentrations, factors influencing concentrations, and associations 
with health effects. We identified 129 papers containing quantitative original 
data on arsenic in toenail samples covering populations from 29 different 
countries. We observed geographic differences in toenail arsenic concentrations, 
with highest median or mean concentrations in Asian countries. 
Arsenic-contaminated drinking water, occupational exposure or living in specific 
industrial areas were associated with an increased toenail arsenic content. The 
effects of other potential determinants and sources of arsenic exposure 
including diet, gender and age on the concentrations in toenails need further 
investigations. Toenail arsenic was correlated with the concentrations in hair 
and fingernails, and with urine arsenic mainly among highly exposed populations 
with a toenail mean or median ≥1 μg/g. Overall, there is a growing body of 
evidence suggesting that arsenic content from a single toenail sample may 
reflect long-term internal dose-exposure. Toenail arsenic can serve as a 
reliable measure of toxic inorganic arsenic exposure in chronic disease 
research, particularly promising for cancer and cardiovascular conditions.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envres.2020.110286
PMCID: PMC7987585
PMID: 33075355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
competing financial interest. Declaration of interests The authors declare that 
they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that 
could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.