---
reference_id: "PMID:39975577"
title: Global prevalence of platelet-type von Willebrand disease.
authors:
- Seidizadeh O
- Cairo A
- Othman M
- Peyvandi F
journal: Res Pract Thromb Haemost
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.rpth.2025.102682
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Global prevalence of platelet-type von Willebrand disease.
**Authors:** Seidizadeh O, Cairo A, Othman M, Peyvandi F
**Journal:** Res Pract Thromb Haemost (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rpth.2025.102682](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rpth.2025.102682)

## Content

1. Res Pract Thromb Haemost. 2025 Jan 16;9(1):102682. doi: 
10.1016/j.rpth.2025.102682. eCollection 2025 Jan.

Global prevalence of platelet-type von Willebrand disease.

Seidizadeh O(1), Cairo A(2), Othman M(3), Peyvandi F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Università degli Studi di 
Milano, Milan, Italy.
(2)Fondazione IRCCS Ca'Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Angelo Bianchi 
Bonomi Hemophilia and Thrombosis Center, Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical & Molecular Sciences, Queen's University, Kingston, 
Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Platelet-type von Willebrand disease (PT-VWD) is a rare autosomal 
dominant disorder. It is caused by gain-of-function gene variants in the 
platelet GP1BA, which results in excessive binding between GPIbα and von 
Willebrand factor (VWF). The prevalence of PT-VWD is unknown.
OBJECTIVES: To establish the worldwide and within distinct ethnic groups 
prevalence of PT-VWD.
METHODS: We used available exome and genome sequencing data of 807,162 (730,947 
exomes and 76,215 genomes) subjects from the Genome Aggregation Database 
(gnomAD-v4.1).
RESULTS: Among the 1,614,324 alleles analyzed in the gnomAD population, there 
were 1397 distinct GP1BA variants. Of them, 4 variants (p.Arg127Gln, 
p.Leu194Phe, p.Gly249Val, and p.Met255Ile) have been previously reported to 
cause PT-VWD. Considering these 4 known pathogenic variants, we estimated a 
global PT-VWD prevalence of 136 cases/106. The highest estimated prevalence of 
PT-VWD was found in Africans/African Americans (160/106), Finnish (156/106), 
Europeans (149/106), and South Asians (110/106), followed by Ashkenazi Jewish 
(68/106) and East Asian (45/106) ethnicities. In the population with no assigned 
ethnicity, a prevalence of 126/106 was estimated. Since no pathogenic GP1BA 
variants that were previously reported to cause PT-VWD were found in Admixed 
American and Middle Eastern ethnicities, we were unable to estimate the PT-VWD 
prevalence in these 2 populations. We found a global prevalence of 2.5/106 for 
severe PT-VWD and 134/106 for the mild form.
CONCLUSION: This population-based genetic epidemiology analysis indicates a 
substantially higher than expected frequency of PT-VWD. This novel finding 
suggests that a large number of PT-VWD patients are still under- or 
misdiagnosed.

Crown Copyright © 2025 Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of International 
Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rpth.2025.102682
PMCID: PMC11836505
PMID: 39975577