---
reference_id: "PMID:20448378"
title: "Delay in the diagnosis of esophageal carcinoma: experience of a single unit from a developing country."
authors:
- Subasinghe D
- Samarasekera DN
journal: Indian J Cancer
year: '2010'
doi: 10.4103/0019-509X.63009
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/diagnosis"
- Developing Countries
- Esophageal Neoplasms/diagnosis
- Female
- Health Services Accessibility
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Staging
- Prognosis
- Prospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Delay in the diagnosis of esophageal carcinoma: experience of a single unit from a developing country.
**Authors:** Subasinghe D, Samarasekera DN
**Journal:** Indian J Cancer (2010)
**DOI:** [10.4103/0019-509X.63009](https://doi.org/10.4103/0019-509X.63009)

## Content

1. Indian J Cancer. 2010 Apr-Jun;47(2):151-5. doi: 10.4103/0019-509X.63009.

Delay in the diagnosis of esophageal carcinoma: experience of a single unit from
a developing country.

Subasinghe D(1), Samarasekera DN.

Author information:
(1)University Surgical Unit, The National Hospital of Sri Lanka, Colombo, Sri
Lanka.

OBJECTIVES: Main objective was to analyze the time delay between the onset of
symptoms and the histological diagnosis of esophageal cancer. The subsidiary
objective was to analyze the relationship between the time delay and stage of
the disease at the time of definitive treatment. STUDY DESIGN, SETTING, AND
METHODS: A prospective analysis of patients with esophageal cancer presenting to
a single unit over a period of 24 months was performed. Interval from the onset
of symptoms to the histological diagnosis and stage at presentation was
analyzed.
RESULTS: There were 48 patients (male = 26) with a median age of 59.5 (range 43
- 84) years. First symptom was progressive dysphagia in all patients. Subsidiary
symptoms were, weight loss in 83.3% (n = 40), abdominal / chest pain in 10
(20.8%), regurgitation in 14 (29.2%), odynophagia in three (6.2%), abdominal
discomfort in two (3%), and dyspepsia in two (3%). The mean delay from the
appearance of the first symptoms to the end point was 14.9 weeks (range 3 - 37
weeks). Total delay was due to patient delay in 82%, endoscopy delay in 7%, and
delay in histological diagnosis in 11%.
CONCLUSIONS: As the majority (82%) in our study showed patient delay, a
community education program may help in their early presentation to the
hospital. However, there is also a notable delay in endoscopy and histology
(15%) services, mainly due to a shortage of endoscopy units and qualified
histopathologists in the state sector.

DOI: 10.4103/0019-509X.63009
PMID: 20448378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
