---
reference_id: "PMID:37594181"
title: Precision medicine using whole genome sequencing in a cat identifies a novel COL5A1 variant for classical Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
authors:
- McElroy A
- Gray-Edwards H
- Coghill LM
- Lyons LA
journal: J Vet Intern Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/jvim.16805
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Precision medicine using whole genome sequencing in a cat identifies a novel COL5A1 variant for classical Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
**Authors:** McElroy A, Gray-Edwards H, Coghill LM, Lyons LA
**Journal:** J Vet Intern Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jvim.16805](https://doi.org/10.1111/jvim.16805)

## Content

1. J Vet Intern Med. 2023 Sep-Oct;37(5):1716-1724. doi: 10.1111/jvim.16805. Epub 
2023 Aug 18.

Precision medicine using whole genome sequencing in a cat identifies a novel 
COL5A1 variant for classical Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.

McElroy A(1), Gray-Edwards H(1)(2), Coghill LM(3), Lyons LA(4).

Author information:
(1)Horae Gene Therapy Center, University of Massachusetts Chan Medical School, 
Worcester, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Radiology, University of Massachusetts Chan Medical School, 
Worcester, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, USA.
(4)Department of Veterinary Medicine & Surgery, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, USA.

BACKGROUND: Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDS) are a heterogeneous group of heritable 
connective tissue disorders occurring in both human and veterinary patients. The 
genetics of these disorders are poorly described in small animal patients.
HYPOTHESIS/OBJECTIVES: Define the clinical manifestations and genetic cause of a 
suspected form of EDS in a cat.
ANIMALS: A 14-week-old male domestic medium hair cat was presented with skin 
hyperextensibility and fragility. The classic tragic facial expression was 
observed as well as chronic pruritus and mild hyperesthesia.
METHODS: Blood samples and a skin biopsy sample were collected from the affected 
cat. Clinical examinations, histology, electron microscopy and whole genome 
sequencing were conducted to characterize the clinical presentation and identify 
possible pathogenic DNA variants to support a diagnosis. Criteria defining 
variant pathogenicity were examined including human disease variant databases.
RESULTS: Histology showed sparse, disorganized collagen and an increase in 
cutaneous mast cells. Electron microscopy identified ultrastructural defects 
commonly seen in collagen type V alpha 1 chain (COL5A1) variants including 
flower-like collagen fibrils in cross-section. Whole genome sequencing and 
comparison with 413 cats in the 99 Lives Cat Genome Sequencing Consortium 
database identified a novel splice acceptor site variant at exon 4 in COL5A1 
(c.501-2A>C).
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL IMPORTANCE: Our report broadens the current 
understanding of EDS in veterinary patients and supports the use of precision 
medicine techniques in clinical veterinary practice. The classification of 
variants for pathogenicity should be considered in companion animals.

© 2023 The Authors. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC on behalf of American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/jvim.16805
PMCID: PMC10473008
PMID: 37594181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors declare no conflict of interest.