---
reference_id: "PMID:28143435"
title: "Genetic characterization of Italian patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome and correlation to ocular, renal and audio-vestibular phenotype: identification of eleven novel pathogenic sequence variants."
authors:
- Esposito G
- Testa F
- Zacchia M
- Crispo AA
- Di Iorio V
- Capolongo G
- Rinaldi L
- "D'Antonio M"
- Fioretti T
- Iadicicco P
- Rossi S
- Franzè A
- Marciano E
- Capasso G
- Simonelli F
- Salvatore F
journal: BMC Med Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s12881-017-0372-0
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Auditory Threshold
- "Bardet-Biedl Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- Chaperonins
- Child
- "DNA/chemistry, isolation & purification, metabolism"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Eye/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genotype
- Group II Chaperonins/genetics
- Humans
- Italy
- Kidney/physiopathology
- Male
- Microtubule-Associated Proteins/genetics
- Middle Aged
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- Proteins/genetics
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- White People/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic characterization of Italian patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome and correlation to ocular, renal and audio-vestibular phenotype: identification of eleven novel pathogenic sequence variants.
**Authors:** Esposito G, Testa F, Zacchia M, Crispo AA, Di Iorio V, Capolongo G, Rinaldi L, D'Antonio M, Fioretti T, Iadicicco P, Rossi S, Franzè A, Marciano E, Capasso G, Simonelli F, Salvatore F
**Journal:** BMC Med Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12881-017-0372-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12881-017-0372-0)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genet. 2017 Feb 1;18(1):10. doi: 10.1186/s12881-017-0372-0.

Genetic characterization of Italian patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome and
correlation to ocular, renal and audio-vestibular phenotype: identification of
eleven novel pathogenic sequence variants.

Esposito G(1)(2), Testa F(3), Zacchia M(4), Crispo AA(1), Di Iorio V(3),
Capolongo G(4), Rinaldi L(4), D'Antonio M(1)(2), Fioretti T(5), Iadicicco P(6),
Rossi S(3), Franzè A(1)(6), Marciano E(6), Capasso G(7), Simonelli F(8),
Salvatore F(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate s.c.a r.l., Via Gaetano Salvatore 486, I-80145,
Naples, Italy.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnologies, University of
Naples Federico II, Via Sergio Pansini 5, I-80131, Naples, Italy.
(3)Eye Clinic, Multidisciplinary Department of Medical, Surgical and Dental
Sciences, Second University of Naples, Via Sergio Pansini 5, I-80131, Naples,
Italy.
(4)Department of Nephrology, Second University of Naples, Via Sergio Pansini 5,
I-80131, Naples, Italy.
(5)IRCCS-Fondazione SDN Naples, Via Emanuele Gianturco 113, I-80143, Naples,
Italy.
(6)Area of Audiology, Department of Neurosciences, Reproductive and
Odontostomatological Sciences, University of Naples Federico II, Via Sergio
Pansini 5, I-80131, Naples, Italy.
(7)Department of Nephrology, Second University of Naples, Via Sergio Pansini 5,
I-80131, Naples, Italy. gb.capasso@unina2.it.
(8)Eye Clinic, Multidisciplinary Department of Medical, Surgical and Dental
Sciences, Second University of Naples, Via Sergio Pansini 5, I-80131, Naples,
Italy. francesca.simonelli@unina2.it.
(9)CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate s.c.a r.l., Via Gaetano Salvatore 486, I-80145,
Naples, Italy. salvator@unina.it.
(10)IRCCS-Fondazione SDN Naples, Via Emanuele Gianturco 113, I-80143, Naples,
Italy. salvator@unina.it.

BACKGROUND: Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a rare genetic disorder that features
retinal degeneration, obesity, polydactyly, learning disabilities and renal
abnormalities. The diagnosis is often missed at birth, the median age at
diagnosis being 9 years. In the attempt to shed light on BBS and improve its
diagnosis and treatment, we evaluated the genotype-phenotype relationship in
patients with a molecular diagnosis of BBS.
METHODS: We analyzed three common BBS genes, BBS1, BBS10 and BBS2, in 25 Italian
patients fulfilling the clinical criteria of BBS. In 12 patients, we identified
gene-specific biallelic variants and thus correlated genotype to the ophthalmic,
renal and audio-vestibular phenotypes.
RESULTS: At least one sequence variant was found in 60% of patients. The most
common mutated gene was BBS1 followed by BBS10. Of the 17 sequence variants we
found, 11 have not previously been associated with BBS. In 12 patients, we
identified biallelic pathogenic variants; they had retinitis pigmentosa with
early onset of visual impairment. However, retinal dystrophy was less severe in
patients with BBS1 than in those with BBS10 variants. Overall, we found a high
prevalence of renal dysmorphism and dysfunction. Notably, patients with BBS10
variants had the most severe renal impairment, which resulted in a critical
decline in renal function. All the patients who underwent audio-vestibular
evaluation had dysfunction of the cochlear outer hair cells, thus confirming the
presence of hearing defects.
CONCLUSION: BBS1, BBS2 and BBS10 are major causative genes in Italian BBS
patients. BBS10 was associated with the worse outcome in terms of the renal,
ocular and audiovestibular phenotypes. Cochlear dysfunction should be included
among the hallmarks of BBS.

DOI: 10.1186/s12881-017-0372-0
PMCID: PMC5286791
PMID: 28143435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
