---
reference_id: "PMID:37377591"
title: "Crohn's disease: Why the ileum?"
authors:
- Richard N
- Savoye G
- Leboutte M
- Amamou A
- Ghosh S
- Marion-Letellier R
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v29.i21.3222
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Crohn's disease: Why the ileum?
**Authors:** Richard N, Savoye G, Leboutte M, Amamou A, Ghosh S, Marion-Letellier R
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.v29.i21.3222](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v29.i21.3222)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2023 Jun 7;29(21):3222-3240. doi: 
10.3748/wjg.v29.i21.3222.

Crohn's disease: Why the ileum?

Richard N(1)(2)(3), Savoye G(1)(2)(3), Leboutte M(1)(3), Amamou A(4), Ghosh 
S(4), Marion-Letellier R(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)University of Rouen Normandie, INSERM, ADEN UMR 1073, Nutrition, Inflammation 
and Microbiota-Gut-Brain Axis, Rouen F-76000, France.
(2)CHU Rouen, Department of Gastroenterology, Rouen University Hospital-Charles 
Nicolle, Rouen F-76000, France.
(3)Institute for Research and Innovation in Biomedicine, University of Rouen 
Normandie, Rouen F-76000, France.
(4)APC Microbiome Ireland, Biosciences Building, University College Cork, Cork 
T12 YT20, Ireland.
(5)Institute for Research and Innovation in Biomedicine, University of Rouen 
Normandie, Rouen F-76000, France. rachel.letellier@univ-rouen.fr.

Crohn's disease (CD) is an inflammatory bowel disease characterized by 
immune-mediated flares affecting any region of the intestine alternating with 
remission periods. In CD, the ileum is frequently affected and about one third 
of patients presents with a pure ileal type. Moreover, the ileal type of CD 
presents epidemiological specificities like a younger age at onset and often a 
strong link with smoking and genetic susceptibility genes. Most of these genes 
are associated with Paneth cell dysfunction, a cell type found in the intestinal 
crypts of the ileum. Besides, a Western-type diet is associated in 
epidemiological studies with CD onset and increasing evidence shows that diet 
can modulate the composition of bile acids and gut microbiota, which in turn 
modulates the susceptibility of the ileum to inflammation. Thus, the interplay 
between environmental factors and the histological and anatomical features of 
the ileum is thought to explain the specific transcriptome profile observed in 
CD ileitis. Indeed, both immune response and cellular healing processes harbour 
differences between ileal and non-ileal CD. Taken together, these findings 
advocate for a dedicated therapeutic approach to managing ileal CD. Currently, 
interventional pharmacological studies have failed to clearly demonstrate 
distinct response profiles according to disease site. However, the high rate of 
stricturing disease in ileal CD requires the identification of new therapeutic 
targets to significantly change the natural history of this debilitating 
disease.

©The Author(s) 2023. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v29.i21.3222
PMCID: PMC10292140
PMID: 37377591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All the authors 
report no relevant conflicts of interest for this article.