---
reference_id: "PMID:17208642"
title: Dental caries.
authors:
- Selwitz RH
- Ismail AI
- Pitts NB
journal: Lancet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(07)60031-2
keywords:
- Biofilms
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Dental Caries/diagnosis, etiology, prevention & control"
- Humans
- Infant
- Middle Aged
- Oral Health
- Risk Factors
- Sodium Fluoride/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dental caries.
**Authors:** Selwitz RH, Ismail AI, Pitts NB
**Journal:** Lancet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(07)60031-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(07)60031-2)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2007 Jan 6;369(9555):51-9. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(07)60031-2.

Dental caries.

Selwitz RH(1), Ismail AI, Pitts NB.

Author information:
(1)College of Dentistry, Department of Community Dentistry and Behavioral
Science, University of Florida, FL, USA. RSelwitz@dental.ufl.edu

Comment in
    Lancet. 2007 Feb 24;369(9562):639. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(07)60304-3.

Dental caries, otherwise known as tooth decay, is one of the most prevalent
chronic diseases of people worldwide; individuals are susceptible to this
disease throughout their lifetime. Dental caries forms through a complex
interaction over time between acid-producing bacteria and fermentable
carbohydrate, and many host factors including teeth and saliva. The disease
develops in both the crowns and roots of teeth, and it can arise in early
childhood as an aggressive tooth decay that affects the primary teeth of infants
and toddlers. Risk for caries includes physical, biological, environmental,
behavioural, and lifestyle-related factors such as high numbers of cariogenic
bacteria, inadequate salivary flow, insufficient fluoride exposure, poor oral
hygiene, inappropriate methods of feeding infants, and poverty. The approach to
primary prevention should be based on common risk factors. Secondary prevention
and treatment should focus on management of the caries process over time for
individual patients, with a minimally invasive, tissue-preserving approach.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(07)60031-2
PMID: 17208642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
