---
reference_id: "PMID:37766657"
title: Pilonidal Sinus Disease is Associated with Severe Hidradenitis Suppurativa in a Spanish Cohort.
authors:
- Ureña-Paniego C
- Gamissans-Cañada M
- Molina-Leyva A
- Romaní J
journal: Acta Derm Venereol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.2340/actadv.v103.6569
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Young Adult
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Female
- "Hidradenitis Suppurativa/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Pilonidal Sinus/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Comorbidity
- Patient Acuity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pilonidal Sinus Disease is Associated with Severe Hidradenitis Suppurativa in a Spanish Cohort.
**Authors:** Ureña-Paniego C, Gamissans-Cañada M, Molina-Leyva A, Romaní J
**Journal:** Acta Derm Venereol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.2340/actadv.v103.6569](https://doi.org/10.2340/actadv.v103.6569)

## Content

1. Acta Derm Venereol. 2023 Sep 27;103:adv6569. doi: 10.2340/actadv.v103.6569.

Pilonidal Sinus Disease is Associated with Severe Hidradenitis Suppurativa in a 
Spanish Cohort.

Ureña-Paniego C(1), Gamissans-Cañada M(2), Molina-Leyva A(3), Romaní J(4).

Author information:
(1)Hidradenitis Suppurativa Clinic, Dermatology Department, Hospital 
Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain.
(2)Hidradenitis suppurativa Clinic, Hospital Universitari Parc Taulí, Autonomous 
University of Barcelona, Sabadell, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Hidradenitis Suppurativa Clinic, Dermatology Department, Hospital 
Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain; European Hidradenitis 
Suppurativa Foundation (EHSF). Dessau-Roßlau, Germany. 
Alejandromolinaleyva@gmail.com.
(4)HHidradenitis suppurativa Clinic, Hospital Universitari Parc Taulí, 
Autonomous University of Barcelona, Sabadell, Barcelona, Spain.

Hidradenitis suppurativa is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the hair follicle 
with a high level of morbidity. Pilonidal sinus disease is a comorbid disorder 
and may be the reason for first contact with the healthcare system of patients 
with hidradenitis suppurativa. The aim of this study was to evaluate the 
frequency of association of pilonidal sinus disease and hidradenitis suppurativa 
and to explore whether pilonidal sinus disease defines a different clinical 
profile for patients with hidradenitis suppurativa. A cross-sectional study in 
which data regarding past history of pilonidal sinus disease, clinical and 
sociodemographic information were recorded during the first visit to the 
Hidradenitis Suppurativa Clinic of 2 tertiary hospitals. A total of 839 patients 
were included in the study. Of these, 51.7% (434/839) were male and mean age was 
37.3 ± 13.6 years. Pilonidal sinus disease was present in 32.6% (269/839) of the 
patients and was associated with an early debut of hidradenitis suppurativa, a 
higher Hurley stage, inflammatory phenotype and a greater number of fistulas and 
perianal involvement. Elapsed time between pilonidal sinus disease and diagnosis 
of hidradenitis suppurativa was associated with higher disease severity. 
Pilonidal sinus disease is a frequent comorbidity and risk marker for 
hidradenitis suppurativa disease severity. Pilonidal sinus disease could be a 
sentinel event to identify patients who would benefit from close treatment and 
follow-up.

DOI: 10.2340/actadv.v103.6569
PMCID: PMC10549763
PMID: 37766657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.