---
reference_id: "PMID:37053013"
title: Multiomics of Bohring-Opitz syndrome truncating ASXL1 mutations identify canonical and noncanonical Wnt signaling dysregulation.
authors:
- Lin I
- Wei A
- Awamleh Z
- Singh M
- Ning A
- Herrera A
- REACH Biobank and Registry
- Russell BE
- Weksberg R
- Arboleda VA
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.167744
keywords:
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Craniosynostoses
- Kidney Neoplasms/genetics
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- "Repressor Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, pathology"
- Wnt Signaling Pathway/genetics
- Humans
- Mutation
- Multiomics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiomics of Bohring-Opitz syndrome truncating ASXL1 mutations identify canonical and noncanonical Wnt signaling dysregulation.
**Authors:** Lin I, Wei A, Awamleh Z, Singh M, Ning A, Herrera A, REACH Biobank and Registry, Russell BE, Weksberg R, Arboleda VA
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.167744](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.167744)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2023 May 22;8(10):e167744. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.167744.

Multiomics of Bohring-Opitz syndrome truncating ASXL1 mutations identify 
canonical and noncanonical Wnt signaling dysregulation.

Lin I(1)(2)(3), Wei A(1)(2)(3)(4), Awamleh Z(5), Singh M(1)(2)(3), Ning 
A(1)(2)(3), Herrera A(1)(2)(3); REACH Biobank and Registry; Russell BE(6), 
Weksberg R(5)(7)(8), Arboleda VA(1)(2)(3)(4)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(3)Department of Computational Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(4)Interdepartmental BioInformatics Program, UCLA, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(5)Department of Genetics and Genome Biology Program, Research Institute, The 
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, UCLA, Los Angeles, 
California, USA.
(7)Division of Clinical & Metabolic Genetics, The Hospital for Sick Children, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(8)Institute of Medical Sciences and Department of Molecular Genetics, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(9)Molecular Biology Institute, UCLA, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(10)Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, UCLA, Los Angeles, California, USA.

ASXL1 (additional sex combs-like 1) plays key roles in epigenetic regulation of 
early developmental gene expression. De novo protein-truncating mutations in 
ASXL1 cause Bohring-Opitz syndrome (BOS; OMIM #605039), a rare 
neurodevelopmental condition characterized by severe intellectual disabilities, 
distinctive facial features, hypertrichosis, increased risk of Wilms tumor, and 
variable congenital anomalies, including heart defects and severe skeletal 
defects giving rise to a typical BOS posture. These BOS-causing ASXL1 variants 
are also high-prevalence somatic driver mutations in acute myeloid leukemia. We 
used primary cells from individuals with BOS (n = 18) and controls (n = 49) to 
dissect gene regulatory changes caused by ASXL1 mutations using comprehensive 
multiomics assays for chromatin accessibility (ATAC-seq), DNA methylation, 
histone methylation binding, and transcriptome in peripheral blood and skin 
fibroblasts. Our data show that regardless of cell type, ASXL1 mutations drive 
strong cross-tissue effects that disrupt multiple layers of the epigenome. The 
data showed a broad activation of canonical Wnt signaling at the transcriptional 
and protein levels and upregulation of VANGL2, which encodes a planar cell 
polarity pathway protein that acts through noncanonical Wnt signaling to direct 
tissue patterning and cell migration. This multiomics approach identifies the 
core impact of ASXL1 mutations and therapeutic targets for BOS and myeloid 
leukemias.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.167744
PMCID: PMC10322691
PMID: 37053013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.