---
reference_id: "PMID:23692820"
title: "Defining publication bias: protocol for a systematic review of highly cited articles and proposal for a new framework."
authors:
- Müller KF
- Briel M
- "D'Amario A"
- Kleijnen J
- Marusic A
- Wager E
- Antes G
- von Elm E
- Lang B
- Motschall E
- Gloy V
- Schwarzer G
- Altman D
- Meerpohl JJ
- Bassler D
journal: Syst Rev
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1186/2046-4053-2-34
keywords:
- Access to Information
- Bias
- Consensus
- Data Mining
- Humans
- Information Dissemination
- Meta-Analysis as Topic
- Publication Bias
- Research Design
- Systematic Reviews as Topic
- Terminology as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defining publication bias: protocol for a systematic review of highly cited articles and proposal for a new framework.
**Authors:** Müller KF, Briel M, D'Amario A, Kleijnen J, Marusic A, Wager E, Antes G, von Elm E, Lang B, Motschall E, Gloy V, Schwarzer G, Altman D, Meerpohl JJ, Bassler D
**Journal:** Syst Rev (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/2046-4053-2-34](https://doi.org/10.1186/2046-4053-2-34)

## Content

1. Syst Rev. 2013 May 21;2:34. doi: 10.1186/2046-4053-2-34.

Defining publication bias: protocol for a systematic review of highly cited
articles and proposal for a new framework.

Müller KF(1), Briel M, D'Amario A, Kleijnen J, Marusic A, Wager E, Antes G, von
Elm E, Lang B, Motschall E, Gloy V, Schwarzer G, Altman D, Meerpohl JJ, Bassler
D.

Author information:
(1)Center for Pediatric Clinical Studies, University Children's Hospital
Tuebingen, Frondsbergstr. 23, 72070, Tuebingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Selective publication of studies, which is commonly called
publication bias, is widely recognized. Over the years a new nomenclature for
other types of bias related to non-publication or distortion related to the
dissemination of research findings has been developed. However, several of these
different biases are often still summarized by the term 'publication bias'.
METHODS/DESIGN: As part of the OPEN Project (To Overcome failure to Publish
nEgative fiNdings) we will conduct a systematic review with the following
objectives:- To systematically review highly cited articles that focus on
non-publication of studies and to present the various definitions of biases
related to the dissemination of research findings contained in the articles
identified.- To develop and discuss a new framework on nomenclature of various
aspects of distortion in the dissemination process that leads to public
availability of research findings in an international group of experts in the
context of the OPEN Project.We will systematically search Web of Knowledge for
highly cited articles that provide a definition of biases related to the
dissemination of research findings. A specifically designed data extraction form
will be developed and pilot-tested. Working in teams of two, we will
independently extract relevant information from each eligible article.For the
development of a new framework we will construct an initial table listing
different levels and different hazards en route to making research findings
public. An international group of experts will iteratively review the table and
reflect on its content until no new insights emerge and consensus has been
reached.
DISCUSSION: Results are expected to be publicly available in mid-2013. This
systematic review together with the results of other systematic reviews of the
OPEN project will serve as a basis for the development of future policies and
guidelines regarding the assessment and prevention of publication bias.

DOI: 10.1186/2046-4053-2-34
PMCID: PMC3667005
PMID: 23692820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
