---
reference_id: "PMID:28400376"
title: "Therapy reduction in patients with Down syndrome and myeloid leukemia: the international ML-DS 2006 trial."
authors:
- Uffmann M
- Rasche M
- Zimmermann M
- von Neuhoff C
- Creutzig U
- Dworzak M
- Scheffers L
- Hasle H
- Zwaan CM
- Reinhardt D
- Klusmann JH
journal: Blood
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2017-01-765057
keywords:
- "Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 8/genetics"
- "Cytarabine/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Cytogenetic Analysis
- Disease-Free Survival
- "Down Syndrome/complications, genetics"
- "Etoposide/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Female
- Humans
- "Idarubicin/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Infant
- "Leukemia, Myeloid/complications, drug therapy, genetics"
- Male
- Prospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
- Trisomy/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapy reduction in patients with Down syndrome and myeloid leukemia: the international ML-DS 2006 trial.
**Authors:** Uffmann M, Rasche M, Zimmermann M, von Neuhoff C, Creutzig U, Dworzak M, Scheffers L, Hasle H, Zwaan CM, Reinhardt D, Klusmann JH
**Journal:** Blood (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2017-01-765057](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2017-01-765057)

## Content

1. Blood. 2017 Jun 22;129(25):3314-3321. doi: 10.1182/blood-2017-01-765057. Epub 
2017 Apr 11.

Therapy reduction in patients with Down syndrome and myeloid leukemia: the 
international ML-DS 2006 trial.

Uffmann M(1), Rasche M(2), Zimmermann M(1), von Neuhoff C(2), Creutzig U(1), 
Dworzak M(3), Scheffers L(4), Hasle H(5), Zwaan CM(4)(6), Reinhardt D(2), 
Klusmann JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Hannover Medical School, 
Hannover, Germany.
(2)Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Pediatrics III, Essen University Hospital, 
Essen, Germany.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, St. Anna Children's Hospital/Children's Cancer 
Research Institute, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Dutch Childhood Oncology Group, The Hague, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Aarhus University Hospital, Skejby, Denmark; and.
(6)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Erasmus Medical Center/Sophia 
Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Blood. 2017 Jun 22;129(25):3274-3275. doi: 10.1182/blood-2017-04-780031.

Children with myeloid leukemia associated with Down syndrome (ML-DS) have 
superior outcome compared with non-DS patients, but suffer from higher 
constitutional cytotoxic drug susceptibility. We analyzed the outcome of 170 
pediatric patients with ML-DS enrolled in the prospective, multicenter, 
open-label, nonrandomized ML-DS 2006 trial by Nordic Society for Pediatric 
Hematology and Oncology (NOPHO), Dutch Childhood Oncology Group (DCOG), and 
Acute Myeloid Leukemia-Berlin-Frankfurt-Münster (AML-BFM) study group. Compared 
with the historical control arm (reduced-intensity protocol for ML-DS patients 
from the AML-BFM 98 trial), treatment intensity was reduced by lowering the 
cumulative dose of etoposide (950 to 450 mg/m2) and intrathecal central nervous 
system prophylaxis while omitting maintenance therapy. Still, 5-year overall 
survival (89% ± 3% vs 90% ± 4%; Plog-rank = .64), event-free survival (EFS; 87% 
± 3% vs 89% ± 4%; Plog-rank = .71), and cumulative incidence of 
relapse/nonresponse (CIR/NR; 6% ± 3% vs 6% ± 2%; PGray = .03) did not 
significantly differ between the ML-DS 2006 trial and the historical control 
arm. Poor early treatment response (5-year EFS, 58% ± 16% vs 88% ± 3%; Plog rank 
= .0008) and gain of chromosome 8 (CIR/NR, 16% ± 7% vs 3% ± 2%, PGray = .02; 
5-year EFS, 73% ± 8% vs 91% ± 4%, Plog rank = .018) were identified as 
independent prognostic factors predicting a worse EFS. Five of 7 relapsed 
patients (71%) with cytogenetic data had trisomy 8. Our study reveals prognostic 
markers for children with ML-DS and illustrates that reducing therapy did not 
impair excellent outcome. The trial was registered at EudraCT as #2007-006219-2.

© 2017 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2017-01-765057
PMID: 28400376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]