---
reference_id: "PMID:26636658"
title: "Efficacy and Safety of Carboplatin and Etoposide Combination Chemotherapy for Extrapulmonary Neuroendocrine Carcinoma: A Retrospective Case Series."
authors:
- Imai H
- Shirota H
- Okita A
- Komine K
- Saijo K
- Takahashi M
- Takahashi S
- Takahashi M
- Shimodaira H
- Ishioka C
journal: Chemotherapy
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1159/000441551
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Carboplatin/administration & dosage"
- "Carcinoma, Neuroendocrine/drug therapy, pathology"
- Disease-Free Survival
- "Etoposide/administration & dosage"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Survival Rate
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and Safety of Carboplatin and Etoposide Combination Chemotherapy for Extrapulmonary Neuroendocrine Carcinoma: A Retrospective Case Series.
**Authors:** Imai H, Shirota H, Okita A, Komine K, Saijo K, Takahashi M, Takahashi S, Takahashi M, Shimodaira H, Ishioka C
**Journal:** Chemotherapy (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000441551](https://doi.org/10.1159/000441551)

## Content

1. Chemotherapy. 2016;61(3):111-6. doi: 10.1159/000441551. Epub 2015 Dec 5.

Efficacy and Safety of Carboplatin and Etoposide Combination Chemotherapy for 
Extrapulmonary Neuroendocrine Carcinoma: A Retrospective Case Series.

Imai H, Shirota H, Okita A, Komine K, Saijo K, Takahashi M, Takahashi S, 
Takahashi M, Shimodaira H, Ishioka C.

BACKGROUND: Neuroendocrine carcinoma (NEC) is a rare tumor type, and a standard 
therapy for NEC has not yet been established. From 2008 to 2013, 
carboplatin-etoposide combination therapy has been used to treat almost all NEC 
patients in our department, and the objective of the present study was to 
investigate the therapeutic effects of carboplatin-etoposide combination therapy 
in NEC.
METHODS: This retrospective study was conducted based on medical records from 
2008 to 2013. Eligible patients had been pathologically diagnosed with NEC and 
had received a carboplatin-etoposide combination as first-line chemotherapy.
RESULTS: Nineteen patients were included in the study, and the overall response 
rate was 47.4%. The median overall survival was 12.7 months, and the median 
progression-free survival was 7.0 months. The median survival times were 10.8 
and 8.9 months in NEC patients with primary sites in the gastrointestinal tract 
and hepatobiliary-pancreatic system, respectively. Median progression-free 
survival times were 5.0 and 3.1 months, respectively. The major toxicities were 
grade 3 and 4 leukopenia (73.7%), neutropenia (78.9%), anemia (31.6%), and 
thrombocytopenia (26.3%).
CONCLUSIONS: Carboplatin-etoposide combination therapy for NEC may have 
comparable effectiveness and milder adverse events than cisplatin-etoposide 
combination therapy.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000441551
PMID: 26636658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]