---
reference_id: "PMID:39268327"
title: "A Pediatric Case of Cogan's Syndrome With Internal Otitis."
authors:
- Sasano Y
- Mochizuki F
- Komori M
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.66742
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Pediatric Case of Cogan's Syndrome With Internal Otitis.
**Authors:** Sasano Y, Mochizuki F, Komori M
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.66742](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.66742)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Aug 12;16(8):e66742. doi: 10.7759/cureus.66742. eCollection 2024 
Aug.

A Pediatric Case of Cogan's Syndrome With Internal Otitis.

Sasano Y(1), Mochizuki F(1), Komori M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, St. Marianna University School of Medicine, 
Kawasaki, JPN.

Cogan's syndrome is characterized by ocular symptoms and auditory vestibular 
dysfunction. Auditory vestibular dysfunction in Cogan's syndrome is believed to 
be similar to Ménière's disease, but the cause is not known in detail. We 
present the case of a 10-year-old boy with Cogan's syndrome. The patient had 
panuveitis, bilateral hearing loss, and bilateral vestibular dysfunction. MRI 
revealed no evidence of endolymphatic hydrops, which is a cause of Ménière's 
disease, and enhanced contrast effects on the bilateral cochlear and vestibular 
apparatus. The caloric test, the video-head impulse test, and the vestibular 
evoked muscle potential test also showed severe vestibular dysfunction. Based on 
the above, the auditory vestibular dysfunction in this patient was considered to 
be caused by internal otitis. The patient's vision recovered after treatment 
with steroids and immunosuppressive drugs, but his hearing did not recover. He 
underwent bilateral cochlear implantation and had a good postoperative 
course but we encountered difficulty in deciding when to perform cochlear 
implantation. This case demonstrates the importance of determining the timing of 
surgery in consideration of the ossification and fibrosis of the inner ear and 
the drug administration status.

Copyright © 2024, Sasano et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.66742
PMCID: PMC11391165
PMID: 39268327

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent was obtained or waived 
by all participants in this study. Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the 
ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: 
Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no financial support was 
received from any organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships: 
All authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present 
or within the previous three years with any organizations that might have an 
interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All authors have declared 
that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have 
influenced the submitted work.