---
reference_id: "PMID:30165915"
title: A clinical guideline on Dientamoeba fragilis infections.
authors:
- van Gestel RS
- Kusters JG
- Monkelbaan JF
journal: Parasitology
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1017/S0031182018001385
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A clinical guideline on Dientamoeba fragilis infections.
**Authors:** van Gestel RS, Kusters JG, Monkelbaan JF
**Journal:** Parasitology (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S0031182018001385](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0031182018001385)

## Content

1. Parasitology. 2019 Aug;146(9):1131-1139. doi: 10.1017/S0031182018001385. Epub 
2018 Aug 31.

A clinical guideline on Dientamoeba fragilis infections.

van Gestel RS(1), Kusters JG(2), Monkelbaan JF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology,University Medical Center 
Utrecht,Utrecht,The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology,University Medical Center 
Utrecht,Utrecht,The Netherlands.

Dientamoeba fragilis (D. fragilis) is an intestinal parasite frequently detected 
in humans with abdominal pain and diarrhoea, but it is also commonly found in 
asymptomatic subjects. Hence its clinical relevance is often disputed. The 
introduction of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a versatile and sensitive 
diagnostic technique for the detection of intestinal parasites, and in some 
Western world countries PCR has almost completely replaced microscopic 
diagnostics. PCR has however resulted in an increase in the number of D. 
fragilis-positive patients. The disputed pathogenic nature of this intestinal 
parasite and an apparent increase in the incidence of patients with positive PCR 
results have renewed the discussions between clinicians and microbiologists on 
how to deal with an infected patient. Moreover, treatment guidelines differ 
throughout the world which makes it difficult for clinicians to choose an 
optimal therapeutic regimen.AimTo summarize and discuss the current knowledge on 
the pathogenicity, best diagnostic approach, treatment and follow-up of children 
and adults infected with D. fragilis.

DOI: 10.1017/S0031182018001385
PMID: 30165915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]