---
reference_id: "PMID:38053939"
title: Long-term outcomes in two adult siblings with Fucosidosis - Diagnostic odyssey and clinical manifestations.
authors:
- Puente-Ruiz N
- Ellis I
- Bregu M
- Chen C
- Church HJ
- Tylee KL
- Gladston S
- Hackett R
- Oldham A
- Virk S
- Hendriksz C
- Morris AAM
- Jones SA
- Stepien KM
journal: Mol Genet Metab Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2023.101009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term outcomes in two adult siblings with Fucosidosis - Diagnostic odyssey and clinical manifestations.
**Authors:** Puente-Ruiz N, Ellis I, Bregu M, Chen C, Church HJ, Tylee KL, Gladston S, Hackett R, Oldham A, Virk S, Hendriksz C, Morris AAM, Jones SA, Stepien KM
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgmr.2023.101009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgmr.2023.101009)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2023 Sep 27;37:101009. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2023.101009.
eCollection 2023 Dec.

Long-term outcomes in two adult siblings with Fucosidosis - Diagnostic odyssey
and clinical manifestations.

Puente-Ruiz N(1)(2), Ellis I(3), Bregu M(4), Chen C(5), Church HJ(6), Tylee
KL(6), Gladston S(7), Hackett R(8), Oldham A(1), Virk S(9), Hendriksz C(10),
Morris AAM(6), Jones SA(6), Stepien KM(1)(11).

Author information:
(1)Adult Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, UK.
(2)Department of Clinical Medicine, Marqués de Valdecilla University Hospital,
López-Albo Post Residency Program, Santander, Spain.
(3)Clinical Genetics, Royal Liverpool Children Hospital, Alder Hey, Liverpool,
UK.
(4)Ophthalmology Department, Warrington Hospital, Warrington, UK.
(5)Clinical Neuropsychology Department, Salford Royal Hospital NHS Foundation
Trust, Salford, UK.
(6)Willink Metabolic Unit, St Mary's Hospital, Manchester Foundation Trust,
Manchester, UK.
(7)Warrington Primary Care Psychiatry, Warrington, UK.
(8)Neurology Department, Salford Royal Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Salford,
UK.
(9)Cardiology Department, Warrington Hospital, Warrington, UK.
(10)University of Pretoria, Steve Biko Academic Unit, Department of Paediatrics,
Pretoria, South Africa.
(11)Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester
M13 9PL, UK.

Fucosidosis (OMIN# 230000) is a rare lysosomal storage disorder (LSDs) caused by
mutations in the FUCA1 gene, leading to alpha-L-fucosidase deficiency; it is
inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. Fucosidosis represents a disease
spectrum with a wide variety of clinical features, but most affected patients
have slow neurologic deterioration. Many patients die young and the long-term
clinical outcomes in adult patients are poorly documented. Here, we report the
long-term follow up of two Caucasian siblings, a 31-year-old man and 25-year-old
woman. We describe the clinical, biochemical, radiological and genetic findings
in two siblings affected by Fucosidosis and the differences between them after
19-years follow up. The dermatological features of the younger sibling have been
reported previously by Bharati et al. (2007). Both patients have typical
features of Fucosidosis, such as learning difficulties, ataxia, and
angiokeratomas with differing severity. Case 1 presents severe ataxia with
greater limitation of mobility, multiple dysostoses, angiokeratomas on his
limbs, retinal vein enlargement and increased tortuosity in the eye and
gastrointestinal symptoms. Biochemical analysis demonstrated a deficiency of
alpha-fucosidase in leucocytes. Case 2 has a greater number of angiokeratomas
and has suffered three psychotic episodes. The diagnosis of Fucosidosis was
confirmed in cultured skin fibroblast at the age of 12 years. Molecular analysis
of the FUCA1 gene showed a heterozygous mutation c.998G > A p.(Gly333Asp), with
a pathogenic exon 4 deletion in the other allele in both patients. Conclusion.
Fucosidosis presents a wide clinical heterogeneity and intrafamilial variability
of symptoms. Psychosis and gastrointestinal symptoms have not been reported
previously in Fucosidosis.

© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2023.101009
PMCID: PMC10694746
PMID: 38053939

Conflict of interest statement: all the authors declare no conflict of interest
for this publication.
