---
reference_id: "PMID:36930098"
title: Neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio can predict overall survival in patients with stage II to III colorectal cancer.
authors:
- Cho Y
- Park SB
- Yoon JY
- Kwak MS
- Cha JM
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000033279
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio can predict overall survival in patients with stage II to III colorectal cancer.
**Authors:** Cho Y, Park SB, Yoon JY, Kwak MS, Cha JM
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000033279](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000033279)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2023 Mar 17;102(11):e33279. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000033279.

Neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio can predict overall survival in patients with 
stage II to III colorectal cancer.

Cho Y(1)(2), Park SB(1)(2), Yoon JY(1), Kwak MS(1), Cha JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Kyung Hee University Hospital at Gangdong, 
Kyung Hee University, College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Medicine, Graduate School, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea.

The neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) is a prognostic inflammatory marker in 
colorectal cancer (CRC), however, little is known for its prognostic role in 
stage II to III CRC patients underwent curative resection. This study was aimed 
to investigate prognostic role of NLR in stage II to III CRC patients underwent 
surgery. Medical records of 1378 newly diagnosed CRC patients between June 2006 
and March 2020 were reviewed. Data were collected by using electronic medical 
record software. Survival rate were analyzed using the Kaplan-Meier method. The 
cutoff values of NLR in stage II to III CRC patients were defined by maximally 
selected log-rank statistics. Multivariable cox proportional-hazard models were 
performed to find risk factors associated with overall survival (OS) in stage II 
to III CRC patients underwent surgery. Among 1378 CRC patients enrolled, 910 
patients underwent surgery. In entire surgical cohort, age, body mass index 
(BMI), CEA, carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9), lymphatic invasion, NLR, and 
albumin-to-globulin ratio (AGR) were found to be risk factors associated with OS 
(all P < .05). In stage II to III CRC patients underwent curative resection (n = 
623), age, BMI, lymphatic invasion, AGR, and NLR were found to be risk factors 
associated with OS (all P < .05). In the multivariable analysis, CA 19-9 and 
lymphatic invasion were independent risk factors for OS in entire surgical 
cohort. In the multivariable analysis for the stage II to III CRC patients, age, 
BMI, lymphatic invasion and NLR (Hazard ratio = 2.41, 95% confidential interval 
[CI]: 1.04-5.595, P = .041) were independent risk factors for OS. NLR can be 
used as a clinically simple and useful parameter for predicting OS in stage II 
to III CRC patients undergoing curative resection, however, its optimal cutoff 
value should be further evaluated.

Copyright © 2023 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000033279
PMCID: PMC10019177
PMID: 36930098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no funding and conflicts of 
interest to disclose.