---
reference_id: "PMID:35804856"
title: Molecular Basis of Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome Spectrum with Associated Tumors and Consequences for Clinical Practice.
authors:
- Eggermann T
- Maher ER
- Kratz CP
- Prawitt D
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/cancers14133083
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Basis of Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome Spectrum with Associated Tumors and Consequences for Clinical Practice.
**Authors:** Eggermann T, Maher ER, Kratz CP, Prawitt D
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers14133083](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers14133083)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2022 Jun 23;14(13):3083. doi: 10.3390/cancers14133083.

Molecular Basis of Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome Spectrum with Associated Tumors 
and Consequences for Clinical Practice.

Eggermann T(1), Maher ER(2), Kratz CP(3), Prawitt D(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen, 52074 Aachen, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge and Cambridge 
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK.
(3)Paediatric Haematology and Oncology, Hannover Medical School, 30625 Hannover, 
Germany.
(4)Center for Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Medical Center, 
55101 Mainz, Germany.

Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS, OMIM 130650) is a congenital imprinting 
condition with a heterogenous clinical presentation of overgrowth and an 
increased childhood cancer risk (mainly nephroblastoma, hepatoblastoma or 
neuroblastoma). Due to the varying clinical presentation encompassing classical, 
clinical BWS without a molecular diagnosis and BWS-related phenotypes with an 
11p15.5 molecular anomaly, the syndromic entity was extended to the 
Beckwith-Wiedemann spectrum (BWSp). The tumor risk of up to 30% depends on the 
molecular subtype of BWSp with causative genetic or epigenetic alterations in 
the chromosomal region 11p15.5. The molecular diagnosis of BWSp can be 
challenging for several reasons, including the range of causative molecular 
mechanisms which are frequently mosaic. The molecular basis of tumor formation 
appears to relate to stalled cellular differentiation in certain organs that 
predisposes persisting embryonic cells to accumulate additional molecular 
defects, which then results in a range of embryonal tumors. The molecular 
subtype of BWSp not only influences the overall risk of neoplasia, but also the 
likelihood of specific embryonal tumors.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers14133083
PMCID: PMC9265096
PMID: 35804856

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.