---
reference_id: "PMID:38520707"
title: "Morphology, Not Only Volume: A Study on Empty Nose Syndrome and Inferior Turbinates."
authors:
- Fu CH
- Chen CC
- Huang CC
- Chang PH
- Chen YW
- Tang YC
- Lee TJ
journal: Laryngoscope
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/lary.31328
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Morphology, Not Only Volume: A Study on Empty Nose Syndrome and Inferior Turbinates.
**Authors:** Fu CH, Chen CC, Huang CC, Chang PH, Chen YW, Tang YC, Lee TJ
**Journal:** Laryngoscope (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/lary.31328](https://doi.org/10.1002/lary.31328)

## Content

1. Laryngoscope. 2024 Jul;134(7):3060-3066. doi: 10.1002/lary.31328. Epub 2024
Mar  23.

Morphology, Not Only Volume: A Study on Empty Nose Syndrome and Inferior 
Turbinates.

Fu CH(1)(2), Chen CC(3), Huang CC(1)(2), Chang PH(1)(2), Chen YW(1), Tang YC(1), 
Lee TJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Chang Gung Memorial 
Hospital and Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(2)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang 
Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Medical Imaging and Intervention, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital 
and Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVES: Empty nose syndrome (ENS) is an underdiagnosed but burdensome 
clinical condition. Studies that have addressed the impact of remnant inferior 
turbinate volume (ITV) on ENS are scarce. We aimed to evaluate the impact of ITV 
and phenotyping on the severity and presentation of ENS.
METHODS: All the enrolled patients underwent the following subjective 
assessments: the ENS 6-Item Questionnaire (ENS6Q), Sino-Nasal Outcome Test-25 
(SNOT-25), Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II) and Beck Anxiety Inventory 
(BAI). The ITV was obtained from finely cut (1-mm-thick slices) sino-nasal 
computed tomography scan images and analyzed using ImageJ. The correlation 
between ITV, subjective measurements, and morphology of inferior turbinates was 
evaluated. ENS was categorized as torpedo type (balanced tissue volume) or 
pistol type (posterior dominance) based on the morphology.
RESULTS: Overall, 54 patients met the inclusion criteria. The ITV was positively 
correlated with the ENS6Q score and domain of ENS symptoms in SNOT-25. Neither 
BDI-II nor BAI scores had a significant correlation with ITV. Based on their 
morphological classification, the torpedo type exhibited diverse manifestations 
in the SNOT-25 analysis in response to changes in ITV, while the pistol type 
demonstrated an elevated rhinologic symptom burden and ENS-specific symptoms as 
their ITV increased. Nasal resistance did not correlate with the ITV in either 
type of ENS.
CONCLUSIONS: Symptoms were paradoxically worse in ENS patients with greater 
remnant ITV, and distinct morphological phenotypes in the nasal cavities may 
result in different presentations. Further investigation into the correlation 
between remnant inferior turbinates and nerve function is warranted.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 3 Laryngoscope, 134:3060-3066, 2024.

© 2024 The American Laryngological, Rhinological and Otological Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.31328
PMID: 38520707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]