---
reference_id: "PMID:20301294"
title: ATP1A3-Related Disorder.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Brashear A
- Sweadner KJ
- Haq I
- Napoli E
- Ozelius L
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ATP1A3-Related Disorder.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Brashear A, Sweadner KJ, Haq I, Napoli E, Ozelius L

## Content

1. ATP1A3-Related Disorder.

Brashear A(1), Sweadner KJ(2), Haq I(3), Napoli E(4), Ozelius L(5).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2008 Feb 7 [updated 2024 Dec 5].

Author information:
(1)Vice President for Health Sciences;, Dean, Jacobs School of Medicine and 
Biomedical Sciences;, Professor, Neurology;, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, New 
York
(2)Associate Professor, Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Department of 
Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
(3)Professor, Department of Neurology, University of Miami Miller School of 
Medicine, Miami, Florida
(4)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, University of California, Davis, 
Davis, California
(5)Associate Neuroscientist, Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: ATP1A3-related disorder consists of heterogenous 
overlapping clinical findings that pertain to the four most common historically 
defined phenotypes: alternating hemiplegia of childhood (AHC); cerebellar 
ataxia, areflexia, pes cavus, optic atrophy, sensorineural hearing loss (CAPOS) 
syndrome; relapsing encephalopathy with cerebellar ataxia (RECA) / fever-induced 
paroxysmal weakness and encephalopathy (FIPWE); and rapid-onset 
dystonia-parkinsonism (RDP). These phenotypes exist on a spectrum and should be 
regarded as classifications of convenience. AHC is characterized by onset prior 
to age 18 months of paroxysmal hemiplegic episodes, predominately involving the 
limbs and/or the whole body, lasting from minutes to hours to days (and 
sometimes weeks) with remission only during sleep, only to resume after 
awakening. Although paroxysmal episodic neurologic dysfunction predominates 
early in the disease course, with age increasingly persistent neurologic 
dysfunction predominates, including oculomotor apraxia and strabismus, 
dysarthria, speech and language delay, developmental delay, and impairment in 
social skills. Other system involvement may include cardiovascular (cardiac 
conduction abnormalities) and gastrointestinal (constipation, vomiting, 
anorexia, diarrhea, nausea, and abdominal pain) manifestations. CAPOS syndrome 
presents in infancy or childhood (usually ages 6 months to 5 years) with 
cerebellar ataxia during or after a fever. The acute febrile encephalopathy may 
include hypotonia, flaccidity, nystagmus, strabismus, dysarthria/anarthria, 
lethargy, loss of consciousness, and even coma. Usually, considerable recovery 
occurs within days to weeks; however, persistence of some degree of ataxia and 
other manifestations is typical. RECA/FIPWE primarily presents with 
fever-induced episodes (infancy to age 5 years); however, first episodes can 
occur occasionally in young adults during illnesses such as mononucleosis. 
Recurrent fever-induced episodes may be ataxia-dominated RECA-like motor 
manifestations or FIPWE-like non-motor manifestations (encephalopathy) and can 
vary among affected individuals. Notably, RECA-like and FIPWE-like 
manifestations can occur in the same individual in different episodes. In some 
individuals episodes seem to decrease in frequency and severity over time, 
whereas others might experience worsening of manifestations. RDP presents in 
individuals ages 18 months to 60 years and older with dystonia that is typically 
of abrupt onset over hours to several weeks, though some individuals report 
gradual onset over the course of months. A stress-related trigger is 
identifiable in up to 75% of individuals. Dystonia rarely improves significantly 
after onset; some individuals report mild improvement over time, whereas others 
can experience subsequent episodes of abrupt worsening months to years after 
onset. Limbs are usually the first to be affected, although by the time of 
diagnosis – typically many years after onset – individuals most commonly display 
a bulbar-predominant generalized dystonia. Exceptions are common and a 
rostrocaudal gradient is rare rather than typical. Migraines and seizures are 
also observed.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of ATP1A3-related disorder is established in a 
proband with suggestive findings and a heterozygous pathogenic variant in ATP1A3 
identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: There is no cure for ATP1A3-related disorder. Supportive treatment 
to improve quality of life, maximize function, and reduce complications is 
recommended. This ideally involves multidisciplinary care by specialists in 
neurology, developmental pediatrics, orthopedics, physical medicine and 
rehabilitation, speech-language therapy, psychology, mental health, 
ophthalmology, social work, and medical genetics. Surveillance: Regularly 
scheduled evaluations by the treating specialists are recommended to monitor 
existing manifestations, the individual's response to supportive care, and the 
emergence of new manifestations. Agents/circumstances to avoid: To the extent 
possible, individuals who are heterozygous for an ATP1A3 pathogenic variant 
should avoid the known triggers for manifestations and/or episodes that include 
physical, psychological (e.g., missed meals, sleep deprivation), and emotional 
stress (e.g., excitement, fear); environmental stress (e.g., bright sunlight or 
fluorescent lighting, heat/cold, excessive noise, crowds); excessive or 
atypically strenuous exercise; and excessive use of alcohol. Evaluation of 
relatives at risk: Clarification of the genetic status of apparently 
asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives is appropriate to identify as 
early as possible those who should be evaluated for cardiac conduction 
abnormalities and who should be advised about agents/circumstances to avoid.
GENETIC COUNSELING: ATP1A3-related disorder – including the four historically 
defined phenotypes of AHC, CAPOS syndrome, RECA/FIPWE, and RDP – is inherited in 
an autosomal dominant manner. Most individuals with a more severe ATP1A3-related 
phenotype (e.g., AHC) have the disorder as the result of a de novo pathogenic 
variant. About half of individuals with a relatively less severe ATP1A3-related 
phenotype (e.g., CAPOS syndrome or RDP) have the disorder as the result of a 
pathogenic variant inherited from an affected parent; about half of individuals 
have an apparently de novo pathogenic variant. Each child of an individual with 
ATP1A3-related disorder has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant. 
Once the ATP1A3 pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family 
member, predictive testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal/preimplantation 
genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301294