---
reference_id: "PMID:25627543"
title: Febrile ulceronecrotic Mucha-Habermann disease following suspected hemorrhagic chickenpox infection in a 20-month-old boy.
authors:
- Lode HN
- Döring P
- Lauenstein P
- Hoeger P
- Dombrowski F
- Bruns R
journal: Infection
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s15010-015-0726-5
keywords:
- "Anti-Bacterial Agents/administration & dosage"
- "Anti-Inflammatory Agents/administration & dosage"
- CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes/immunology
- Chickenpox/complications
- "Cyclosporine/administration & dosage"
- "Granulocytes/chemistry, immunology"
- "Herpes Simplex/diagnosis, drug therapy, pathology"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Pityriasis Lichenoides/diagnosis, drug therapy, pathology"
- "Prednisolone/administration & dosage"
- "Receptors, IgG/analysis"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Febrile ulceronecrotic Mucha-Habermann disease following suspected hemorrhagic chickenpox infection in a 20-month-old boy.
**Authors:** Lode HN, Döring P, Lauenstein P, Hoeger P, Dombrowski F, Bruns R
**Journal:** Infection (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s15010-015-0726-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s15010-015-0726-5)

## Content

1. Infection. 2015 Oct;43(5):583-8. doi: 10.1007/s15010-015-0726-5. Epub 2015 Jan
 28.

Febrile ulceronecrotic Mucha-Habermann disease following suspected hemorrhagic
chickenpox infection in a 20-month-old boy.

Lode HN(1), Döring P(2), Lauenstein P(3)(4), Hoeger P(5), Dombrowski F(2), Bruns
R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University Medicine Greifswald,
Ferdinand-Sauerbruchstrasse 1, 17475, Greifswald, Germany.
lode@uni-greifswald.de.
(2)Institute of Pathology, University Medicine Greifswald,
Friedrich-Loeffler-Str. 23e, 17475, Greifswald, Germany.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University Medicine Greifswald,
Ferdinand-Sauerbruchstrasse 1, 17475, Greifswald, Germany.
(4)DKD HELIOS Klinik Wiesbaden, Aukammallee 33, 65191, Wiesbaden, Germany.
(5)Department of Paediatric Dermatology, Children's Hospital Wilhelmstift,
Liliencronstraße 130, 22149, Hamburg, Germany.

We present the youngest pediatric patient so far with febrile ulcerative
Mucha-Haberman disease (FUMHD) after an admitting clinical picture of
hemorrhagic varicella infection. With a time to diagnosis of 25 days, the
20-month-old boy responded to low dose cyclosporine and prednisolone given for 3
months and is free of disease after 4 years of follow up. We describe a
polyclonal CD8+ T cell response with elevated pro-inflammatory cytokines and a
fivefold upregulation of the high-affinity Fc receptor type I (CD64) on
granulocytes. Early consideration of FUMHD in the differential diagnosis of a
systemic inflammatory disease combined with a generalized necrotizing rash is
important for early and adequate management of children with this rare and
challenging disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s15010-015-0726-5
PMID: 25627543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
