---
reference_id: "PMID:36738888"
title: "The empirical use of aminoglycosides in Ludwig's angina based on bacterial analysis of 63 cases."
authors:
- van der Merwe P
- Rule R
- Olorunju S
- Jacobs F
journal: J Stomatol Oral Maxillofac Surg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jormas.2023.101409
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The empirical use of aminoglycosides in Ludwig's angina based on bacterial analysis of 63 cases.
**Authors:** van der Merwe P, Rule R, Olorunju S, Jacobs F
**Journal:** J Stomatol Oral Maxillofac Surg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jormas.2023.101409](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jormas.2023.101409)

## Content

1. J Stomatol Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2023 Sep;124(4):101409. doi: 
10.1016/j.jormas.2023.101409. Epub 2023 Feb 3.

The empirical use of aminoglycosides in Ludwig's angina based on bacterial 
analysis of 63 cases.

van der Merwe P(1), Rule R(2), Olorunju S(3), Jacobs F(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Maxillofacial and Oral Surgery, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
School of Dentistry, Oral and Dental Hospital, University of Pretoria, C/o Steve 
Biko and Dr Savage Roads, Gezina, Pretoria 0002, South Africa. Electronic 
address: pjvdmerwe11@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of 
Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa; Department of Medical Microbiology, National 
Health Laboratory Services, Tshwane Academic Division, Pretoria, South Africa.
(3)Biostatistics Unit (Pretoria office), South African Medical Research Council 
(SAMRC), South Africa.
(4)Department of Maxillofacial and Oral Surgery, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
School of Dentistry, Oral and Dental Hospital, University of Pretoria, C/o Steve 
Biko and Dr Savage Roads, Gezina, Pretoria 0002, South Africa.

PURPOSES: To determine if the empirical use of aminoglycosides is justified in 
Ludwig's angina based on microscopy, culture and sensitivity results.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis was done on patients that presented with 
Ludwig's angina to the Maxillofacial and Oral surgery department at the 
University of Pretoria. Demographical data was extracted from patient files. Pus 
specimens that were submitted as part of the initial surgical intervention were 
analysed.
RESULTS: Sixty-three patients were included in the study with the majority, 
76.19% (n=48/63), comprising males. The mean patient age was 38.6 years (range 6 
months to 78 years). The majority of infections (87.3%) had an odontogenic 
aetiology (n=55/63). Forty-four percent of the patients had immunosuppressive 
co-morbidities (n=28/63). Streptococci contributed 71.26% (n=62/87) of the 
cultured bacteria. Similar bacteria were cultured in the immunocompromised and 
the immunocompetent patients (p=0.672). Ninety-two percent (n=57/62) of the 
streptococci cultured were sensitive to penicillin. The addition of 
aminoglycosides to the study sample would not have made a statistically 
significant difference (p=0.1556).
CONCLUSION: Based on the findings of this study, the empirical use of 
aminoglycosides is not warranted in either immunocompromised or immunocompetent 
patients with Ludwig's angina.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jormas.2023.101409
PMID: 36738888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None.