---
reference_id: "PMID:12590850"
title: "Treatment of Ménière's disease by intratympanic gentamicin application."
authors:
- Assimakopoulos D
- Patrikakos G
journal: J Laryngol Otol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1258/002221503321046586
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of Ménière's disease by intratympanic gentamicin application.
**Authors:** Assimakopoulos D, Patrikakos G
**Journal:** J Laryngol Otol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1258/002221503321046586](https://doi.org/10.1258/002221503321046586)

## Content

1. J Laryngol Otol. 2003 Jan;117(1):10-6. doi: 10.1258/002221503321046586.

Treatment of Ménière's disease by intratympanic gentamicin application.

Assimakopoulos D(1), Patrikakos G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, University of Ioannina, Medical School, 
Ioannina, 45110, Greece. dassimak@cc.uoi.gr

Ménière's disease is a vestibular disorder characterized by episodic vertigo, 
tinnitus, fluctuant hearing loss, and ear fullness, with vertiginous attacks 
being the most disabling complaint. The effectiveness of conservative treatment 
has been variable, while surgical techniques provide more permanent relief from 
vertigo, but pose possible morbidity and cochlear risk. Intratympanic 
administration of gentamicin has been proposed as an alternative for patients 
with debilitating Ménière's disease who have failed to respond to standard 
medical treatment. The goal of such treatment is to control vertigo by partially 
or completely destroying the vestibular system, while at the same time 
maintaining hearing. In this review we present the current medical literature on 
pathophysiology, pharmacokinetics, administration methods, dosage, treatment 
protocols, and problems related to intratympanic administration of gentamicin 
for patients with MD. Intratympanic gentamicin administration is a simple 
medical modality for treatment of persistent vertigo in patients with Ménière's 
disease. According to recent world research protocols, we propose the 
instillation of gentamicin by transtympanic injection, as a quick, easy, 
well-tolerated, ambulatory and cost-effective technique. Drug solution 
concentrations should be dependent on the frequency, intensity and duration of 
vertigo spells, as well as the degree of existing hearing loss, thus providing 
progressive vertigo relief with a low possibility of secondary deafness.

DOI: 10.1258/002221503321046586
PMID: 12590850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]