---
reference_id: "PMID:31155743"
title: COX6A2 variants cause a muscle-specific cytochrome c oxidase deficiency.
authors:
- Inoue M
- Uchino S
- Iida A
- Noguchi S
- Hayashi S
- Takahashi T
- Fujii K
- Komaki H
- Takeshita E
- Nonaka I
- Okada Y
- Yoshizawa T
- Van Lommel L
- Schuit F
- Goto YI
- Mimaki M
- Nishino I
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/ana.25517
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Cytochrome-c Oxidase Deficiency/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Electron Transport Complex IV/genetics
- Fatal Outcome
- Genetic Variation/genetics
- HEK293 Cells
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Muscle Proteins/genetics
- "Muscle, Skeletal/pathology"
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# COX6A2 variants cause a muscle-specific cytochrome c oxidase deficiency.
**Authors:** Inoue M, Uchino S, Iida A, Noguchi S, Hayashi S, Takahashi T, Fujii K, Komaki H, Takeshita E, Nonaka I, Okada Y, Yoshizawa T, Van Lommel L, Schuit F, Goto YI, Mimaki M, Nishino I
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.25517](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.25517)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2019 Aug;86(2):193-202. doi: 10.1002/ana.25517. Epub 2019 Jul 2.

COX6A2 variants cause a muscle-specific cytochrome c oxidase deficiency.

Inoue M(1)(2)(3), Uchino S(4)(5), Iida A(3), Noguchi S(1)(3), Hayashi S(1)(3), 
Takahashi T(6), Fujii K(7), Komaki H(4)(8), Takeshita E(4)(8), Nonaka I(1), 
Okada Y(9), Yoshizawa T(10), Van Lommel L(11), Schuit F(11), Goto YI(3)(4)(8), 
Mimaki M(4)(5), Nishino I(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuromuscular Research, National Institute of Neuroscience, 
National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Integrated Graduate School of Medicine, Engineering, and Agricultural 
Science, University of Yamanashi, Yamanashi, Japan.
(3)Medical Genome Center, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Mental Retardation and Birth Defect Research, National 
Institute of Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Teikyo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Saiseikai Utsunomiya Hospital, Tochigi, Japan.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Chiba University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Chiba, Japan.
(8)Department of Child Neurology, National Center Hospital, National Center of 
Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.
(9)Department of Statistical Genetics, Osaka University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Osaka, Japan.
(10)College of Life Sciences, Ritsumeikan University, Kusatsu, Japan.
(11)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, KU 
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

OBJECTIVE: Cytochrome c oxidase (COX) deficiency is a major mitochondrial 
respiratory chain defect that has vast genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity. 
This study aims to identify novel causative genes of COX deficiency with only 
striated muscle-specific symptoms.
METHODS: Whole exome sequencing was performed in 2 unrelated individuals who 
were diagnosed with congenital myopathy and presented COX deficiency in muscle 
pathology. We assessed the COX6A2 variants using measurements of enzymatic 
activities and assembly of mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes in the 
samples from the patients and knockout mice.
RESULTS: Both patients presented muscle weakness and hypotonia in 4 limbs along 
with facial muscle weakness. One patient had cardiomyopathy. Neither patient 
exhibited involvement from other organs. Whole exome sequencing identified 
biallelic missense variants in COX6A2, which is expressed only in the skeletal 
muscle and heart. The variants detected were homozygous c.117C > A (p.Ser39Arg) 
and compound heterozygous c.117C > A (p.Ser39Arg) and c.127T > C (p.Cys43Arg). 
We found specific reductions in complex IV activities in the skeletal muscle of 
both individuals. Assembly of complex IV and its supercomplex formation were 
impaired in the muscle.
INTERPRETATION: This study indicates that biallelic variants in COX6A2 cause a 
striated muscle-specific form of COX deficiency. ANN NEUROL 2019;86:193-202.

© 2019 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.25517
PMID: 31155743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]