---
reference_id: "PMID:20829227"
title: Mutations in the neuronal ß-tubulin subunit TUBB3 result in malformation of cortical development and neuronal migration defects.
authors:
- Poirier K
- Saillour Y
- Bahi-Buisson N
- Jaglin XH
- Fallet-Bianco C
- Nabbout R
- Castelnau-Ptakhine L
- Roubertie A
- Attie-Bitach T
- Desguerre I
- Genevieve D
- Barnerias C
- Keren B
- Lebrun N
- Boddaert N
- Encha-Razavi F
- Chelly J
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq377
keywords:
- Cell Differentiation/genetics
- Cell Movement/genetics
- Cerebral Cortex/abnormalities
- Humans
- Malformations of Cortical Development/genetics
- "Malformations of Cortical Development, Group II/genetics"
- "Microtubules/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Neurogenesis
- Neurons/metabolism
- Phenotype
- "Tubulin/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the neuronal ß-tubulin subunit TUBB3 result in malformation of cortical development and neuronal migration defects.
**Authors:** Poirier K, Saillour Y, Bahi-Buisson N, Jaglin XH, Fallet-Bianco C, Nabbout R, Castelnau-Ptakhine L, Roubertie A, Attie-Bitach T, Desguerre I, Genevieve D, Barnerias C, Keren B, Lebrun N, Boddaert N, Encha-Razavi F, Chelly J
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddq377](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddq377)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Nov 15;19(22):4462-73. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq377. Epub 2010 
Sep 9.

Mutations in the neuronal ß-tubulin subunit TUBB3 result in malformation of 
cortical development and neuronal migration defects.

Poirier K(1), Saillour Y, Bahi-Buisson N, Jaglin XH, Fallet-Bianco C, Nabbout R, 
Castelnau-Ptakhine L, Roubertie A, Attie-Bitach T, Desguerre I, Genevieve D, 
Barnerias C, Keren B, Lebrun N, Boddaert N, Encha-Razavi F, Chelly J.

Author information:
(1)Institut Cochin, Université Paris-Descartes, CNRS (UMR 8104), 24 rue du 
Faubourg St Jacques, Paris, France.

Mutations in the TUBB3 gene, encoding β-tubulin isotype III, were recently shown 
to be associated with various neurological syndromes which all have in common 
the ocular motility disorder, congenital fibrosis of the extraocular muscle type 
3 (CFEOM3). Surprisingly and in contrast to previously described TUBA1A and 
TUBB2B phenotypes, no evidence of dysfunctional neuronal migration and cortical 
organization was reported. In our study, we report the discovery of six novel 
missense mutations in the TUBB3 gene, including one fetal case and one 
homozygous variation, in nine patients that all share cortical disorganization, 
axonal abnormalities associated with pontocerebellar hypoplasia, but with no 
ocular motility defects, CFEOM3. These new findings demonstrate that the 
spectrum of TUBB3-related phenotype is broader than previously described and 
includes malformations of cortical development (MCD) associated with neuronal 
migration and differentiation defects, axonal guidance and tract organization 
impairment. Complementary functional studies revealed that the mutated 
βIII-tubulin causing the MCD phenotype results in a reduction of heterodimer 
formation, yet produce correctly formed microtubules (MTs) in mammalian cells. 
Further to this, we investigated the properties of the MT network in patients' 
fibroblasts and revealed that MCD mutations can alter the resistance of MTs to 
depolymerization. Interestingly, this finding contrasts with the increased MT 
stability observed in the case of CFEOM3-related mutations. These results led us 
to hypothesize that either MT dynamics or their interactions with various 
MT-interacting proteins could be differently affected by TUBB3 variations, thus 
resulting in distinct alteration of downstream processes and therefore 
explaining the phenotypic diversity of the TUBB3-related spectrum.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddq377
PMCID: PMC3298850
PMID: 20829227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]