---
reference_id: "PMID:9463337"
title: "HMG CoA lyase deficiency: identification of five causal point mutations in codons 41 and 42, including a frequent Saudi Arabian mutation, R41Q."
authors:
- Mitchell GA
- Ozand PT
- Robert MF
- Ashmarina L
- Roberts J
- Gibson KM
- Wanders RJ
- Wang S
- Chevalier I
- Plöchl E
- Miziorko H
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1086/301730
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- Codon
- Coma/genetics
- DNA Primers
- Ethnicity
- Exons
- Humans
- Hypoglycemia/genetics
- Introns
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/enzymology, epidemiology, genetics"
- "Oxo-Acid-Lyases/chemistry, deficiency, genetics"
- Point Mutation
- "Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational"
- "Recombinant Proteins/biosynthesis, chemistry"
- Saudi Arabia/epidemiology
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HMG CoA lyase deficiency: identification of five causal point mutations in codons 41 and 42, including a frequent Saudi Arabian mutation, R41Q.
**Authors:** Mitchell GA, Ozand PT, Robert MF, Ashmarina L, Roberts J, Gibson KM, Wanders RJ, Wang S, Chevalier I, Plöchl E, Miziorko H
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1086/301730](https://doi.org/10.1086/301730)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1998 Feb;62(2):295-300. doi: 10.1086/301730.

HMG CoA lyase deficiency: identification of five causal point mutations in
codons 41 and 42, including a frequent Saudi Arabian mutation, R41Q.

Mitchell GA(1), Ozand PT, Robert MF, Ashmarina L, Roberts J, Gibson KM, Wanders
RJ, Wang S, Chevalier I, Plöchl E, Miziorko H.

Author information:
(1)Service de genetique medicale, Hopital Sainte-Justine, Montreal, Quebec H3T
1C5, Canada. mitchell@ere.umontreal.ca

The hereditary deficiency of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl (HMG) CoA lyase (HL;
OMIM 246450 [http://www3.ncbi.nlm.nih. gov:80/htbin-post/Omim/dispmim?246450])
results in episodes of hypoketotic hypoglycemia and coma and is reported to be
frequent and clinically severe in Saudi Arabia. We found genetic diversity among
nine Saudi HL-deficient probands: six were homozygous for the missense mutation
R41Q, and two were homozygous for the frameshift mutation F305fs(-2). In 32
non-Saudi HL-deficient probands, we found three R41Q alleles and also discovered
four other deleterious point mutations in codons 41 and 42: R41X, D42E, D42G,
and D42H. In purified mutant recombinant HL, all four missense mutations in
codons 41 and 42 cause a marked decrease in HL activity. We developed a
screening procedure for HL missense mutations that yields residual activity at
levels comparable to those obtained using purified HL peptides. Codons 41 and 42
are important for normal HL catalysis and account for a disproportionate 21
(26%) of 82 of mutant alleles in our group of HL-deficient probands.

DOI: 10.1086/301730
PMCID: PMC1376904
PMID: 9463337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
