---
reference_id: "PMID:26590809"
title: Alkaline Phosphatase and Hypophosphatasia.
authors:
- Millán JL
- Whyte MP
journal: Calcif Tissue Int
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s00223-015-0079-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alkaline Phosphatase and Hypophosphatasia.
**Authors:** Millán JL, Whyte MP
**Journal:** Calcif Tissue Int (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00223-015-0079-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00223-015-0079-1)

## Content

1. Calcif Tissue Int. 2016 Apr;98(4):398-416. doi: 10.1007/s00223-015-0079-1.
Epub  2015 Nov 21.

Alkaline Phosphatase and Hypophosphatasia.

Millán JL(1), Whyte MP(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Sanford Children's Health Research Center, Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical 
Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA, 92037, USA. millan@burnham.org.
(2)Center for Metabolic Bone Disease and Molecular Research, Shriners Hospital 
for Children, St. Louis, MO, 63110, USA.
(3)Division of Bone and Mineral Diseases, Washington University School of 
Medicine at Barnes-Jewish Hospital, St. Louis, MO, 63110, USA.

Hypophosphatasia (HPP) results from ALPL mutations leading to deficient activity 
of the tissue-non-specific alkaline phosphatase isozyme (TNAP) and thereby 
extracellular accumulation of inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi), a natural substrate 
of TNAP and potent inhibitor of mineralization. Thus, HPP features rickets or 
osteomalacia and hypomineralization of teeth. Enzyme replacement using 
mineral-targeted TNAP from birth prevented severe HPP in TNAP-knockout mice and 
was then shown to rescue and substantially treat infants and young children with 
life-threatening HPP. Clinical trials are revealing aspects of HPP 
pathophysiology not yet fully understood, such as craniosynostosis and muscle 
weakness when HPP is severe. New treatment approaches are under development to 
improve patient care.

DOI: 10.1007/s00223-015-0079-1
PMCID: PMC4824800
PMID: 26590809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]