---
reference_id: "PMID:6132270"
title: "Acquired immunodeficiency in an infant: possible transmission by means of blood products."
authors:
- Ammann AJ
- Cowan MJ
- Wara DW
- Weintrub P
- Dritz S
- Goldman H
- Perkins HA
journal: Lancet
year: '1983'
doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(83)92082-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acquired immunodeficiency in an infant: possible transmission by means of blood products.
**Authors:** Ammann AJ, Cowan MJ, Wara DW, Weintrub P, Dritz S, Goldman H, Perkins HA
**Journal:** Lancet (1983)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0140-6736(83)92082-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(83)92082-2)

## Content

1. Lancet. 1983 Apr 30;1(8331):956-8. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(83)92082-2.

Acquired immunodeficiency in an infant: possible transmission by means of blood 
products.

Ammann AJ, Cowan MJ, Wara DW, Weintrub P, Dritz S, Goldman H, Perkins HA.

An infant who received multiple transfusions during the first few days of life 
for rhesus disease became ill with recurrent infections when 6 months old. 
Hepatitis, thrush, Candida dermatitis, otitis media, and disseminated 
Mycobacterium avium intracellulare infection occurred by 14 months of age. 
Immunological studies showed raised immunoglobulin levels, decreased 
mononuclear-cell responses to allogeneic cells and mitogen, and a decreased 
helper/suppressor cell ratio. It was determined that one of the blood donors, 
who was well at the time of blood donation, had died 17 months after with 
multiple opportunistic infections and acquired immunodeficiency. The clinical 
and laboratory findings in our patient suggest that he acquired a transmissible 
infectious agent from a blood transfusion, resulting in acquired 
immunodeficiency, and that this agent was not cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr 
virus, or hepatitis B virus.

DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(83)92082-2
PMID: 6132270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]