---
reference_id: "PMID:18798308"
title: "Popcorn calcification in osteogenesis imperfecta: incidence, progression, and molecular correlation."
authors:
- Obafemi AA
- Bulas DI
- Troendle J
- Marini JC
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32508
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Calcinosis/diagnostic imaging
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Collagen/genetics
- Collagen Type I/genetics
- "Collagen Type I, alpha 1 Chain"
- Female
- Femur/diagnostic imaging
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/classification, diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Radiography
- Retrospective Studies
- Tibia/diagnostic imaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Popcorn calcification in osteogenesis imperfecta: incidence, progression, and molecular correlation.
**Authors:** Obafemi AA, Bulas DI, Troendle J, Marini JC
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.32508](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.32508)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Nov 1;146A(21):2725-32. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32508.

Popcorn calcification in osteogenesis imperfecta: incidence, progression, and 
molecular correlation.

Obafemi AA(1), Bulas DI, Troendle J, Marini JC.

Author information:
(1)Bone and Extracellular Matrix Branch, The Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, 
USA.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heritable disorder characterized by 
osteoporosis and increased susceptibility to fracture. All children with severe 
OI have extreme short stature and some have "popcorn" calcifications, areas of 
disorganized hyperdense lines in the metaphysis and epiphysis around the growth 
plate on lower limb radiographs. Popcorn calcifications were noted on 
radiographs of two children with non-lethal type VIII OI, a recessive form 
caused by P3H1 deficiency. To determine the incidence, progression, and 
molecular correlations of popcorn calcifications, we retrospectively examined 
serial lower limb radiographs of 45 children with type III or IV OI and known 
dominant mutations in type I collagen. Popcorn calcifications were present in 13 
of 25 type III (52%), but only 2 of 20 type IV (10%), OI children. The mean age 
of onset was 7.0 years, with a range of 4-14 years. All children with popcorn 
calcifications had this finding in their distal femora, and most also had 
calcifications in proximal tibiae. While unilateral popcorn calcification 
contributes to femoral growth deficiency and leg length discrepancy, severe 
linear growth deficiency, and metaphyseal flare do not differ significantly 
between type III OI patients with and without popcorn calcifications. The type I 
collagen mutations associated with popcorn calcifications occur equally in both 
COL1A1 and COL1A2, and have no preferential location along the chains. These 
data demonstrate that popcorn calcifications are a frequent feature of severe 
OI, but do not distinguish cases with defects in collagen structure (primarily 
dominant type III OI) or modification (recessive type VIII OI).

Copyright 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32508
PMCID: PMC6320686
PMID: 18798308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]