---
reference_id: "PMID:10712202"
title: Decreased elastin deposition and high proliferation of fibroblasts from Costello syndrome are related to functional deficiency in the 67-kD elastin-binding protein.
authors:
- Hinek A
- Smith AC
- Cutiongco EM
- Callahan JW
- Gripp KW
- Weksberg R
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1086/302829
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- Adolescent
- Biglycan
- Biopolymers/metabolism
- Cell Division
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chondroitin ABC Lyase/metabolism
- Chondroitin Sulfates/metabolism
- "Culture Media, Conditioned/metabolism"
- Elastin/metabolism
- Extracellular Matrix Proteins
- "Fibroblasts/metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- "Hyaluronan Receptors/chemistry, metabolism"
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Molecular Chaperones/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Molecular Weight
- "Proteoglycans/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Receptors, Cell Surface/chemistry, deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Syndrome
- Tropoelastin/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Decreased elastin deposition and high proliferation of fibroblasts from Costello syndrome are related to functional deficiency in the 67-kD elastin-binding protein.
**Authors:** Hinek A, Smith AC, Cutiongco EM, Callahan JW, Gripp KW, Weksberg R
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1086/302829](https://doi.org/10.1086/302829)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2000 Mar;66(3):859-72. doi: 10.1086/302829.

Decreased elastin deposition and high proliferation of fibroblasts from Costello 
syndrome are related to functional deficiency in the 67-kD elastin-binding 
protein.

Hinek A(1), Smith AC, Cutiongco EM, Callahan JW, Gripp KW, Weksberg R.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Research, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
ON M5G 1X8 Canada. alek.hinek@sickkids.on.ca

Costello syndrome is characterized by mental retardation, loose skin, coarse 
face, skeletal deformations, cardiomyopathy, and predisposition to numerous 
malignancies. The genetic origin of Costello syndrome has not yet been defined. 
Using immunohistochemistry and metabolic labeling with [3H]-valine, we have 
established that cultured skin fibroblasts obtained from patients with Costello 
syndrome did not assemble elastic fibers, despite an adequate synthesis of 
tropoelastin and normal deposition of the microfibrillar scaffold. We found that 
impaired production of elastic fibers by these fibroblasts is associated with a 
functional deficiency of the 67-kD elastin-binding protein (EBP), which is 
normally required to chaperone tropoelastin through the secretory pathways and 
to its extracellular assembly. Metabolic pulse labeling of the 67-kD EBP with 
radioactive serine and further chase of this tracer indicated that both normal 
fibroblasts and fibroblasts from patients with Costello syndrome initially 
synthesized comparable amounts of this protein; however, the fibroblasts from 
Costello syndrome patients quickly lost it into the conditioned media. Because 
the normal association between EBP and tropoelastin can be disrupted on contact 
with galactosugar-bearing moieties, and the fibroblasts from patients with 
Costello syndrome revealed an unusual accumulation of chondroitin 
sulfate-bearing proteoglycans (CD44 and biglycan), we postulate that a 
chondroitin sulfate may be responsible for shedding EBP from Costello cells and 
in turn for their impaired elastogenesis. This was further supported by the fact 
that exposure to chondroitinase ABC, an enzyme capable of chondroitin sulfate 
degradation, restored normal production of elastic fibers by fibroblasts from 
patients with Costello syndrome. We also present evidence that loss of EBP from 
fibroblasts of Costello syndrome patients is associated with an unusually high 
rate of cellular proliferation.

DOI: 10.1086/302829
PMCID: PMC1288169
PMID: 10712202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]