---
reference_id: "PMID:16689662"
title: "IFN-alpha1,8 inhibits tumor-induced angiogenesis in murine angiosarcomas."
authors:
- Taylor KL
- Oates RK
- Grane R
- Leaman DW
- Borden EC
- Lindner DJ
journal: J Interferon Cytokine Res
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1089/jir.2006.26.353
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- Chemokine CXCL10
- "Chemokines, CXC/biosynthesis, blood"
- Disease Progression
- "Hemangiosarcoma/blood supply, drug therapy, metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- Interferon-alpha/therapeutic use
- Mice
- "Neovascularization, Pathologic/drug therapy"
- Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IFN-alpha1,8 inhibits tumor-induced angiogenesis in murine angiosarcomas.
**Authors:** Taylor KL, Oates RK, Grane R, Leaman DW, Borden EC, Lindner DJ
**Journal:** J Interferon Cytokine Res (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1089/jir.2006.26.353](https://doi.org/10.1089/jir.2006.26.353)

## Content

1. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2006 May;26(5):353-61. doi:
10.1089/jir.2006.26.353.

IFN-alpha1,8 inhibits tumor-induced angiogenesis in murine angiosarcomas.

Taylor KL(1), Oates RK, Grane R, Leaman DW, Borden EC, Lindner DJ.

Author information:
(1)Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Center for Hematology and Oncology Molecular
Therapeutics, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha) has proved effective in the treatment of
hemangiomas, hemangioblastomas, and Kaposi's sarcoma. To investigate the ability
of IFNs to inhibit angiosarcoma, we used two transformed murine endothelial cell
lines that form angiosarcomas in vivo. SVR and MS1-VEGF cell lines express
oncogenic H-ras or vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), respectively.
IFN-alpha1,8, which is active against murine and human cells, inhibited SVR and
MS1-VEGF proliferation in vitro by 40% at 10(3) U/mL (p = 0.028). In vivo,
IFN-alpha1,8 inhibited SVR tumor volume by 71% (p = 0.047) and MS1-VEGF volume
by 79% (p = 0.003). Tumor-induced angiogenesis was decreased in SVR tumors by
52% (p = 0.005) and in MS1-VEGF tumors by 58% (p = 0.001). Sera from
IFN-alpha1,8-treated mice bearing either SVR or MS1-VEGF tumors demonstrated a
5-fold increase in IP-10/CXCL10 (p = 0.001), an IFN-induced antiangiogenic
protein. Both recombinant IP-10 and IFN-alpha1,8 inhibited human umbilical vein
endothelial cell (HUVEC) vessel formation in the fibrin gel assay, a
three-dimensional culture model of angiogenesis, by 56% at 25 ng/mL and 50% at
1.2 ng/mL, respectively (p < 0.001). An IP-10 blocking antibody restored vessel
formation to 80% of untreated controls (p = 0.001). Given the magnitude of the
in vivo response, these data suggested that the antitumor effects of
IFN-alpha1,8 were likely mediated through angiogenesis inhibition rather than
solely by direct inhibition of tumor cell proliferation.

DOI: 10.1089/jir.2006.26.353
PMID: 16689662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
