---
reference_id: "PMID:39817450"
title: "Clonal analysis of SepSecS-specific B and T cells in autoimmune hepatitis."
authors:
- Kramer M
- Mele F
- Jovic S
- Fernandez BM
- Jarrossay D
- Low JS
- Sokollik C
- Filipowicz Sinnreich M
- Ferrari-Lacraz S
- Mieli-Vergani G
- Vergani D
- Lanzavecchia A
- Cassotta A
- Terziroli Beretta-Piccoli B
- Sallusto F
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1172/JCI183776
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clonal analysis of SepSecS-specific B and T cells in autoimmune hepatitis.
**Authors:** Kramer M, Mele F, Jovic S, Fernandez BM, Jarrossay D, Low JS, Sokollik C, Filipowicz Sinnreich M, Ferrari-Lacraz S, Mieli-Vergani G, Vergani D, Lanzavecchia A, Cassotta A, Terziroli Beretta-Piccoli B, Sallusto F
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI183776](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI183776)

## Content

J Clin Invest. 2025 Jan 16;135(2):e183776. doi: 10.1172/JCI183776.

Clonal analysis of SepSecS-specific B and T cells in autoimmune hepatitis.

Kramer M(1), Mele F(1), Jovic S(1), Fernandez BM(1), Jarrossay D(1), Low JS(1), Sokollik C(2)(3), Filipowicz Sinnreich M(4), Ferrari-Lacraz S(5), Mieli-Vergani G(6), Vergani D(7), Lanzavecchia A(8), Cassotta A(1), Terziroli Beretta-Piccoli B(9), Sallusto F(1)(10).

Author information (truncated for space)

Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) is a rare chronic inflammatory liver disease characterized by the presence of autoantibodies, including those targeting O-phosphoseryl-tRNA:selenocysteine-tRNA synthase (SepSecS), also known as soluble liver antigen (SLA). Anti-SepSecS antibodies have been associated with a more severe phenotype, suggesting a key role for the SepSecS autoantigen in AIH. The anti-SepSecS mAbs isolated were primarily IgG1, affinity-matured compared with their germline versions, and recognized at least 3 nonoverlapping epitopes. SepSecS-specific CD4+ T cell clones were found in patients with AIH who were anti-SLA-positive and anti-SLA-negative, and, to a lesser extent, in patients with non-AIH liver diseases and in healthy individuals. SepSecS-specific T cell clones from patients with AIH produced IFN-γ, IL-4, and IL-10, targeted multiple SepSecS epitopes, and, in one patient, were clonally expanded in both blood and liver biopsy. SepSecS-specific B cell clones, but not those of unrelated specificities, were able to present soluble SepSecS to specific T cells. Collectively, this study provides the first detailed analysis of B and T cell repertoires targeting SepSecS in patients with AIH, offering a rationale for improved targeted therapies.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI183776
PMID: 39817450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
