---
reference_id: "PMID:36636590"
title: "Neonatal screening for isovaleric aciduria: Reducing the increasingly high false-positive rate in Germany."
authors:
- Murko S
- Aseman AD
- Reinhardt F
- Gramer G
- Okun JG
- Mütze U
- Santer R
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/jmd2.12345
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neonatal screening for isovaleric aciduria: Reducing the increasingly high false-positive rate in Germany.
**Authors:** Murko S, Aseman AD, Reinhardt F, Gramer G, Okun JG, Mütze U, Santer R
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmd2.12345](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmd2.12345)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2022 Oct 28;64(1):114-120. doi: 10.1002/jmd2.12345. eCollection 2023
 Jan.

Neonatal screening for isovaleric aciduria: Reducing the increasingly high 
false-positive rate in Germany.

Murko S(1), Aseman AD(1), Reinhardt F(1), Gramer G(1), Okun JG(2), Mütze U(2), 
Santer R(1).

Author information:
(1)Newborn Screening and Metabolic Laboratory, Department of Pediatrics 
University Medical Center Eppendorf Hamburg Germany.
(2)Division of Child Neurology and Metabolic Medicine, Dietmar Hopp Metabolic 
Center, Center for Child and Adolescent Medicine Heidelberg University Hospital 
Heidelberg Germany.

Newborn screening (NBS) for isovaleric acidemia (IVA) is performed by flow 
injection tandem mass spectrometry quantifying C5 carnitines (C5). 
Isovalerylcarnitine, however, is isomeric with pivaloylcarnitine which can be 
present in blood due to maternal use of pivaloylester-containing antibiotics, 
available in Germany since late 2016. During a 36-month period (January 
19-December 21), all newborns screened in Hamburg with a C5 above cutoff 
(NeoGram®: 0.50 μmol/L or Neobase®2: 0.45 μmol/L) were included in the study. As 
a second-tier test, a simple ultra performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass 
spectrometry (UPLC-MS/MS) method was developed to differentiate the C5 isomers 
pivaloyl-, 2-methylbutyryl-, isovaleryl-, and valerylcarnitine. Out of 156 772 
newborns tested, one turned out to have genetically proven IVA while 99 were 
false positive (C5: 0.5-8.2 μmol/L) due to the presence of pivaloylcarnitine. 
These cases have increased year by year and show local clusters. Retrospective 
analysis of another 39 cases from 287 206 neonates tested at the NBS center in 
Heidelberg with C5 elevation (0.9-10.6 μmol/L) but clinical and biochemical 
exclusion of IVA yielded evidence of pivaloylcarnitine in all cases. Inclusion 
of a second-tier test into NBS significantly reduces the high and increasing 
false-positive rate of IVA screening. This avoids further diagnostic steps, 
prevents unnecessary stress and anxiety of parents in a remarkably high number 
of cases. If Hamburg data of 2021 are extrapolated to all of Germany, one can 
assume around 800 (1‰) false-positive cases in comparison to an average of two 
classic IVA cases per year. Unless licensing of pivaloylester-containing drugs 
for use during pregnancy is reconsidered, a second-tier test for C5 
determination is indispensable.

© 2022 The Authors. JIMD Reports published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of 
SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jmd2.12345
PMCID: PMC9830014
PMID: 36636590

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest that could be perceived as prejudicing the impartiality of the research 
reported.