---
reference_id: "PMID:20563664"
title: "Association of body mass index and lipid profiles: evaluation of a broad spectrum of body mass index patients including the morbidly obese."
authors:
- Shamai L
- Lurix E
- Shen M
- Novaro GM
- Szomstein S
- Rosenthal R
- Hernandez AV
- Asher CR
journal: Obes Surg
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s11695-010-0170-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of body mass index and lipid profiles: evaluation of a broad spectrum of body mass index patients including the morbidly obese.
**Authors:** Shamai L, Lurix E, Shen M, Novaro GM, Szomstein S, Rosenthal R, Hernandez AV, Asher CR
**Journal:** Obes Surg (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11695-010-0170-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11695-010-0170-7)

## Content

1. Obes Surg. 2011 Jan;21(1):42-7. doi: 10.1007/s11695-010-0170-7.

Association of body mass index and lipid profiles: evaluation of a broad 
spectrum of body mass index patients including the morbidly obese.

Shamai L(1), Lurix E, Shen M, Novaro GM, Szomstein S, Rosenthal R, Hernandez AV, 
Asher CR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Cardiology, Cleveland Clinic Florida, 
Weston, FL 33331, USA.

Prior epidemiologic studies have shown that increasing body mass index (BMI) is 
associated with higher total cholesterol and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol 
(LDL). However, these studies were limited by underrepresentation of obese 
subjects. The aim of this study was to determine whether there is an association 
between BMI and lipid profiles in a population of patients with a broad spectrum 
of BMI values. A case-control study was performed involving patients seen at the 
Cleveland Clinic Florida. Cases (BMI >30 kg/m(2)) were obtained from the obesity 
surgery database between August 31, 2000, and April 4, 2002. Controls (BMI ≤ 30 
kg/m(2)) were obtained from a database of primary care physicians between May 1, 
2004, and November 18, 2004. Pearson correlation coefficients were used to 
assess the relationship between BMI and lipid fractions. Multiple linear 
regression was performed to assess the independent effect of BMI on lipid levels 
while adjusting for potential confounders and propensity scores. Six hundred 
thirty-seven patients were analyzed (females, n = 362, 57%). There was no 
association between higher BMI and LDL (r = 0.19 p = 0.07), a negative 
association with high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL; r = 0.45, p < 
0.001), and a positive association with the log transformation of triglycerides 
(r = 0.32, p = 0.005).Higher BMI was inversely associated with HDL and directly 
associated with TG. BMI showed no significant association with LDL. Although the 
association between BMI and both HDL and TG may be explained by insulin 
resistance, the lack of a significant association between BMI and LDL remains an 
unexpected finding that requires further investigation.

DOI: 10.1007/s11695-010-0170-7
PMID: 20563664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]