---
reference_id: "PMID:8596320"
title: "Genetic variation in bilirubin UPD-glucuronosyltransferase gene promoter and Gilbert's syndrome."
authors:
- Monaghan G
- Ryan M
- Seddon R
- Hume R
- Burchell B
journal: Lancet
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(96)91273-8
keywords:
- Adult
- Alleles
- Base Sequence
- "Bilirubin/blood, metabolism"
- Female
- Genetic Variation
- Genotype
- "Gilbert Disease/diagnosis, genetics"
- Glucuronosyltransferase/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- Scotland
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic variation in bilirubin UPD-glucuronosyltransferase gene promoter and Gilbert's syndrome.
**Authors:** Monaghan G, Ryan M, Seddon R, Hume R, Burchell B
**Journal:** Lancet (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0140-6736(96)91273-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0140-6736(96)91273-8)

## Content

1. Lancet. 1996 Mar 2;347(9001):578-81. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(96)91273-8.

Genetic variation in bilirubin UPD-glucuronosyltransferase gene promoter and 
Gilbert's syndrome.

Monaghan G(1), Ryan M, Seddon R, Hume R, Burchell B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemical Medicine, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, 
Dundee DD1 9SY, UK.

Comment in
    Lancet. 1996 Mar 2;347(9001):557-8. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(96)91266-0.

BACKGROUND: The genetic basis of Gilbert's syndrome is ill-defined. This common 
mild hyperbilirubinaemia sometimes presents as an intermittent jaundice. A 
reduced hepatic bilirubin UPD- glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) is associated with 
this syndrome. We have examined variation in the gene encoding the UGT1*1 enzyme 
and serum bilirubin levels in a Scottish population.
METHODS: Blood was collected from 12 patients with confirmed or suspected 
Gilbert's syndrome, from 6 members of a family with 4 Gilbert members, and from 
77 non-smoking, alcohol-free, drug-free volunteers recruited from the staff of a 
teaching hospital in Dundee. Polymerase chain reaction amplification was used to 
examine sequence variation of the promoter upstream of the UGT1*1 exon I. 
Genotypes were assigned as follows: 6/6 (homozygous for a common allele bearing 
the sequence [TA](6)TAA), 7/7 (homozygous for a rarer allele with the sequence 
[TA](7)TAA), and 6/7 (heterozygous with one of each allele).
FINDINGS: Individuals in the population with the 7/7 genotype had significantly 
higher bilirubin concentrations than those who had the 6/7 or 6/6 genotype. 14 
volunteers underwent a 24 h fasting test to see if they had Gilbert's syndrome, 
and all four positives had the 7/7 genotype. One confirmed Gilbert's patient, 
two recurrent jaundice patients (with suspected Gilbert's syndrome), and nine 
clinically diagnosed cases had the 7/7 genotype. Segregation of the 7/7 genotype 
with the Gilbert phenotype was also demonstrated in the family with four 
affected members. The frequency of the 7/7 genotype in this eastern Scottish 
population was 10-13%.
INTERPRETATION: In a healthy population there was an association between 
variation in bilirubin concentration and a mutation within the gene encoding the 
enzyme bilirubin UGT. This and other findings suggest the existence of a mild 
and a more severe form of Gilbert's syndrome, depending on whether the gene 
defect lies in the promoter sequence upstream of UGT1*I exon I, as here (mild), 
or in the coding sequence (severe) of the gene.

DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(96)91273-8
PMID: 8596320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]