---
reference_id: "PMID:26168930"
title: Investigating the long-term course of schizophrenia by sequence analysis.
authors:
- An der Heiden W
- Häfner H
journal: Psychiatry Res
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2015.04.056
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Investigating the long-term course of schizophrenia by sequence analysis.
**Authors:** An der Heiden W, Häfner H
**Journal:** Psychiatry Res (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.psychres.2015.04.056](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2015.04.056)

## Content

1. Psychiatry Res. 2015 Aug 30;228(3):551-9. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2015.04.056.
 Epub 2015 Jun 19.

Investigating the long-term course of schizophrenia by sequence analysis.

An der Heiden W(1), Häfner H(2).

Author information:
(1)Schizophrenia Research Group, Central Institute of Mental Health, Mannheim 
Faculty of Medicine/University of Heidelberg, J5, D-68159 Mannheim, Germany. 
Electronic address: wolfram.ad_heiden@zi-mannheim.de.
(2)Schizophrenia Research Group, Central Institute of Mental Health, Mannheim 
Faculty of Medicine/University of Heidelberg, J5, D-68159 Mannheim, Germany.

In the present study we set out to explore the long-term clinical course of 
schizophrenia in a holistic manner by adopting sequence analysis. Our aim was to 
identify course types of illness by means of cluster analysis. The study was 
based on course and outcome data for 107 patients followed up over 134 months 
after first admission in the ABC Schizophrenia Study. Focusing on the main 
syndromes (positive, negative, depressive and unspecific symptoms) and their 
combinations we looked for similarities in individual illness courses using the 
'optimal matching' method. A cluster analysis performed on the resulting 
similarity matrix yielded two main groups (a 'improving' and a 'chronic' group), 
which comprised a total of six different types of illness course. The course 
types differed in both quantitative (frequency of syndromes and syndrome 
combinations) and qualitative terms (clinical presentation, sequence of 
syndromes). Cluster membership was only rarely, but clearly associated with 
sociodemographic characteristics, treatment data and other illness variables.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2015.04.056
PMID: 26168930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]