---
reference_id: "PMID:40801290"
title: High-throughput assessment of FMR1 and SNRPN methylation-based newborn screening using IsoPure and QIAcube HT systems.
authors:
- Cartagena C
- Alshawsh M
- Bui MQ
- Gamage D
- Thakor RP
- Pitt J
- Greaves RF
- Wall M
- Saffery R
- Amor DJ
- Godler DE
journal: Epigenomics
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1080/17501911.2025.2544530
keywords:
- Humans
- Fragile X Messenger Ribonucleoprotein 1/genetics
- DNA Methylation
- "Fragile X Syndrome/genetics, diagnosis"
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Neonatal Screening/methods
- snRNP Core Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Male
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- High-Throughput Screening Assays/methods
- Genomic Imprinting
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 15/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High-throughput assessment of FMR1 and SNRPN methylation-based newborn screening using IsoPure and QIAcube HT systems.
**Authors:** Cartagena C, Alshawsh M, Bui MQ, Gamage D, Thakor RP, Pitt J, Greaves RF, Wall M, Saffery R, Amor DJ, Godler DE
**Journal:** Epigenomics (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1080/17501911.2025.2544530](https://doi.org/10.1080/17501911.2025.2544530)

## Content

1. Epigenomics. 2025 Sep;17(13):851-863. doi: 10.1080/17501911.2025.2544530. Epub
 2025 Aug 13.

High-throughput assessment of FMR1 and SNRPN methylation-based newborn screening
using IsoPure and QIAcube HT systems.

Cartagena C(1)(2), Alshawsh M(1)(3), Bui MQ(1)(4), Gamage D(1), Thakor RP(1),
Pitt J(1)(2)(5), Greaves RF(1)(2)(5), Wall M(1)(2)(5), Saffery R(1)(2), Amor
DJ(1)(2), Godler DE(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville,
VIC, Australia.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC,
Australia.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia.
(4)Centre for Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Melbourne School of Population &
Global Health, University of Melbourne, Carlton, VIC, Australia.
(5)Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children's Research Institute,
Parkville, VIC, Australia.

AIM: This study compared methylation-specific quantitative melt analysis of FMR1
and SNRPN methylation (mDNA) using automated bisulfite conversion by the
magnetic-bead-based IsoPure and column-based QIAcube HT systems.
METHODS: Two bisulfite conversion methods were assessed on 3.2 mm punches from
the same archival blood spots stored at room temperature for >10 years of
individuals with FMR1 premutation (n = 20), fragile X syndrome (FXS, n = 20), or
chromosome 15 imprinting disorders (n = 50) and freshly made blood spots from
184 newborns from the general population. Performance criteria were: (i)
diagnostic sensitivity and specificity for the conditions screened; (ii)
reaction failure rate; (iii) variability in mDNA between groups.
RESULTS: Both methods showed 100% sensitivity and specificity for
differentiating FXS and individual chromosome 15 imprinting disorders. IsoPure
showed reaction failure rates of 0.365% for SNRPN and 0.74% for FMR1 compared to
19.34% and 2.56%, for QIAcube HT, respectively, with most failed reactions
originating from archival blood spots. IsoPure showed lower variability in mDNA
values in the neurotypical and condition-specific ranges.
CONCLUSION: The IsoPure system showed superior performance especially on
archival samples, with broader applications for screening and diagnostic testing
requiring high-throughput mDNA analyses on materials of limited quantity and
quality.

Plain Language Summary: Testing for a change to DNA known as methylation has
been used by researchers and in medical practice to identify people affected
with different diseases. We compared how well two procedures that employ
robotics, work in a lab. We tested a small amount of blood soaked onto absorbent
cards to detect this change. Blood on these cards was from people who either had
fragile X syndrome or a chromosome 15 imprinting disorder or did not have these.
Both procedures worked equally well on freshly made materials in identifying
these conditions without making any mistakes. One of the procedures, however,
worked better, on cards not recently made. These results provide new
opportunities for automated testing of DNA to detect diseases.

DOI: 10.1080/17501911.2025.2544530
PMCID: PMC12369608
PMID: 40801290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: David E Godler reporting being an inventor on
patents related to the technologies described in this publication and being the
executive director of EDG Innovations & Consulting, which receives funds from
this intellectual property. He has also acted as a paid consultant for
Bellberry, Ltd and Actinogen Medical, Pty, Ltd. No other disclosures were
reported. The authors have no other relevant affiliations or financial
involvement with any organization or entity with a financial interest in or
financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the
manuscript apart from those disclosed. No writing assistance was utilized in the
production of this manuscript.
