---
reference_id: "PMID:36049455"
title: "Chorea: An Update on Genetics."
authors:
- Burgunder JM
journal: Eur Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1159/000526237
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chorea: An Update on Genetics.
**Authors:** Burgunder JM
**Journal:** Eur Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000526237](https://doi.org/10.1159/000526237)

## Content

1. Eur Neurol. 2022;85(5):342-348. doi: 10.1159/000526237. Epub 2022 Sep 1.

Chorea: An Update on Genetics.

Burgunder JM(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(2)Swiss HD Center, Neurozentrum Siloah AG, Gümligen, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Neurology, West China University, Chengdu, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Sun Yat Set University, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Chorea may be present in a number of diseases including hereditary 
disorders. Major advances have occurred in our understanding of the genetic 
background of those disorders, and the present short review aims at highlighting 
the most salient ones.
SUMMARY: Chorea is one of the major manifestations of Huntington's disease. 
However, there are a number of other diseases, in which chorea is present as 
well and their list is in constant increase thanks to the availability of 
advanced molecular genetic diagnostic techniques. Finding of new genes followed 
by the investigation of further cases with part of the phenotype first described 
often leads to the recognition of additional aspects of the disorders, thus 
widening the scope of investigation and management. Likewise, assessment of 
genetic variations associated with specific aspects of the phenotype, in a way 
similar to approaches established in nongenetic disorders, has improved our 
understanding of phenotype variation. Knowledge on genetic background of chorea 
has ameliorated our diagnostic approaches. Furthermore, it opens new therapeutic 
strategies aimed at modifying expression both of the genes primarily implicated 
as the ones involved in further phenotype modification.
KEY MESSAGES: Recent research on the genetic background of disorders with chorea 
has provided data, which can now better guide differential diagnostic 
investigations in practical ways. Furthermore, they provide avenues for research 
on the disease mechanisms opening the door for clinical therapeutic trials.

© 2022 The Author(s). Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000526237
PMID: 36049455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]