---
reference_id: "PMID:37810307"
title: "Lhermitte-Duclos disease: A systematic review."
authors:
- Alanazi AI
- Alanezi T
- Aljofan ZF
- Alarabi A
- Elwatidy S
journal: Surg Neurol Int
year: '2023'
doi: 10.25259/SNI_555_2023
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lhermitte-Duclos disease: A systematic review.
**Authors:** Alanazi AI, Alanezi T, Aljofan ZF, Alarabi A, Elwatidy S
**Journal:** Surg Neurol Int (2023)
**DOI:** [10.25259/SNI_555_2023](https://doi.org/10.25259/SNI_555_2023)

## Content

1. Surg Neurol Int. 2023 Sep 29;14:351. doi: 10.25259/SNI_555_2023. eCollection 
2023.

Lhermitte-Duclos disease: A systematic review.

Alanazi AI(1), Alanezi T(1), Aljofan ZF(1), Alarabi A(1), Elwatidy S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, 
Saudi Arabia.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Lhermitte-Duclos disease (LDD) is a rare tumor, with only about 300 
reported cases. It often shows comorbidity with Cowden syndrome (CS); however, 
it can occur by itself. Radiologically, the "tiger-stripe" appearance is 
considered pathognomonic. Surgical resection remains the mainstay of treatment. 
This report aims to describe the clinical and radiological characteristics of 
LDD and its relationship with CS according to age group.
METHODS: PubMed electronic databases were searched in August 2022. The search 
terms included "Lhermitte- Duclos disease" and "dysplastic gangliocytoma," which 
yielded 297 and 103 research articles, respectively. The articles were collected 
and reviewed by three researchers.
RESULTS: Out of 400 identified articles, we analyzed 302 reported cases. The 
mean age at presentation was 33.6 ± 16 years; 171 patients (56.6%) were female, 
and 123 (40.7%) were male. The most commonly reported symptom was headache (174 
patients, 57.6%), followed by ataxia (109, 36.1%). In addition, 99 cases (32.8%) 
were associated with CS, and 60 (19.9%) had a confirmed phosphatase and tensin 
homolog (PTEN) mutation. A tiger-stripe appearance was observed in 208 cases 
(58.7%); surgical resection was performed in 64.2% of the cases. Mortality and 
recurrence rates were 4.3% and 8.6%, respectively. No statistically significant 
difference was found between adult- and pediatric-onset LDD for the association 
with CS (P = 0.128).
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that adult and pediatric LDD have major 
commonalities; however, further prospective studies are warranted.

Copyright: © 2023 Surgical Neurology International.

DOI: 10.25259/SNI_555_2023
PMCID: PMC10559389
PMID: 37810307

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.