---
reference_id: "PMID:9498897"
title: Risk of lung cancer from environmental exposures to tobacco smoke.
authors:
- Dockery DW
- Trichopoulos D
journal: Cancer Causes Control
year: '1997'
doi: "10.1023/a:1018401120233"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk of lung cancer from environmental exposures to tobacco smoke.
**Authors:** Dockery DW, Trichopoulos D
**Journal:** Cancer Causes Control (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1023/a:1018401120233](https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1018401120233)

## Content

1. Cancer Causes Control. 1997 May;8(3):333-45. doi: 10.1023/a:1018401120233.

Risk of lung cancer from environmental exposures to tobacco smoke.

Dockery DW(1), Trichopoulos D.

Author information:
(1)Environmental Epidemiology Program, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, 
MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Causes Control. 1997 Nov;8(6):929. doi: 10.1023/a:1018428815632.

Epidemiologic evidence on the relation between environmental tobacco smoke and 
cancer is reviewed. The labeling of tobacco smoke as an environmental cause of 
lung cancer has been challenged based on allegations of bias in the 
epidemiologic data. However, tobacco smoke has been shown to increase the risk 
of lung cancer down to the lowest exposure levels. Environmental tobacco smoke 
contains the same carcinogenic compounds as those found in the tobacco smoke 
inhaled directly by the smoker. Nonsmokers environmentally exposed have elevated 
levels of tobacco smoke byproducts in biological samples. These observations 
alone are sufficient to identify tobacco smoke as an environmental carcinogen. 
The epidemiologic studies showing that environmental exposure to tobacco smoke 
is associated weakly but consistently with increased risk of lung cancer. While 
these epidemiologic studies have been challenged, it does not appear that the 
observed epidemiologic associations are due to misclassification or confounding. 
Indeed, the epidemiologic results, particularly among the studies with superior 
data collection methods and better control of bias and confounding, find 
consistent associations between environmental tobacco smoke and lung cancer. 
This paper summarizes the evidence that environmental exposure to tobacco smoke 
increases the risk of lung cancer, and considers the criticisms of the 
epidemiologic evidence which have been raised.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1018401120233
PMID: 9498897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]