---
reference_id: "PMID:3041395"
title: Cardiovascular pathology in osteogenesis imperfecta type IIA with a review of the literature.
authors:
- Wheeler VR
- Cooley NR Jr
- Blackburn WR
journal: Pediatr Pathol
year: '1988'
doi: 10.3109/15513818809022279
keywords:
- "Cardiovascular System/embryology, pathology"
- Chordae Tendineae/pathology
- Heart/embryology
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/pathology"
- Humans
- Myocardium/ultrastructure
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/complications, embryology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiovascular pathology in osteogenesis imperfecta type IIA with a review of the literature.
**Authors:** Wheeler VR, Cooley NR Jr, Blackburn WR
**Journal:** Pediatr Pathol (1988)
**DOI:** [10.3109/15513818809022279](https://doi.org/10.3109/15513818809022279)

## Content

1. Pediatr Pathol. 1988;8(1):55-64. doi: 10.3109/15513818809022279.

Cardiovascular pathology in osteogenesis imperfecta type IIA with a review of 
the literature.

Wheeler VR(1), Cooley NR Jr, Blackburn WR.

Author information:
(1)University of South Alabama Medical Center, Department of Pathology, Mobile 
36617.

Lethal perinatal osteogenesis imperfecta (OI Type II) is a biochemically diverse 
collagen disorder characterized by short, crumpled long bones, beaded ribs, blue 
sclerae and thin, fragile skin. Cardiovascular abnormalities are rarely 
described. Using morphometry and light and electron (SEM and TEM) microscopy, we 
analyzed the hearts and great vessels from 2 fetuses with OI Type IIA and 
compared the findings with age-matched controls. The heart weights and 
atrioventricular valve (AVV) circumferences were reduced in OI. The chordae 
tendineae were short and fragile; both the AVVs and the chordae tendineae were 
hypercellular. TEM showed relatively little organized collagen in the chordae 
tendineae of OI fetuses. Furthermore, quantitative evaluation of collagen fibril 
size revealed a decrease in the cross-sectional diameter. There was also a 
marked decrease in the adventitial and intramural collagen of the 
intramyocardial arteries and great vessels in OI. Our study reports, for the 
first time, specific lesions in the cardiovascular systems of patients with OI 
Type II and reviews the cardiovascular pathology in other forms of OI.

DOI: 10.3109/15513818809022279
PMID: 3041395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]