---
reference_id: "PMID:10779555"
title: "Uncompensated polyuria in a mouse model of Bartter's syndrome."
authors:
- Takahashi N
- Chernavvsky DR
- Gomez RA
- Igarashi P
- Gitelman HJ
- Smithies O
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.090091297
keywords:
- Animals
- "Bartter Syndrome/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Calcium/urine
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Electrolytes/blood
- "Hydronephrosis/genetics, physiopathology"
- Indomethacin/pharmacology
- Introns
- "Kidney/metabolism, pathology"
- "Membrane Proteins/deficiency, genetics, physiology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred Strains"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Polyuria/etiology, genetics, pathology"
- Potassium/blood
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- Proteinuria
- Renin/blood
- Sodium-Potassium-Chloride Symporters
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Uncompensated polyuria in a mouse model of Bartter's syndrome.
**Authors:** Takahashi N, Chernavvsky DR, Gomez RA, Igarashi P, Gitelman HJ, Smithies O
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.090091297](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.090091297)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 May 9;97(10):5434-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.090091297.

Uncompensated polyuria in a mouse model of Bartter's syndrome.

Takahashi N(1), Chernavvsky DR, Gomez RA, Igarashi P, Gitelman HJ, Smithies O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and Division of Nephrology,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. ntakaha@med.unc.edu

We have used homologous recombination to disrupt the mouse gene coding for the
NaK2Cl cotransporter (NKCC2) expressed in kidney epithelial cells of the thick
ascending limb and macula densa. This gene is one of several that when mutated
causes Bartter's syndrome in humans, a syndrome characterized by severe polyuria
and electrolyte imbalance. Homozygous NKCC2-/- pups were born in expected
numbers and appeared normal. However, by day 1 they showed signs of
extracellular volume depletion (hematocrit 51%; wild type 37%). They
subsequently failed to thrive. By day 7, they were small and markedly dehydrated
and exhibited renal insufficiency, high plasma potassium, metabolic acidosis,
hydronephrosis of varying severity, and high plasma renin concentrations. None
survived to weaning. Treatment of -/- pups with indomethacin from day 1
prevented growth retardation and 10% treated for 3 weeks survived, although as
adults they exhibited severe polyuria (10 ml/day), extreme hydronephrosis, low
plasma potassium, high blood pH, hypercalciuria, and proteinuria. Wild-type mice
treated with furosemide, an inhibitor of NaK2Cl cotransporters, have a phenotype
similar to the indomethacin-rescued -/- adults except that hydronephrosis was
mild. The polyuria, hypercalciuria, and proteinuria of the -/- adults and
furosemide-treated wild-type mice were unresponsive to inhibitors of the renin
angiotensin system, vasopressin, and further indomethacin. Thus absence of NKCC2
in the mouse causes polyuria that is not compensated elsewhere in the nephron.
The NKCC2 mutant animals should be valuable for uncovering new pathophysiologic
and therapeutic aspects of genetic disturbances in water and electrolyte
recovery by the kidney.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.090091297
PMCID: PMC25846
PMID: 10779555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
