---
reference_id: "PMID:34000246"
title: "Cemiplimab in locally advanced basal cell carcinoma after hedgehog inhibitor therapy: an open-label, multi-centre, single-arm, phase 2 trial."
authors:
- Stratigos AJ
- Sekulic A
- Peris K
- Bechter O
- Prey S
- Kaatz M
- Lewis KD
- Basset-Seguin N
- Chang ALS
- Dalle S
- Orland AF
- Licitra L
- Robert C
- Ulrich C
- Hauschild A
- Migden MR
- Dummer R
- Li S
- Yoo SY
- Mohan K
- Coates E
- Jankovic V
- Fiaschi N
- Okoye E
- Bassukas ID
- Loquai C
- De Giorgi V
- Eroglu Z
- Gutzmer R
- Ulrich J
- Puig S
- Seebach F
- Thurston G
- Weinreich DM
- Yancopoulos GD
- Lowy I
- Bowler T
- Fury MG
journal: Lancet Oncol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(21)00126-1
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Anilides/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Female
- "Hedgehog Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- Humans
- "Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Programmed Cell Death 1 Receptor/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- "Pyridines/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cemiplimab in locally advanced basal cell carcinoma after hedgehog inhibitor therapy: an open-label, multi-centre, single-arm, phase 2 trial.
**Authors:** Stratigos AJ, Sekulic A, Peris K, Bechter O, Prey S, Kaatz M, Lewis KD, Basset-Seguin N, Chang ALS, Dalle S, Orland AF, Licitra L, Robert C, Ulrich C, Hauschild A, Migden MR, Dummer R, Li S, Yoo SY, Mohan K, Coates E, Jankovic V, Fiaschi N, Okoye E, Bassukas ID, Loquai C, De Giorgi V, Eroglu Z, Gutzmer R, Ulrich J, Puig S, Seebach F, Thurston G, Weinreich DM, Yancopoulos GD, Lowy I, Bowler T, Fury MG
**Journal:** Lancet Oncol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1470-2045(21)00126-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(21)00126-1)

## Content

1. Lancet Oncol. 2021 Jun;22(6):848-857. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(21)00126-1. Epub
 2021 May 14.

Cemiplimab in locally advanced basal cell carcinoma after hedgehog inhibitor
therapy: an open-label, multi-centre, single-arm, phase 2 trial.

Stratigos AJ(1), Sekulic A(2), Peris K(3), Bechter O(4), Prey S(5), Kaatz M(6),
Lewis KD(7), Basset-Seguin N(8), Chang ALS(9), Dalle S(10), Orland AF(11),
Licitra L(12), Robert C(13), Ulrich C(14), Hauschild A(15), Migden MR(16),
Dummer R(17), Li S(18), Yoo SY(18), Mohan K(19), Coates E(19), Jankovic V(19),
Fiaschi N(19), Okoye E(19), Bassukas ID(20), Loquai C(21), De Giorgi V(22),
Eroglu Z(23), Gutzmer R(24), Ulrich J(25), Puig S(26), Seebach F(19), Thurston
G(19), Weinreich DM(19), Yancopoulos GD(19), Lowy I(19), Bowler T(19), Fury
MG(19).

Author information:
(1)First Department of Dermatology-Venereology, Andreas Syggros
Hospital-National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
Electronic address: alstrat@med.uoa.gr.
(2)Arizona Mayo Clinic, Phoenix, AZ, USA.
(3)Catholic University of the Sacred Heart and Fondazione Policlinico
Universitario A. Gemelli-IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of General Medical Oncology, University Hospitals, Leuven,
Belgium.
(5)Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center, Bordeaux, France.
(6)SRH Wald-Klinikum Gera, Gera, Germany.
(7)University of Colorado Cancer Center, Aurora, CO, USA.
(8)Hopital Saint-Louis, Paris, France.
(9)Department of Dermatology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA, USA.
(10)Department of Dermatology, HCL Cancer Institute, Lyon Cancer Research
Center, Lyon, France.
(11)Hospital Universitario Virgen Macarena, Seville, Spain.
(12)Fondazione IRCCS, Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy; Department of
Oncology and Hematology-Oncology, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(13)Dermatology Unit, Gustave Roussy Cancer Center, Villejuif, France;
Paris-Saclay University, Villejuif, France.
(14)Charite-Universitiitsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(15)Department of Dermatology, University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(16)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(17)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(18)Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Basking Ridge, NJ, USA.
(19)Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Tarrytown, NY, USA.
(20)University of Ioánnina, Ioánnina, Greece.
(21)Department of Dermatology, University Medical Center Mainz, Mainz, Germany.
(22)Department of Dermatology, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(23)Department of Cutaneous Oncology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL, USA.
(24)Skin Cancer Center Hannover, Department of Dermatology and Allergy, Hannover
Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(25)Skin Cancer Center, Department of Dermatology, Harz Clinics, Quedlinburg,
Germany.
(26)Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Institut d'Investigacions Biomediques August
Pi I Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Universitat de Barcelona, and Centro de Investigación
Biomèdica en Red de Enfermedadees Raras (CIBERER), Instituto de Salud Carlos
III, Barcelona, Spain.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2021 Jul;18(7):400. doi: 10.1038/s41571-021-00528-7.

BACKGROUND: Before February, 2021, there was no standard treatment regimen for
locally advanced basal cell carcinoma after first-line hedgehog inhibitor (HHI)
therapy. Cemiplimab, a PD-1 antibody, is approved for treatment of advanced
cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma and has shown clinical activity as monotherapy
in first-line non-small-cell lung cancer. Here, we present the primary analysis
data of cemiplimab in patients with locally advanced basal cell carcinoma after
HHI therapy.
METHODS: We did an open-label, multicentre, single-arm, phase 2 trial across 38
outpatient clinics, primarily at academic medical centres, in Canada, Europe,
and the USA. Eligible patients (aged ≥18 years and with an Eastern Cooperative
Oncology Group performance status of 0 or 1) with a histologically confirmed
diagnosis of metastatic basal cell carcinoma (group 1) or locally advanced basal
cell carcinoma (group 2) who had progressed on or were intolerant to previous
HHI therapy were enrolled. Patients were not candidates for further HHI therapy
due to progression of disease on or intolerance to previous HHI therapy or
having no better than stable disease after 9 months on HHI therapy. Patients
received cemiplimab 350 mg intravenously every 3 weeks for up to 93 weeks or
until progression or unacceptable toxicity. The primary endpoint was objective
response by independent central review. Analyses were done as per the
intention-to-treat principle. The safety analysis comprised all patients who
received at least one dose of cemiplimab. The primary analysis is reported only
for group 2; group 1 data have not reached maturity and will be reported when
the timepoint, according to the statistical analysis plan, has been reached.
This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03132636, and is no longer
recruiting new participants.
FINDINGS: Between Nov 16, 2017, and Jan 7, 2019, 84 patients were enrolled and
treated with cemiplimab. At data cutoff on Feb 17, 2020, median duration of
follow-up was 15 months (IQR 8-18). An objective response per independent
central review was observed in 26 (31%; 95% CI 21-42) of 84 patients, including
two partial responses that emerged at tumour assessments before the data cutoff
and were confirmed by tumour assessments done subsequent to the data cutoff. The
best overall response was five (6%) patients with a complete response and 21
(25%) with a partial response. Grade 3-4 treatment-emergent adverse events
occurred in 40 (48%) of 84 patients; the most common were hypertension (four
[5%] of 84 patients) and colitis (four [5%]). Serious treatment-emergent adverse
events occurred in 29 (35%) of 84 patients. There were no treatment-related
deaths.
INTERPRETATION: Cemiplimab exhibited clinically meaningful antitumour activity
and an acceptable safety profile in patients with locally advanced basal cell
carcinoma after HHI therapy.
FUNDING: Regeneron Pharmaceuticals and Sanofi.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(21)00126-1
PMID: 34000246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests AJS reports advisory
board or steering committee roles with Janssen, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals,
Roche, and Sanofi; and research support from Abbvie, Bristol Myers Squibb,
Genesis Pharma, and Novartis. AS reports advisory roles with Regeneron
Pharmaceuticals and Roche. KP reports advisory board roles with Abbvie, LEO
Pharma, Janssen, Almirall, Eli Lilly, Galderma, Novartis, Pierre Fabre, Sun
Pharma, and Sanofi, outside the submitted work. OB has advisory board roles with
Novartis, Bristol Myers Squibb, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Pierre Fabre, and
Ultimovacs. KDL reports grants from the University of Colorado; and grants and
personal fees from Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. ALSC reports advisory roles with
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals and Merck; and research funding from Regeneron
Pharmaceuticals, Merck, Novartis, and Galderma. SD reports that their spouse is
an employee of Sanofi. LL reports institutional grants and personal fees from
AstraZeneca, Bristol Myers Squibb, Boehringer Ingelheim, Debiopharm
International SA, Eisai, Novartis, and Roche; institutional grants from Celgene
International, Exelixis, Hoffmann-La Roche, IRX Therapeutics, Medpace,
Merck-Serono, and Pfizer; and personal fees from Sobi, Ipsen, Incyte Biosciences
Italy SRL, Doxa Pharma, Amgen, Nanobiotics SA, GlaxoSmithKline, AccMed, Medical
Science Fundation G. Lorenzini, Associazione Sinapsi, Think 2 IT, Aiom Servizi,
Prime Oncology, WMA Congress Education, Fasi, DueCi Promotion SRL, MI&T, Net
Congress & Education, PRMA Consulting, Kura Oncology, Health & Life SRL, and
Immuno-Oncology Hub. CR reports grants and personal fees advisory board roles
with Bristol Myers Squibb, Pierre Fabre, Novartis, Amgen, Merck, Roche, Merck
Sharp & Dohme, Sanofi, Biothera, and Ultimovacs. CU reports advisory board and
speaker roles for Roche, Sanofi, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, and Sun Pharma. AH
reports institutional funding and personal fees from Amgen, Bristol Myers
Squibb, Merck Serono, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Merck & Co, Philogen, Pierre Fabre,
Provectus, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Roche, Sanofi Genzyme, and Novartis; and
consultancy fees from OncoSec, Almirall Hermal, and Sun Pharma. MRM reports
advisory roles with and travel fees from Regeneron Pharmaceuticals and Sun
Pharmaceuticals; advisory role with Rakuten Medical; and research funding from
Regeneron Pharmaceuticals and PellePharm. RD has intermittent, project focused
consultant and advisory roles with Novartis, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Bristol Myers
Squibb, Roche, Amgen, Takeda, Pierre Fabre, Sun Pharma, Sanofi, Catalym, Second
Genome, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Alligator, MaxiVAX SA, and touchIME outside
the submitted work. SL, S-YY, KM, EC, VJ, NF, EO, FS, DMW, and TB are employees
and shareholders of Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. CL reports personal fees from
Roche, Sun Pharma, Bristol Myers Squibb, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Merck, Novartis,
Pierre Fabre, Kyowa Kirin, Almiral Hermal, and Biontech. ZE reports advisory
board fees from Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Novartis, Array, Genentech, and
SunPharma; and grants from Novartis. RG reports documentation fees to
institution from Regeneron Pharmaceuticals; personal fees and non-financial
support from Amgen, Bristol Myers Squibb, Roche Pharma, Merck Serono, Pierre
Fabre, Sanofi, and Regeneron Pharmaceuticals; grants, personal fees, and
non-financial support from Novartis; grants and personal fees from Pfizer;
grants from Johnson & Johnson; and personal fees from Merck Sharp & Dohme,
Almirall Hermal, SUN Pharma, 4SC, and Bayer. JU reports grants and personal fees
from Sanofi, Bristol Myers Squibb, Novartis, and Merck Sharp & Dohme; and
personal fees from Roche, medac, and Sun Pharma. SPu reports personal fees and
non-financial support from Sanofi; other (clinical trials) from Regeneron
Pharmaceuticals; grants from Avene; non-financial support from Abbie; grants,
personal fees, and non-financial support from ISDIN, La Roche-Posay, and Roche;
grants and personal fees from Sun Pharma; non-financial support from Eli Lilly
and Merck Sharp & Dohme; personal fees, non-financial support, and other
(related to clinical trials) from Pfizer; grants, personal fees, and other from
Leo Pharma and Almirall; personal fees and other (related to clinical trials)
from Ojer Pharma; personal fees from Pierre Fabre; and non-financial support
from MAVIG, FotoFinder, and 3Gen. GDY is an employee of, shareholder in, and a
member of the Board of Directors at Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. GT is an employee
of, patent holder, and shareholder of Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. IL and MGF are
employees of, have patents pending, and are shareholders of Regeneron
Pharmaceuticals. SPr, MK, NB-S, AFO, IB, and VDG declare no competing interests.
