---
reference_id: "PMID:12791526"
title: High levels of transdermal nicotine exposure produce green tobacco sickness in Latino farmworkers.
authors:
- Arcury TA
- Quandt SA
- Preisser JS
- Bernert JT
- Norton D
- Wang J
journal: Nicotine Tob Res
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1080/1462220031000094132
keywords:
- "Administration, Cutaneous"
- Adult
- Agriculture
- Cotinine/analysis
- Environmental Exposure
- Female
- "Ganglionic Stimulants/administration & dosage, poisoning"
- Hispanic or Latino
- Humans
- Indicators and Reagents/analysis
- Male
- "Nicotine/administration & dosage, poisoning"
- Occupational Exposure
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
- Saliva/chemistry
- Smoking
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High levels of transdermal nicotine exposure produce green tobacco sickness in Latino farmworkers.
**Authors:** Arcury TA, Quandt SA, Preisser JS, Bernert JT, Norton D, Wang J
**Journal:** Nicotine Tob Res (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1080/1462220031000094132](https://doi.org/10.1080/1462220031000094132)

## Content

1. Nicotine Tob Res. 2003 Jun;5(3):315-21. doi: 10.1080/1462220031000094132.

High levels of transdermal nicotine exposure produce green tobacco sickness in 
Latino farmworkers.

Arcury TA(1), Quandt SA, Preisser JS, Bernert JT, Norton D, Wang J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Family and Community Medicine, Wake Forest University School of 
Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA. tarcury@wfubmc.edu

Green tobacco sickness (GTS) is an occupational illness that affects tobacco 
workers worldwide. This study tested whether GTS results from nicotine 
poisoning. Data collection was based on a prospective design in which 182 
farmworkers were interviewed up to five times at biweekly intervals. A saliva 
sample was obtained at each interview. Examining four regression models in which 
salivary cotinine was evaluated as a mediator between behavioral risk factors 
and GTS, this analysis showed that nicotine causes GTS: 25 workers had 31 
occurrences of GTS. Among nonsmokers, each increment increase in the natural log 
of cotinine increased the odds of GTS 2.11 times, adjusting for task and wet 
conditions. Treatment of GTS must address nicotine poisoning. GTS affects 
laborers with limited resources. Research must disclose the extent of this 
occupational illness and investigate ways to prevent it.

DOI: 10.1080/1462220031000094132
PMID: 12791526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]