---
reference_id: "PMID:41282513"
title: "Adverse outcomes in patients with a diagnosis of an eating disorder: primary care cohort study with linked secondary care and mortality records."
authors:
- Morgan C
- Carr MJ
- Chew-Graham CA
- "O'Neill TW"
- Elvins R
- Kapur N
- Webb RT
- Ashcroft DM
journal: BMJ Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1136/bmjmed-2025-001438
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adverse outcomes in patients with a diagnosis of an eating disorder: primary care cohort study with linked secondary care and mortality records.
**Authors:** Morgan C, Carr MJ, Chew-Graham CA, O'Neill TW, Elvins R, Kapur N, Webb RT, Ashcroft DM
**Journal:** BMJ Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bmjmed-2025-001438](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjmed-2025-001438)

## Content

1. BMJ Med. 2025 Nov 18;4(1):e001438. doi: 10.1136/bmjmed-2025-001438.
eCollection  2025.

Adverse outcomes in patients with a diagnosis of an eating disorder: primary
care cohort study with linked secondary care and mortality records.

Morgan C(1), Carr MJ(2)(3), Chew-Graham CA(4), O'Neill TW(5)(6), Elvins R(7),
Kapur N(8)(9), Webb RT(3)(9), Ashcroft DM(3)(10).

Author information:
(1)Division of Informatics, Imaging and Data Science, University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK.
(2)Division of Pharmacy and Optometry, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(3)University of Manchester, National Institute for Health and Care Research
(NIHR) Greater Patient Safety Research Collaboration, Manchester, UK.
(4)Research Insitute for Primary Care and Health Sciences, University of Keele,
Keele, UK.
(5)Centre for Epidemiology Versus Arthritis, University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK.
(6)National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR) Greater Manchester
Biomedical Research Centre, Manchester University Foundation Trust, Manchester,
UK.
(7)Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
(8)Centre for Suicide prevention, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(9)Division of Psychology and Mental Health, University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK.
(10)Centre for Pharmcoepidemiology and Drug Safety, Division of Pharmacy and
Optometry, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1136/bmjmed-2025-002261.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the short and long term adverse physical and mental health
outcomes, all cause mortality, and natural and unnatural deaths in individuals
with a diagnosis of an eating disorder compared with a matched cohort without
these disorders.
DESIGN: Primary care cohort study with linked secondary care and mortality
records.
SETTING: English primary care electronic health records from the Clinical
Practice Research Datalink, linked to Hospital Episode Statistics for hospital
records and the Office for National Statistics for mortality data, 1 January
1998 to 30 November 2018.
PARTICIPANTS: 24 709 patients, aged 10-44 years, with a diagnosis of an eating
disorder, matched by age, sex, and general practice with up to 20 comparators
without an eating disorder (n=493 001). Disorders examined were anorexia
nervosa, bulimia nervosa, binge eating disorder, and all other types combined.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Physical health conditions, mental health conditions, and
mortality (all cause and cause specific). Hazard ratios and cumulative
incidences were calculated to compare outcomes.
RESULTS: Individuals with eating disorders had substantially higher risks for
coded adverse physical, mental health, and mortality outcomes. Within the first
year after a diagnosis of an eating disorder, these individuals were six times
more likely to develop renal failure (hazard ratio 6.0, 95% confidence interval
(CI) 4.2 to 8.5; excess 15 events per 10 000 individuals, 95% CI 11 to 21) and
nearly seven times more likely to develop liver disease (hazard ratio 6.7, 3.8
to 11.7; excess 6 per 10 000, 4 to 11). Risks were still increased after five
years (hazard ratio for renal failure 2.6, 95% CI 2.0 to 3.4; hazard ratio for
liver disease 3.7, 2.3 to 6.0), with cumulative excesses of 110 (95% CI 87 to
136) and 26 (17 to 39) per 10 000 individuals at 10 years for renal failure and
liver disease, respectively. Mental health coded outcomes were markedly
increased in the short term for depression (hazard ratio 7.3, 95% CI 6.6 to 8.1;
excess 596 per 10 000 individuals, 95% CI 545 to 650) and self-harm (hazard
ratio 9.4, 8.2 to 10.7; excess 309 per 10 000, 279 to 342) at one year.
Mortality was also higher: within the first year, the risk of all cause
mortality was more than fourfold (hazard ratio 4.6, 95% CI 3.1 to 7.0; excess 10
per 10 000 individuals, 95% CI 7 to 15) and was fivefold for unnatural deaths
(hazard ratio 5.1, 2.2 to 11.9; excess 30 per 100 000, 13 to 61). Risks
persisted beyond five years (hazard ratio 2.2, 95% CI 1.8 to 2.7 for all cause
mortality; hazard ratio 3.2, 1.9 to 5.4 for unnatural deaths), corresponding to
43 (95% CI 33 to 54) excess all cause deaths per 10 000 individuals and 184 (125
to 262) excess unnatural deaths per 100 000 at five years. At 10 years, 95 (95%
CI 75 to 118) excess all cause deaths per 10 000 individuals and 341 (236 to
479) unnatural deaths per 100 000 were found. Suicide risk was 13.7 times higher
in the first year (95% CI 4.8 to 38.8; 24 excess deaths per 100 000 individuals,
95% CI 10 to 52) and remained increased at 10 years (hazard ratio 2.7, 1.3 to
5.8), accounting for 169 (103 to 266) excess deaths per 100 000 individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: Individuals with a diagnosis of an eating disorder derived from
coded primary care data were more likely to have recorded adverse physical and
mental health outcomes, as well as higher mortality than individuals without an
eating disorder matched by age, sex, and general practice. These findings
highlight the need for integrated care strategies that deal with both the
physical and mental health dimensions in the management of individuals with
eating disorders.

Copyright © Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2025. Re-use permitted under CC
BY-NC. No commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ Group.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjmed-2025-001438
PMCID: PMC12636977
PMID: 41282513

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have completed the ICMJE uniform
disclosure form at www.icmje.org/disclosure-of-interest/ and declare: support
from the National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR) Greater
Manchester Patient Safety Research Collaboration for the submitted work; RTW is
supported by the NIHR Manchester Biomedical Research Centre (NIHR203308); CAC-G
is supported by the NIHR Applied Research Collaboration West Midlands; NK works
with NHS England on national quality improvement initiatives for suicide and
self-harm, is on the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) National
Suicide Prevention Strategy Advisory Group for England, chaired the guideline
development group for the 2012 UK National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence (NICE) guidelines on the longer term management of self-harm, chaired
the guideline development group for the 2022 NICE guideline on depression in
adults, and was a topic advisor for the 2022 NICE guideline Self-Harm:
Assessment, Management and Preventing Recurrence; TWO is supported by the NIHR
Manchester Biomedical Research Centre (NIHR203308); no financial relationships
with any organisations that might have an interest in the submitted work in the
previous three years; no other relationships or activities that could appear to
have influenced the submitted work. .
