---
reference_id: PMID:30021169
title: Dual Function of USP14 Deubiquitinase in Cellular Proteasomal Activity and Autophagic Flux.
authors:
- Kim E
- Park S
- Lee JH
- Mun JY
- Choi WH
- Yun Y
- Lee J
- Kim JH
- Kang MJ
- Lee MJ
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2018.06.058
keywords:
- Animals
- "Autophagosomes/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- Autophagy
- "Feedback, Physiological"
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Huntingtin Protein/metabolism
- "Lysosomes/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- Membrane Fusion
- Mice
- "Models, Biological"
- Proteasome Endopeptidase Complex/metabolism
- Proteolysis
- Substrate Specificity
- Tumor Suppressor Proteins/metabolism
- "Ubiquitin Thiolesterase/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- tau Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dual Function of USP14 Deubiquitinase in Cellular Proteasomal Activity and Autophagic Flux.
**Authors:** Kim E, Park S, Lee JH, Mun JY, Choi WH, Yun Y, Lee J, Kim JH, Kang MJ, Lee MJ
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2018.06.058](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2018.06.058)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2018 Jul 17;24(3):732-743. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2018.06.058.

Dual Function of USP14 Deubiquitinase in Cellular Proteasomal Activity and 
Autophagic Flux.

Kim E(1), Park S(2), Lee JH(2), Mun JY(3), Choi WH(1), Yun Y(1), Lee J(1), Kim 
JH(1), Kang MJ(4), Lee MJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul National University Graduate School, 
Seoul 03080, Korea.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Seoul National University 
College of Medicine, Seoul 03080, Korea.
(3)Department of Structure and Function of Neural Network, Korea Brain Research 
Institute, Daegu 41068, Korea.
(4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 
Asan Medical Center, Seoul 05505, Korea. Electronic address: 
mjkang@amc.seoul.kr.
(5)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul National University Graduate School, 
Seoul 03080, Korea; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Seoul 
National University College of Medicine, Seoul 03080, Korea. Electronic address: 
minjlee@snu.ac.kr.

Comment in
    Autophagy. 2019 Apr;15(4):726-728. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2019.1569917.

The ubiquitin-proteasome system and the autophagy-lysosome system are two major 
intracellular proteolytic pathways in eukaryotes. Although several biochemical 
mechanisms underlying the crosstalk between them have been suggested, little is 
known about the effect of enhanced proteasome activity on autophagic flux. Here, 
we found that upregulation of proteasome activity, which was achieved through 
the inhibition of USP14, significantly impaired cellular autophagic flux, 
especially at the autophagosome-lysosome fusion step. UVRAG appeared to function 
as a crucial checkpoint for the proper progression of autophagic flux. Although 
proteasome activation through USP14 inhibition facilitated the clearance of 
microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) and reduced the amount of its 
oligomeric forms, the same conditions increased the formation of inclusion 
bodies from nonproteasomal substrates such as huntingtin with long polyglutamine 
repeats. Our results collectively indicate that USP14 may function as a common 
denominator in the compensatory negative feedback between the two major 
proteolytic processes in the cell.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2018.06.058
PMID: 30021169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]