---
reference_id: "PMID:29062463"
title: Antioxidant Treatment Reduces Formation of Structural Cores and Improves Muscle Function in RYR1(Y522S/WT) Mice.
authors:
- Michelucci A
- De Marco A
- Guarnier FA
- Protasi F
- Boncompagni S
journal: Oxid Med Cell Longev
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1155/2017/6792694
keywords:
- Animals
- Antioxidants/metabolism
- Humans
- Mice
- "Muscle, Skeletal/physiology"
- "Myopathy, Central Core/genetics, pathology"
- Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antioxidant Treatment Reduces Formation of Structural Cores and Improves Muscle Function in RYR1(Y522S/WT) Mice.
**Authors:** Michelucci A, De Marco A, Guarnier FA, Protasi F, Boncompagni S
**Journal:** Oxid Med Cell Longev (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2017/6792694](https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/6792694)

## Content

1. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2017;2017:6792694. doi: 10.1155/2017/6792694. Epub 2017 
Sep 10.

Antioxidant Treatment Reduces Formation of Structural Cores and Improves Muscle 
Function in RYR1(Y522S/WT) Mice.

Michelucci A(1)(2), De Marco A(1)(2), Guarnier FA(3), Protasi F(1)(4), 
Boncompagni S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Research on Aging and Translational Medicine (CeSI-MeT), 
University G. d'Annunzio of Chieti, 66100 Chieti, Italy.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Imaging, and Clinical Sciences (DNICS), 
University G. d'Annunzio of Chieti, 66100 Chieti, Italy.
(3)Department of General Pathology, University Estadual de Londrina, 86057-970 
Londrina, PR, Brazil.
(4)Department of Medicine and Aging Science (DMSI), University G. d'Annunzio of 
Chieti, 66100 Chieti, Italy.

Central core disease (CCD) is a congenital myopathy linked to mutations in the 
ryanodine receptor type 1 (RYR1), the sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ release 
channel of skeletal muscle. CCD is characterized by formation of amorphous cores 
within muscle fibers, lacking mitochondrial activity. In skeletal muscle of 
RYR1Y522S/WT knock-in mice, carrying a human mutation in RYR1 linked to 
malignant hyperthermia (MH) with cores, oxidative stress is elevated and fibers 
present severe mitochondrial damage and cores. We treated RYR1Y522S/WT mice with 
N-acetylcysteine (NAC), an antioxidant provided ad libitum in drinking water for 
either 2 or 6 months. Our results show that 2 months of NAC treatment starting 
at 2 months of age, when mitochondrial and fiber damage was still minimal, (i) 
reduce formation of unstructured and contracture cores, (ii) improve muscle 
function, and (iii) decrease mitochondrial damage. The beneficial effect of NAC 
treatment is also evident following 6 months of treatment starting at 4 months 
of age, when structural damage was at an advanced stage. NAC exerts its 
protective effect likely by lowering oxidative stress, as supported by the 
reduction of 3-NT and SOD2 levels. This work suggests that NAC administration is 
beneficial to prevent mitochondrial damage and formation of cores and improve 
muscle function in RYR1Y522S/WT mice.

DOI: 10.1155/2017/6792694
PMCID: PMC5610828
PMID: 29062463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]