---
reference_id: "PMID:32402541"
title: Impact of surgery versus medical management on cardiovascular manifestations in Graves disease.
authors:
- Elnahla A
- Attia AS
- Khadra HS
- Munshi R
- Shalaby H
- Lee GS
- Kandil E
journal: Surgery
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.surg.2020.03.023
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of surgery versus medical management on cardiovascular manifestations in Graves disease.
**Authors:** Elnahla A, Attia AS, Khadra HS, Munshi R, Shalaby H, Lee GS, Kandil E
**Journal:** Surgery (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.surg.2020.03.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.surg.2020.03.023)

## Content

1. Surgery. 2021 Jan;169(1):82-86. doi: 10.1016/j.surg.2020.03.023. Epub 2020 May
 10.

Impact of surgery versus medical management on cardiovascular manifestations in 
Graves disease.

Elnahla A(1), Attia AS(1), Khadra HS(1), Munshi R(1), Shalaby H(1), Lee GS(1), 
Kandil E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA.
(2)Department of Surgery, Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA. 
Electronic address: ekandil@tulane.edu.

BACKGROUND: Graves disease is well known to have multiple adverse effects on the 
cardiovascular system. We compared the cardiovascular outcomes after surgical 
intervention versus medical treatment in patients with Graves disease.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective study of all Graves disease patients with 
a cardiovascular comorbidity who underwent either surgical or medical management 
(N = 151). Perioperative biochemical and cardiovascular outcomes from the 
surgical versus the medical groups were analyzed.
RESULTS: Of 151 patients, 69 (45.6%) patients underwent total thyroidectomy and 
82 (54.3%) patients received medical treatment. Hypertension resolved in 44.7% 
of the patients from the surgical group vs 18% in the medical group (P = .03). 
Tachyarrhythmias, including atrial fibrillation and tachycardia, improved in 
85.9% of patients in the surgical group vs 66% in the medical group (P = .01). 
All cardiovascular manifestations examined, hypertension, tachyarrhythmias, and 
heart failure, improved in 69% of patients in the surgical group and 42.6% of 
patients in the medical group during the follow-up period (P < .01).
CONCLUSION: Surgical treatment offers a significant and rapid clinical 
improvement of cardiovascular manifestations in Graves disease patients, such as 
hypertension, tachyarrhythmias, and heart failure. Surgery should be considered 
and recommended in Graves disease patients with known cardiovascular 
manifestations.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.surg.2020.03.023
PMID: 32402541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]