---
reference_id: "PMID:29701157"
title: Pharmacological Treatment of Body Dysmorphic Disorder.
authors:
- Hong K
- Nezgovorova V
- Uzunova G
- Schlussel D
- Hollander E
journal: Curr Neuropharmacol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.2174/1570159X16666180426153940
keywords:
- "Body Dysmorphic Disorders/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology, etiology"
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pharmacological Treatment of Body Dysmorphic Disorder.
**Authors:** Hong K, Nezgovorova V, Uzunova G, Schlussel D, Hollander E
**Journal:** Curr Neuropharmacol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1570159X16666180426153940](https://doi.org/10.2174/1570159X16666180426153940)

## Content

1. Curr Neuropharmacol. 2019;17(8):697-702. doi:
10.2174/1570159X16666180426153940.

Pharmacological Treatment of Body Dysmorphic Disorder.

Hong K(1), Nezgovorova V(1), Uzunova G(1), Schlussel D(1), Hollander E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Autism and 
Obsessive-Compulsive Spectrum Program, Anxiety and Depression Program, Albert 
Einstein College of Medicine, Montefiore Medical Center, NY, United States.

Body dysmorphic disorder is a challenging disorder that manifests as erroneously 
perceived flaws in one's physical appearance and repetitive behaviors in 
response to appearance concerns. This disorder is also frequently comorbid with 
other psychiatric disorders, including major depressive disorder and autism 
spectrum disorder. It is currently understood to arise from a combination of 
biological, psychological, and environmental factors. Treatment of body 
dysmorphic disorder typically consists of a combination of pharmacotherapy and 
cognitive behavioral therapy. However, not all patients respond to treatment, 
and BDD symptoms remain even in those who do respond. This review outlines 
current pharmacological and neuromodulation treatments for body dysmorphic 
disorder and suggests directions for future studies of novel treatments such as 
augmentation with atypical antipsychotics and the use of intranasal oxytocin in 
cases of body dysmorphic disorder that show residual symptomatology even with 
tailored monotherapy. There is emerging evidence suggesting that non-invasive 
neurostimulatory techniques, such as repetitive transcranial magnetic 
stimulation, may be of value in treatment-resistant cases.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1570159X16666180426153940
PMCID: PMC7059151
PMID: 29701157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]