---
reference_id: "PMID:20301322"
title: Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Nowaczyk MJM
- Wassif CA
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Nowaczyk MJM, Wassif CA

## Content

1. Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome.

Nowaczyk MJM(1), Wassif CA(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
1998 Nov 13 [updated 2020 Jan 30].

Author information:
(1)Professor, Molecular Medicine & Pathology and PediatricsPediatrician and
Clinical GeneticistMcMaster UniversityHamilton, Canada
(2)Staff Scientist, Section of Molecular DysmorphologyNICHDBethesda, Maryland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is a congenital
multiple-anomaly / cognitive impairment syndrome caused by an abnormality in
cholesterol metabolism resulting from deficiency of the enzyme
7-dehydrocholesterol (7-DHC) reductase. It is characterized by prenatal and
postnatal growth restriction, microcephaly, moderate-to-severe intellectual
disability, and multiple major and minor malformations. The malformations
include distinctive facial features, cleft palate, cardiac defects,
underdeveloped external genitalia in males, postaxial polydactyly, and 2-3
syndactyly of the toes. The clinical spectrum is wide; individuals with normal
development and only minor malformations have been described.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SLOS is established in a proband with
suggestive clinical features and elevated 7-dehydrocholesterol level and/or by
identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in DHCR7 by molecular genetic
testing. Although serum concentration of cholesterol is usually low, it may be
in the normal range in approximately 10% of affected individuals, making it an
unreliable test for screening and diagnosis.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: While no long-term dietary studies on
cholesterol supplementation have been conducted in a randomized fashion,
cholesterol supplementation may result in clinical improvement. Early
intervention and physical/occupational/speech therapies are indicated for
identified disabilities. Consultation with a nutritionist and consideration of
hypoallergenic or elemental formulas in infants; gastrostomy as needed for
feeding; neonatal cholestatic liver disease often resolves with cholesterol
and/or bile acid therapy. A trial of melatonin or another hypnotic may be
considered for those with sleep disturbance. Orthotics, tendon release surgery,
or Botox® as needed. Proper clothing and sunscreen with UVA and UBV protection
for photosensitivity. Routine treatment for gastroesophageal reflux, pyloric
stenosis, Hirschsprung disease, constipation, recurrent otitis media, hearing
loss, cataracts, ptosis, strabismus, psychiatric disturbance/behavioral issues,
seizures, cleft palate, dental anomalies, congenital heart defects, hearing
loss, limb defects, and adrenal insufficiency, including stress-related doses of
steroids during illness and other physical stress. Surveillance: Routine health
supervision including monitoring of growth parameters, nutritional status,
developmental progress, behavior, stooling pattern, changes in tone, seizures
(if present), and movement disorders at each visit; monitoring of cholesterol,
serum concentration of 7-DHC, and serum amino transferases (ALT and AST) every
three to four months in the first few years of life and twice yearly thereafter;
screening for vision problems and hearing loss annually in childhood; dental
evaluations twice yearly starting at age three years; assessment for signs of
puberty and rate of pubertal progression starting at age ten years; monitor for
gonadal location and signs/symptoms of urinary tract infection as clinically
indicated. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Treatment with haloperidol or other
drugs in the same class. Psychotropic drugs (trazodone, aripirazole) that
elevate 7-DHC should be used with caution; extended sun exposure should be
avoided. Evaluation of relatives at risk: Testing of all sibs so that
cholesterol supplementation can begin as soon as possible after birth. Other:
For severely affected infants, consider surgical management of congenital
anomalies (e.g., cleft palate, congenital heart disease, genital anomalies) as
for any other severe, usually lethal disorder.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SLOS is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. At
conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being
affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of
being unaffected and not a carrier. Carrier detection is possible if the
pathogenic variants in the family are known. Prenatal testing for a pregnancy at
increased risk is possible using biochemical testing or molecular genetic
testing if the pathogenic variants in the family are known.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301322
