---
reference_id: "PMID:37011526"
title: "Efficacy, safety, and tolerability of soticlestat as adjunctive therapy for the treatment of seizures in patients with Dup15q syndrome or CDKL5 deficiency disorder in an open-label signal-finding phase II study (ARCADE)."
authors:
- Demarest S
- Jeste S
- Agarwal N
- Arkilo D
- Asgharnejad M
- Hsiao S
- Thibert R
journal: Epilepsy Behav
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2023.109173
keywords:
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases
- "Spasms, Infantile/drug therapy"
- Pilot Projects
- Humans
- Anticonvulsants/adverse effects
- Double-Blind Method
- Drug-Related Side Effects and Adverse Reactions/drug therapy
- Treatment Outcome
- Adult
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- "Seizures/drug therapy, genetics, chemically induced"
- Infant
- Child
- Piperidines
- Pyridines
- Epileptic Syndromes
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy, safety, and tolerability of soticlestat as adjunctive therapy for the treatment of seizures in patients with Dup15q syndrome or CDKL5 deficiency disorder in an open-label signal-finding phase II study (ARCADE).
**Authors:** Demarest S, Jeste S, Agarwal N, Arkilo D, Asgharnejad M, Hsiao S, Thibert R
**Journal:** Epilepsy Behav (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.yebeh.2023.109173](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yebeh.2023.109173)

## Content

1. Epilepsy Behav. 2023 May;142:109173. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2023.109173. Epub
2023  Apr 1.

Efficacy, safety, and tolerability of soticlestat as adjunctive therapy for the 
treatment of seizures in patients with Dup15q syndrome or CDKL5 deficiency 
disorder in an open-label signal-finding phase II study (ARCADE).

Demarest S(1), Jeste S(2), Agarwal N(3), Arkilo D(4), Asgharnejad M(5), Hsiao 
S(6), Thibert R(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Neurology, University of Colorado School of 
Medicine, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, Colorado, USA. Electronic 
address: Scott.Demarest@childrenscolorado.org.
(2)Division of Neurology, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
California, USA. Electronic address: sjeste@chla.usc.edu.
(3)Division of Pediatric Epilepsy, Minnesota Epilepsy Group, P.A., and 
Children's Minnesota, St Paul, Minnesota, USA. Electronic address: 
NAgarwal@mnepilepsy.net.
(4)Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. 
Electronic address: arkdimi@hotmail.com.
(5)Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. 
Electronic address: mahnaz.asgharnejad@takeda.com.
(6)Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. 
Electronic address: sam.hsiao@takeda.com.
(7)Massachusetts General Hospital for Children, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA. Electronic address: RTHIBERT@mgh.harvard.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Chromosome 15q duplication (Dup15q) syndrome and cyclin‑dependent 
kinase-like 5 deficiency disorder (CDD) are rare neurodevelopmental disorders 
associated with epileptic encephalopathies, with a lack of specifically approved 
treatment options. ARCADE assessed the efficacy and safety of adjunctive 
soticlestat (TAK-935) for the treatment of seizures in patients with Dup15q 
syndrome or CDD (NCT03694275).
METHODS: ARCADE was a phase II, open-label, pilot study of soticlestat 
(≤300 mg/day twice daily, weight-adjusted) in pediatric and adult patients 
2-55 years of age with Dup15q syndrome or CDD who experienced ≥3 motor seizures 
per month in the 3 months before screening and at baseline. The 20-week 
treatment period consisted of a dose-optimization period and a 12-week 
maintenance period. Efficacy endpoints included the change from baseline in 
motor seizure frequency during the maintenance period and the proportion of 
treatment responders. Safety endpoints included the incidence of 
treatment-emergent adverse effects (TEAEs).
RESULTS: The modified-intent-to-treat population included 20 participants who 
received ≥1 dose of soticlestat and had ≥1 efficacy assessment (Dup15q syndrome, 
n = 8; CDD, n = 12). Soticlestat administration during the maintenance period 
was associated with a median change from baseline in motor seizure frequency of 
+11.7% in the Dup15q syndrome group and -23.6% in the CDD group. Reductions in 
all seizure frequency of -23.4% and -30.5% were also observed during the 
maintenance period in the Dup15q syndrome group and the CDD group, respectively. 
Most TEAEs were of mild or moderate severity. Serious TEAEs were reported by 
three patients (15.0%); none were considered drug related. The most common TEAEs 
were constipation, rash, and seizure. No deaths were reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Adjunctive soticlestat treatment was associated with a decrease in 
motor seizure frequency from baseline in patients with CDD and a decrease in all 
seizure frequency in both patient groups. Soticlestat treatment was associated 
with an increase in motor seizure frequency in patients with Dup15q syndrome.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2023.109173
PMID: 37011526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: Scott Demarest has served as a paid 
consultant for BioMarin, Neurogene, Upsher-Smith Laboratories, Taysha Gene 
Therapies, and Zogenix on unrelated subject matters and for Marinus 
Pharmaceuticals and Ovid Therapeutics on related subject matters. Furthermore, 
he has received funding from the US National Institutes of Health, the 
International Foundation for CDKL5 Research, Mila's Miracle Foundation, and 
Project 8p. He also serves on the advisory board for the nonprofit foundations 
FamilieSCN2A, Project 8p, Ring14 USA, and SLC6A1 Connect. Shafali Jeste has 
served as a consultant for Roche Pharmaceuticals. Nitin Agarwal currently serves 
on a speaker panel for Livanova. Dimitrios Arkilo is a former employee of Takeda 
Pharmaceutical Company Limited. Mahnaz Asgharnejad and Samuel Hsiao are 
employees of Takeda Pharmaceutical Company Limited and own stock or stock 
options. Ronald Thibert has served as a paid consultant for Ovid Therapeutics, 
Takeda, and Roche on related subject matters.