---
reference_id: "PMID:39215466"
title: Expert panel curation of 31 genes in relation to limb girdle muscular dystrophy.
authors:
- Mohan S
- McNulty S
- Thaxton C
- Elnagheeb M
- Owens E
- Flowers M
- Nunnery T
- Self A
- Palus B
- Gorokhova S
- Kennedy A
- Niu Z
- Johari M
- Maiga AB
- Macalalad K
- Clause AR
- Beckmann JS
- Bronicki L
- Cooper ST
- Ganesh VS
- Kang PB
- Kesari A
- Lek M
- Levy J
- Rufibach L
- Savarese M
- Spencer MJ
- Straub V
- Tasca G
- Weihl CC
journal: Ann Clin Transl Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/acn3.52127
keywords:
- Humans
- "Muscular Dystrophies, Limb-Girdle/genetics, diagnosis"
- Collagen Type VI/genetics
- Muscle Proteins/genetics
- Phenotype
- Data Curation
- Calpain
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expert panel curation of 31 genes in relation to limb girdle muscular dystrophy.
**Authors:** Mohan S, McNulty S, Thaxton C, Elnagheeb M, Owens E, Flowers M, Nunnery T, Self A, Palus B, Gorokhova S, Kennedy A, Niu Z, Johari M, Maiga AB, Macalalad K, Clause AR, Beckmann JS, Bronicki L, Cooper ST, Ganesh VS, Kang PB, Kesari A, Lek M, Levy J, Rufibach L, Savarese M, Spencer MJ, Straub V, Tasca G, Weihl CC
**Journal:** Ann Clin Transl Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/acn3.52127](https://doi.org/10.1002/acn3.52127)

## Content

1. Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2024 Sep;11(9):2268-2276. doi: 10.1002/acn3.52127.
Epub  2024 Aug 30.

Expert panel curation of 31 genes in relation to limb girdle muscular dystrophy.

Mohan S(1), McNulty S(1), Thaxton C(1), Elnagheeb M(1), Owens E(1), Flowers 
M(1), Nunnery T(1), Self A(1), Palus B(1), Gorokhova S(2)(3), Kennedy A(4), Niu 
Z(5), Johari M(6)(7), Maiga AB(8), Macalalad K(9), Clause AR(9), Beckmann 
JS(10), Bronicki L(11), Cooper ST(12)(13)(14), Ganesh VS(15)(16), Kang PB(17), 
Kesari A(18), Lek M(19), Levy J(20), Rufibach L(21), Savarese M(7), Spencer 
MJ(22), Straub V(23), Tasca G(23), Weihl CC(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North 
Carolina, USA.
(2)Aix Marseille Univ, INSERM, MMG, U 1251, Marseille, France.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Timone Children's Hospital, APHM, Marseille, 
France.
(4)Division of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, The Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota, USA.
(6)Harry Perkins Institute of Medical Research, Centre for Medical Research, 
University of Western Australia, Nedlands, Western Australia, Australia.
(7)Folkhälsan Research Center, Department of Medical and Clinical Genetics, 
Medicum, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
(8)Department of Medicine, University of Sciences, Techniques and Technologies 
of Bamako, Bamako, Mali.
(9)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine in St. 
Louis, St Louis, Missouri, USA.
(10)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(11)Department of clinical genetics, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(12)Kids Neuroscience Centre, Children's Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, New 
South Wales, Australia.
(13)School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University 
of Sydney, Westmead, New South Wales, Australia.
(14)Functional Neuromics, Children's Medical Research Institute, Westmead, New 
South Wales, Australia.
(15)Center for Mendelian Genomics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
(16)Department of Neurology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(17)Greg Marzolf Jr. Muscular Dystrophy Center and Department of Neurology, 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(18)Illumina Inc, San Diego, California, USA.
(19)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut, USA.
(20)Coalition to Cure Calpain 3, Westport, Connecticut, USA.
(21)Jain Foundation, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(22)Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los 
Angeles, California, USA.
(23)John Walton Muscular Dystrophy Research Centre, Newcastle University and 
Newcastle Hospitals NHS Foundation Trusts, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 May 06:2024.05.03.592369. doi: 10.1101/2024.05.03.592369.

OBJECTIVE: Limb girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMDs) are a group of genetically 
heterogeneous autosomal conditions with some degree of phenotypic homogeneity. 
LGMD is defined as having onset >2 years of age with progressive proximal 
weakness, elevated serum creatine kinase levels and dystrophic features on 
muscle biopsy. Advances in massively parallel sequencing have led to a surge in 
genes linked to LGMD.
METHODS: The ClinGen Muscular Dystrophies and Myopathies gene curation expert 
panel (MDM GCEP, formerly Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy GCEP) convened to 
evaluate the strength of evidence supporting gene-disease relationships (GDR) 
using the ClinGen gene-disease clinical validity framework to evaluate 31 genes 
implicated in LGMD.
RESULTS: The GDR was exclusively LGMD for 17 genes, whereas an additional 14 
genes were related to a broader phenotype encompassing congenital weakness. Four 
genes (CAPN3, COL6A1, COL6A2, and COL6A3) were split into two separate disease 
entities, based on each displaying both dominant and recessive inheritance 
patterns, resulting in curation of 35 GDRs. Of these, 30 (86%) were classified 
as definitive, 4 (11%) as moderate, and 1 (3%) as limited. Two genes, POMGNT1 
and DAG1, though definitively related to myopathy, currently have insufficient 
evidence to support a relationship specifically with LGMD.
INTERPRETATION: The expert-reviewed assertions on the clinical validity of genes 
implicated in LGMDs form an invaluable resource for clinicians and molecular 
geneticists. We encourage the global neuromuscular community to publish 
case-level data that help clarify disputed or novel LGMD associations.

© 2024 The Author(s). Annals of Clinical and Translational Neurology published 
by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/acn3.52127
PMCID: PMC11537137
PMID: 39215466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.