---
reference_id: "PMID:12563048"
title: "Mevalonate kinase deficiency: enlarging the clinical and biochemical spectrum."
authors:
- Prietsch V
- Mayatepek E
- Krastel H
- Haas D
- Zundel D
- Waterham HR
- Wanders RJ
- Gibson KM
- Hoffmann GF
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1542/peds.111.2.258
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Cerebellar Ataxia/enzymology, etiology, pathology"
- Child
- Female
- "Growth Disorders/enzymology, etiology"
- Humans
- "Hypergammaglobulinemia/enzymology, etiology"
- Immunoglobulin D/blood
- "Intellectual Disability/enzymology, etiology"
- Male
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/complications, enzymology, pathology"
- "Mevalonic Acid/metabolism, urine"
- Phenotype
- "Phosphotransferases (Alcohol Group Acceptor)/deficiency, physiology"
- "Psychomotor Disorders/enzymology, etiology"
- "Sweet Syndrome/enzymology, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mevalonate kinase deficiency: enlarging the clinical and biochemical spectrum.
**Authors:** Prietsch V, Mayatepek E, Krastel H, Haas D, Zundel D, Waterham HR, Wanders RJ, Gibson KM, Hoffmann GF
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.111.2.258](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.111.2.258)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2003 Feb;111(2):258-61. doi: 10.1542/peds.111.2.258.

Mevalonate kinase deficiency: enlarging the clinical and biochemical spectrum.

Prietsch V(1), Mayatepek E, Krastel H, Haas D, Zundel D, Waterham HR, Wanders 
RJ, Gibson KM, Hoffmann GF.

Author information:
(1)General Pediatrics, University of Heidelberg, Federal Republic of Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Mevalonic aciduria as a result of mevalonate kinase deficiency is an 
inborn error of cholesterol biosynthesis characterized by dysmorphology, 
psychomotor retardation, progressive cerebellar ataxia, and recurrent febrile 
crises, usually manifesting in early infancy, accompanied by hepatosplenomegaly, 
lymphadenopathy, arthralgia, and skin rash. The febrile crises are similar to 
those observed in hyperimmunoglobulinemia D and periodic fever syndrome (HIDS). 
Pathogenic mutations in the mevalonate kinase gene in both disorders have 
demonstrated a common genetic basis. Our aim was to describe the clinical 
picture of adolescent patients with mevalonate kinase deficiency and to expand 
the clinical and biochemical spectrum of mevalonate kinase deficiency, 
particularly with regard to HIDS.
METHODS: We report the clinical history and biochemical findings of 3 patients 
with mevalonic aciduria.
RESULTS: In 2 siblings with mevalonic aciduria, a 15-year-old girl and a 
14-year-old boy, the phenotype shifted with age. Ataxia has become the 
predominant clinical manifestation, whereas the febrile attacks occur less 
frequently but as yet have not disappeared. Both of them show marked elevations 
of immunoglobulin D (IgD). Psychomotor development is retarded but not 
regressive. Short stature developed in both patients. Additional findings 
include the development of retinal dystrophy and cataracts in both of them. The 
third patient is a 6-year-old boy who presented at the age of 5 years with 
cerebellar ataxia and retinal dystrophy. He is different from all known patients 
with mevalonic aciduria because of the mild neurologic involvement and because 
he has never developed febrile crises. In addition, levels of IgD were 
repeatedly normal.
CONCLUSION: The clinical and biochemical spectrum of patients with mevalonic 
aciduria is heterogeneous. Manifestations of the disease seem to be age 
dependent, as evident from this first report of adolescent patients. In patients 
who survive infancy, short stature, ataxia caused by cerebellar atrophy, and 
ocular involvement with retinal dystrophy become predominant findings. Recurrent 
febrile crises seem to diminish with increasing age and may not even be an 
obligatory finding. Elevation of IgD is most likely a secondary phenomenon that 
seems to be linked to recurrent febrile crises.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.111.2.258
PMID: 12563048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]