---
reference_id: "PMID:31678162"
title: Pathomechanisms in the neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses.
authors:
- Nelvagal HR
- Lange J
- Takahashi K
- Tarczyluk-Wells MA
- Cooper JD
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2019.165570
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- "Lysosomes/metabolism, pathology"
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- "Neuronal Ceroid-Lipofuscinoses/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathomechanisms in the neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses.
**Authors:** Nelvagal HR, Lange J, Takahashi K, Tarczyluk-Wells MA, Cooper JD
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbadis.2019.165570](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbadis.2019.165570)

## Content

1. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Basis Dis. 2020 Sep 1;1866(9):165570. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2019.165570. Epub 2019 Oct 31.

Pathomechanisms in the neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses.

Nelvagal HR(1), Lange J(2), Takahashi K(3), Tarczyluk-Wells MA(4), Cooper JD(3).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Storage Disorders Laboratory, Department of Pediatrics, Division of
Genetics and Genomics, Washington University in St. Louis, School of Medicine,
St Louis, MO 63110, USA. Electronic address: hemanth.nelvagal@wustl.edu.
(2)Department of Basic and Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of Psychiatry,
Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London, London SE5 9NU, UK; Department
of Neurodegenerative Disease, Institute of Neurology, University College London,
London WC1N 3BG, UK.
(3)Pediatric Storage Disorders Laboratory, Department of Pediatrics, Division of
Genetics and Genomics, Washington University in St. Louis, School of Medicine,
St Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(4)Department of Basic and Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of Psychiatry,
Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London, London SE5 9NU, UK; Centre for
Brain Research, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, University of Auckland,
New Zealand.

The neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs) are a group of inherited
neurodegenerative lysosomal storage disorders (LSDs), traditionally grouped
together based on shared clinical symptoms. The recent emergence of new forms of
NCL along with an improved understanding of endo-lysosomal system function have
necessitated the reassessment of their classification and pathogenesis. Novel
clinical findings, as well as observations in various animal models of NCL, have
revealed significant pathological changes in regions outside the brain, as well
as progression of disease along connected anatomical pathways. The
characterization of animal models of NCLs has not only highlighted the
vulnerability of certain neuron populations but has also revealed glial cells to
be adversely affected and actively contribute to disease progression. While the
lysosome has been thought of as being the 'waste-disposal' unit of the cell,
recent evidence of the endo-lysosomal system playing a crucial role in nutrient
sensing and cellular homeostasis have shown that NCL mutations have far-ranging
effects on cellular functions including autophagy and synaptic dysfunction. The
discovery of the machinery controlling endo-lysosomal function via transcription
factor EB (TFEB) and mTORC1, have also shed light on potential mechanisms by
which NCL mutations may exert their effect. While the NCLs share many common
down-stream pathologies, there is a growing body of evidence for unique
pathogenic pathways in each form. In light of the rapid advances in therapeutic
strategies for the NCLs and LSDs, these new lessons learnt about unique NCL
pathomechanisms will be key for informing the targeting, timing and strategies
for future treatments.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2019.165570
PMID: 31678162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest JDC has been
in receipt of research support from BioMarin Pharmaceutical Inc., Abeona
Therapeutics Inc., Regenexbio Inc. and CereSpir Inc., but none of these projects
relate directly to the subject of this review. The other authors have no
declarations of interest.
