---
reference_id: "PMID:16998597"
title: "Neuropathological spectrum of pilocytic astrocytoma: an Indian series of 120 cases."
authors:
- Malik A
- Deb P
- Sharma MC
- Sarkar C
journal: Pathol Oncol Res
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1007/BF02893364
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Astrocytoma/blood supply, pathology"
- "Brain Neoplasms/blood supply, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- India
- Infant
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuropathological spectrum of pilocytic astrocytoma: an Indian series of 120 cases.
**Authors:** Malik A, Deb P, Sharma MC, Sarkar C
**Journal:** Pathol Oncol Res (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF02893364](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02893364)

## Content

1. Pathol Oncol Res. 2006;12(3):164-71. doi: 10.1007/BF02893364. Epub 2006 Sep
23.

Neuropathological spectrum of pilocytic astrocytoma: an Indian series of 120
cases.

Malik A(1), Deb P, Sharma MC, Sarkar C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi,
India.

Pilocytic astrocytomas (PAs) are generally well circumscribed, slowly growing,
cystic tumors, occurring in the pediatric age group. Our aims were to
retrospectively analyze the neuropathological spectrum of PA, and correlate it
with various clinicopathological features. A total of 120 PAs, diagnosed and
managed at this center during a 5-year period, were included. The study
population had a mean age of 18.9 years, with male predominance (68.3%), and
demonstrated predilection for posterior fossa (61.7%). On histopathology,
biphasic pattern (89.2%) along with Rosenthal fibers (66.7%) and eosinophilic
granular bodies (60%) were present in the majority of cases. Vascular features
were characterized by perivascular hyalinization (51.7%), angiomatous
proliferation (21.7%) and glomeruloid changes (21.7%). Hemosiderin-laden
macrophages were noted in 37.1% of cases. Further, 60.8% showed
lymphoplasmacytic infiltration, while atypia and necrosis were present in 25.8%
and 1.7% of cases, respectively. Statistical evaluation revealed significant
correlation of angiomatous proliferation with age (< or =12 and >12-year age
groups) (p=0.011); and of hemosiderin deposition with angiomatous proliferation
(p=0.006), perivascular hyalinization (p=0.035), and age (< or =12 and >12-year
age groups) (p=0.028). This study emphasizes that though PAs generally display
classical histomorphology, diagnosis may be challenging in patients with unusual
clinicopathological features, e.g. in older patients, uncommon location, absence
of biphasic pattern, or presence of nuclear atypia, mitotic figures and
necrosis, and also in cases of small biopsies. In the absence of diagnostic
histology enumerated above, vascular features like angiomatous proliferation,
glomeruloid changes and perivascular hyalinization, along with hemosiderinladen
macrophages and perivascular lymphocytic infiltration should be considered as
surrogate histological markers of PA.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02893364
PMID: 16998597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
