---
reference_id: "PMID:34459313"
title: "Hematological involvement in pediatric systemic lupus erythematosus: A multi-center study."
authors:
- Akca ÜK
- Batu ED
- Kısaarslan AP
- Poyrazoğlu H
- Ayaz NA
- Sözeri B
- Sağ E
- Atalay E
- Demir S
- Karadağ ŞG
- Demir F
- Bilginer Y
- Gümrük F
- Özen S
journal: Lupus
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1177/09612033211038824
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hematological involvement in pediatric systemic lupus erythematosus: A multi-center study.
**Authors:** Akca ÜK, Batu ED, Kısaarslan AP, Poyrazoğlu H, Ayaz NA, Sözeri B, Sağ E, Atalay E, Demir S, Karadağ ŞG, Demir F, Bilginer Y, Gümrük F, Özen S
**Journal:** Lupus (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1177/09612033211038824](https://doi.org/10.1177/09612033211038824)

## Content

1. Lupus. 2021 Oct;30(12):1983-1990. doi: 10.1177/09612033211038824. Epub 2021
Aug  28.

Hematological involvement in pediatric systemic lupus erythematosus: A 
multi-center study.

Akca ÜK(1), Batu ED(1), Kısaarslan AP(2), Poyrazoğlu H(2), Ayaz NA(3), Sözeri 
B(4), Sağ E(1), Atalay E(1), Demir S(1), Karadağ ŞG(3), Demir F(4), Bilginer 
Y(1), Gümrük F(5), Özen S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Rheumatology, 37515Hacettepe 
University64005Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Rheumatology, 64212Erciyes University 
Faculty of Medicine, Kayseri, Turkey.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Rheumatology, 64041Istanbul Faculty of 
Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Rheumatology, 64041Umraniye Training 
and Research Center, University of Health Sciences, Istanbul, Turkey.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Hematology, 37515Hacettepe 
University64005Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.

Introduction: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) may present with features of 
several systems, including hematological manifestations. In this study, we aimed 
to evaluate the characteristics of hematological involvement and assess possible 
associations and correlations in pediatric SLE patients. Method: This is a 
retrospective multi-center study. The medical records of pediatric SLE patients 
followed between January 2000 and June 2020 were analyzed. All children 
fulfilled the criteria of the Systemic Lupus International Collaborating 
Clinics. Results: The study included 215 children with SLE, 118 of whom had 
hematological manifestations. Concomitant renal involvement and low C3 levels 
were significantly more frequent in patients with hematological involvement (p = 
0.04, p = 0.008, respectively). Also, anti-cardiolipin, anti-beta-2-glycoprotein 
I (anti-β2 GP1), and anti-Sm antibody positivity, and the presence of lupus 
anticoagulant were more common in the group with hematological findings (p = 
0.001 for anti-cardiolipin antibody positivity and p < 0.001 for the positivity 
of anti-β2 GP1 antibody, anti-Sm antibody, and lupus anticoagulant). The most 
common hematologic abnormality was anemia (n = 88, 74.5%), with autoimmune 
hemolytic anemia constituting the majority (n = 40). Corticosteroids followed by 
IVIG were the mainstay of treatment. In patients resistant to corticosteroid and 
IVIG treatments, the most preferred drug was rituximab. Low levels of C3, high 
SLEDAI score, high incidence of renal involvement, and positive antiphospholipid 
antibodies were associated with hematological involvement in the univariate 
analysis. The presence of antiphospholipid antibodies and high SLEDAI score were 
independently associated with hematological involvement in multivariate analysis 
(OR: 4.021; 95% CI: 2.041-7.921; p < 0.001 and OR: 1.136; 95% CI: 1.065-1.212; p 
< 0.001). Conclusion: Hematological abnormalities are frequently encountered in 
pediatric SLE. Positive antiphospholipid antibodies and high SLEDAI scores were 
associated with hematological involvement.

DOI: 10.1177/09612033211038824
PMID: 34459313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]