---
reference_id: "PMID:36543475"
title: "A non-invasive artificial intelligence approach for the prediction of human blastocyst ploidy: a retrospective model development and validation study."
authors:
- Barnes J
- Brendel M
- Gao VR
- Rajendran S
- Kim J
- Li Q
- Malmsten JE
- Sierra JT
- Zisimopoulos P
- Sigaras A
- Khosravi P
- Meseguer M
- Zhan Q
- Rosenwaks Z
- Elemento O
- Zaninovic N
- Hajirasouliha I
journal: Lancet Digit Health
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/S2589-7500(22)00213-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A non-invasive artificial intelligence approach for the prediction of human blastocyst ploidy: a retrospective model development and validation study.
**Authors:** Barnes J, Brendel M, Gao VR, Rajendran S, Kim J, Li Q, Malmsten JE, Sierra JT, Zisimopoulos P, Sigaras A, Khosravi P, Meseguer M, Zhan Q, Rosenwaks Z, Elemento O, Zaninovic N, Hajirasouliha I
**Journal:** Lancet Digit Health (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2589-7500(22)00213-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2589-7500(22)00213-8)

## Content

1. Lancet Digit Health. 2023 Jan;5(1):e28-e40. doi:
10.1016/S2589-7500(22)00213-8.

A non-invasive artificial intelligence approach for the prediction of human 
blastocyst ploidy: a retrospective model development and validation study.

Barnes J(1), Brendel M(1), Gao VR(2), Rajendran S(3), Kim J(1), Li Q(2), 
Malmsten JE(4), Sierra JT(5), Zisimopoulos P(6), Sigaras A(6), Khosravi P(7), 
Meseguer M(8), Zhan Q(4), Rosenwaks Z(4), Elemento O(9), Zaninovic N(4), 
Hajirasouliha I(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, 
NY, USA; Institute for Computational Biomedicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New 
York, NY, USA.
(2)Institute for Computational Biomedicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, 
NY, USA; Tri-Institutional Computational Biology & Medicine Program, Cornell 
University, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, 
NY, USA; Institute for Computational Biomedicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New 
York, NY, USA; Tri-Institutional Computational Biology & Medicine Program, 
Cornell University, NY, USA.
(4)Ronald O Perelman and Claudia Cohen Center for Reproductive Medicine, Weill 
Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(5)QED Analytics, Princeton, NJ, USA.
(6)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, 
NY, USA; Institute for Computational Biomedicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New 
York, NY, USA; Caryl and Israel Englander Institute for Precision Medicine, 
Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(7)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, 
NY, USA; Institute for Computational Biomedicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New 
York, NY, USA; Caryl and Israel Englander Institute for Precision Medicine, 
Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA; Computational Oncology, Department of 
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, NY, USA.
(8)IVI Valencia, Health Research Institute la Fe, Valencia, Spain.
(9)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, 
NY, USA; Institute for Computational Biomedicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New 
York, NY, USA; Caryl and Israel Englander Institute for Precision Medicine, 
Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA; Meyer Cancer Center, Weill Cornell 
Medicine, New York, NY, USA; WorldQuant Initiative for Quantitative Prediction, 
Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(10)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, 
NY, USA; Institute for Computational Biomedicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, New 
York, NY, USA; Caryl and Israel Englander Institute for Precision Medicine, 
Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA; Meyer Cancer Center, Weill Cornell 
Medicine, New York, NY, USA. Electronic address: imh2003@med.cornell.edu.

BACKGROUND: One challenge in the field of in-vitro fertilisation is the 
selection of the most viable embryos for transfer. Morphological quality 
assessment and morphokinetic analysis both have the disadvantage of 
intra-observer and inter-observer variability. A third method, preimplantation 
genetic testing for aneuploidy (PGT-A), has limitations too, including its 
invasiveness and cost. We hypothesised that differences in aneuploid and euploid 
embryos that allow for model-based classification are reflected in morphology, 
morphokinetics, and associated clinical information.
METHODS: In this retrospective study, we used machine-learning and deep-learning 
approaches to develop STORK-A, a non-invasive and automated method of embryo 
evaluation that uses artificial intelligence to predict embryo ploidy status. 
Our method used a dataset of 10 378 embryos that consisted of static images 
captured at 110 h after intracytoplasmic sperm injection, morphokinetic 
parameters, blastocyst morphological assessments, maternal age, and ploidy 
status. Independent and external datasets, Weill Cornell Medicine EmbryoScope+ 
(WCM-ES+; Weill Cornell Medicine Center of Reproductive Medicine, NY, USA) and 
IVI Valencia (IVI Valencia, Health Research Institute la Fe, Valencia, Spain) 
were used to test the generalisability of STORK-A and were compared measuring 
accuracy and area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC).
FINDINGS: Analysis and model development included the use of 10 378 embryos, all 
with PGT-A results, from 1385 patients (maternal age range 21-48 years; mean age 
36·98 years [SD 4·62]). STORK-A predicted aneuploid versus euploid embryos with 
an accuracy of 69·3% (95% CI 66·9-71·5; AUC 0·761; positive predictive value 
[PPV] 76·1%; negative predictive value [NPV] 62·1%) when using images, maternal 
age, morphokinetics, and blastocyst score. A second classification task trained 
to predict complex aneuploidy versus euploidy and single aneuploidy produced an 
accuracy of 74·0% (95% CI 71·7-76·1; AUC 0·760; PPV 54·9%; NPV 87·6%) using an 
image, maternal age, morphokinetic parameters, and blastocyst grade. A third 
classification task trained to predict complex aneuploidy versus euploidy had an 
accuracy of 77·6% (95% CI 75·0-80·0; AUC 0·847; PPV 76·7%; NPV 78·0%). STORK-A 
reported accuracies of 63·4% (AUC 0·702) on the WCM-ES+ dataset and 65·7% (AUC 
0·715) on the IVI Valencia dataset, when using an image, maternal age, and 
morphokinetic parameters, similar to the STORK-A test dataset accuracy of 67·8% 
(AUC 0·737), showing generalisability.
INTERPRETATION: As a proof of concept, STORK-A shows an ability to predict 
embryo ploidy in a non-invasive manner and shows future potential as a 
standardised supplementation to traditional methods of embryo selection and 
prioritisation for implantation or recommendation for PGT-A.
FUNDING: US National Institutes of Health.

Copyright © 2023 Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an Open Access article under 
the CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 license. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2589-7500(22)00213-8
PMCID: PMC10193126
PMID: 36543475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests OE is scientific 
adviser for, and an equity holder in, Freenome, Owkin, Volastra Therapeutics, 
OneThree Biotech, Genetic Intelligence, Acuamark DX, Harmonic Discovery, and 
Champions Oncology, and has received funding from Eli Lilly, Johnson & 
Johnson–Janssen, Sanofi, AstraZeneca, and Volastra. NZ is a paid consultant for 
AIVF and Fairtility, and is on the advisory board of, and has equity in, Alife 
Health. IH gave an academic lecture for Fairtility on a related topic (precision 
medicine and artificial intelligence: what we have learned and how it can impact 
assisted reproductive technology). JB, JEM, ZR, OE, NZ, and IH are listed as 
inventors on a provisional patent filed by Cornell University (application 
number 63/308,710) about the technology described in this study. MM received 
speaker fees from Merck, Vitrolife, Ferring, Theramex, and Gideon Richter. PZ 
holds stocks in Pfizer and Bristol Myers Squibb. JB received funding support for 
attending meetings for the 2022 Association for Clinical and Translational 
Science Conference. All other authors declare no competing interests.