---
reference_id: PMID:38534779
title: Autosomal Recessive Rod-Cone Dystrophy with Mild Extra-Ocular Manifestations Due to a Splice-Affecting Variant in BBS9.
authors:
- Deitch I
- Itskov S
- Panneman D
- Abu Shtaya A
- Saban T
- Goldberg Y
- Ehrenberg M
- Cremers FPM
- Roosing S
- Ben-Yosef T
journal: Curr Issues Mol Biol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cimb46030163
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal Recessive Rod-Cone Dystrophy with Mild Extra-Ocular Manifestations Due to a Splice-Affecting Variant in BBS9.
**Authors:** Deitch I, Itskov S, Panneman D, Abu Shtaya A, Saban T, Goldberg Y, Ehrenberg M, Cremers FPM, Roosing S, Ben-Yosef T
**Journal:** Curr Issues Mol Biol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cimb46030163](https://doi.org/10.3390/cimb46030163)

## Content

1. Curr Issues Mol Biol. 2024 Mar 18;46(3):2566-2575. doi: 10.3390/cimb46030163.

Autosomal Recessive Rod-Cone Dystrophy with Mild Extra-Ocular Manifestations Due 
to a Splice-Affecting Variant in BBS9.

Deitch I(1)(2), Itskov S(3), Panneman D(4), Abu Shtaya A(5)(6), Saban T(1)(2), 
Goldberg Y(2)(5), Ehrenberg M(2)(7), Cremers FPM(4), Roosing S(4), Ben-Yosef 
T(3).

Author information:
(1)Rabin Medical Center, Department of Ophthalmology, Petach Tikva 4941492, 
Israel.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 6997801, Israel.
(3)Ruth & Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of 
Technology, Haifa 3109601, Israel.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, 6525 GA 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(5)Raphael Recanati Genetic Institute, Rabin Medical Center, Beilinson Hospital, 
Petach Tikva 4941492, Israel.
(6)Unit of Gastroenterology, Carmel Medical Center, Haifa 3436212, Israel.
(7)Schneider Children's Medical Center of Israel, Department of Ophthalmology, 
Petach Tikva 4920235, Israel.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS), one of the most common forms of syndromic inherited 
retinal diseases (IRDs), is characterized by the combination of retinal 
degeneration with additional extra-ocular manifestations, including obesity, 
intellectual disability, kidney disease, polydactyly and other skeletal 
abnormalities. We observed an Israeli patient with autosomal recessive 
apparently non-syndromic rod-cone dystrophy (RCD). Extra-ocular findings were 
limited to epilepsy and dental problems. Genetic analysis with a single molecule 
molecular inversion probes-based panel that targets the exons and splice sites 
of 113 genes associated with retinitis pigmentosa and Leber congenital amaurosis 
revealed a homozygous rare missense variant in the BBS9 gene 
(c.263C>T;p.(Ser88Leu)). This variant, which affects a highly conserved amino 
acid, is also located in the last base of Exon 3, and predicted to be 
splice-altering. An in vitro minigene splice assay demonstrated that this 
variant leads to the partial aberrant splicing of Exon 3. Therefore, we suggest 
that this variant is likely hypomorphic. This is in agreement with the 
relatively mild phenotype observed in the patient. Hence, the findings in our 
study expand the phenotypic spectrum associated with BBS9 variants and indicate 
that variants in this gene should be considered not only in BBS patients but 
also in individuals with non-syndromic IRD or IRD with very mild extra-ocular 
manifestations.

DOI: 10.3390/cimb46030163
PMCID: PMC10969354
PMID: 38534779

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.