---
reference_id: "PMID:30021818"
title: "Incipient and Subclinical Tuberculosis: a Clinical Review of Early Stages and Progression of Infection."
authors:
- Drain PK
- Bajema KL
- Dowdy D
- Dheda K
- Naidoo K
- Schumacher SG
- Ma S
- Meermeier E
- Lewinsohn DM
- Sherman DR
journal: Clin Microbiol Rev
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1128/CMR.00021-18
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incipient and Subclinical Tuberculosis: a Clinical Review of Early Stages and Progression of Infection.
**Authors:** Drain PK, Bajema KL, Dowdy D, Dheda K, Naidoo K, Schumacher SG, Ma S, Meermeier E, Lewinsohn DM, Sherman DR
**Journal:** Clin Microbiol Rev (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1128/CMR.00021-18](https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.00021-18)

## Content

1. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2018 Jul 18;31(4):e00021-18. doi: 10.1128/CMR.00021-18. 
Print 2018 Oct.

Incipient and Subclinical Tuberculosis: a Clinical Review of Early Stages and 
Progression of Infection.

Drain PK(1)(2)(3), Bajema KL(2), Dowdy D(4), Dheda K(5), Naidoo K(6)(7), 
Schumacher SG(8), Ma S(9)(10), Meermeier E(11), Lewinsohn DM(11), Sherman 
DR(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 
USA pkdrain@uw.edu.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 
USA.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(5)University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa.
(6)Centre for the AIDS Programme of Research in Africa, Durban, South Africa.
(7)South African Medical Research Council-CAPRISA HIV-TB Pathogenesis and 
Treatment Research Unit, Durban, South Africa.
(8)Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics, Geneva, Switzerland.
(9)Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 
USA.
(10)Center for Infectious Disease Research, Seattle, Washington, USA.
(11)Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, Oregon, USA.

Tuberculosis (TB) is the leading infectious cause of mortality worldwide, due in 
part to a limited understanding of its clinical pathogenic spectrum of infection 
and disease. Historically, scientific research, diagnostic testing, and drug 
treatment have focused on addressing one of two disease states: latent TB 
infection or active TB disease. Recent research has clearly demonstrated that 
human TB infection, from latent infection to active disease, exists within a 
continuous spectrum of metabolic bacterial activity and antagonistic 
immunological responses. This revised understanding leads us to propose two 
additional clinical states: incipient and subclinical TB. The recognition of 
incipient and subclinical TB, which helps divide latent and active TB along the 
clinical disease spectrum, provides opportunities for the development of 
diagnostic and therapeutic interventions to prevent progression to active TB 
disease and transmission of TB bacilli. In this report, we review the current 
understanding of the pathogenesis, immunology, clinical epidemiology, diagnosis, 
treatment, and prevention of both incipient and subclinical TB, two emerging 
clinical states of an ancient bacterium.

Copyright © 2018 American Society for Microbiology.

DOI: 10.1128/CMR.00021-18
PMCID: PMC6148193
PMID: 30021818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]