---
reference_id: "PMID:40149952"
title: The Pathogenesis of Very Long-Chain Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency.
authors:
- Sharma S
- McKenzie M
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/biom15030416
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Pathogenesis of Very Long-Chain Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Sharma S, McKenzie M
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom15030416](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom15030416)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2025 Mar 14;15(3):416. doi: 10.3390/biom15030416.

The Pathogenesis of Very Long-Chain Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency.

Sharma S(1), McKenzie M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Science, Engineering 
and Built Environment, Deakin University, 75 Pigdons Road, Waurn Ponds, VIC 
3216, Australia.
(2)Institute for Physical Activity and Nutrition, Deakin University, 75 Pigdons 
Road, Waurn Ponds, VIC 3216, Australia.

Living systems require energy to maintain their existence and perform tasks such 
as cell division. This energy is stored in several molecular forms in nature, 
specifically lipids, carbohydrates, and amino acids. At a cellular level, energy 
is extracted from these complex molecules and transferred to adenosine 
triphosphate (ATP) in the cytoplasm and mitochondria. Within the mitochondria, 
fatty acid β-oxidation (FAO) and oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) are crucial 
metabolic processes involved in generating ATP, with defects in these pathways 
causing mitochondrial disease. Very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency 
(VLCADD) is a fatty acid β-oxidation disorder (FAOD) affecting 1 to 2 
individuals per 100,000. Similar to other mitochondrial disorders, there is no 
cure for VLCADD, with symptomatic treatment comprising dietary management and 
supplementation with medium-chain fatty acids to bypass the enzyme deficiency. 
While this addresses the primary defect in VLCADD, there is growing evidence 
that other aspects of mitochondrial function are also affected in VLCADD, 
including secondary defects in OXPHOS function. Here, we review our current 
understanding of VLCADD with a focus on the associated biochemical and molecular 
defects that can disrupt multiple aspects of mitochondrial function. We describe 
the interactions between FAO proteins and the OXPHOS complexes and how these 
interactions are critical for maintaining the activity of both metabolic 
pathways. In particular, we describe what is now known about the protein-protein 
interactions between VLCAD and the OXPHOS supercomplex and how their disruption 
contributes to overall VLCADD pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.3390/biom15030416
PMCID: PMC11940467
PMID: 40149952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.