---
reference_id: "PMID:41057332"
title: Human pancreatic α-cell heterogeneity and trajectory inference analyses reveal SMOC1 as a β-cell dedifferentiation gene.
authors:
- Kang RB
- Varela M
- Oh E
- Lee J
- Zhang T
- Karakose E
- Stewart AF
- Scott DK
- Thurmond DC
- Garcia-Ocana A
- Lu G
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-62670-5
keywords:
- Humans
- "Insulin-Secreting Cells/metabolism, cytology"
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Glucagon-Secreting Cells/metabolism, cytology"
- Cell Dedifferentiation/genetics
- Single-Cell Analysis
- Transcriptome
- Insulin/metabolism
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human pancreatic α-cell heterogeneity and trajectory inference analyses reveal SMOC1 as a β-cell dedifferentiation gene.
**Authors:** Kang RB, Varela M, Oh E, Lee J, Zhang T, Karakose E, Stewart AF, Scott DK, Thurmond DC, Garcia-Ocana A, Lu G
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-025-62670-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-62670-5)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2025 Oct 7;16(1):8434. doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-62670-5.

Human pancreatic α-cell heterogeneity and trajectory inference analyses reveal
SMOC1 as a β-cell dedifferentiation gene.

Kang RB(1), Varela M(1), Oh E(1), Lee J(1), Zhang T(2), Karakose E(3), Stewart
AF(3), Scott DK(3), Thurmond DC(1), Garcia-Ocana A(#)(4), Lu G(#)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology, Arthur Riggs Diabetes and
Metabolism Research Institute, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope,
Duarte, CA, 91010, USA.
(2)Genomics Resources Core Facility, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY,
10065, USA.
(3)Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism Institute, and Division of Endocrinology,
Diabetes and Bone Diseases, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
NY, 10029, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology, Arthur Riggs Diabetes and
Metabolism Research Institute, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope,
Duarte, CA, 91010, USA. agarciaocana@coh.org.
(5)Department of Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology, Arthur Riggs Diabetes and
Metabolism Research Institute, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope,
Duarte, CA, 91010, USA. gelu@coh.org.
(#)Contributed equally

β-cell dysfunction and dedifferentiation towards an α-cell-like phenotype are
hallmarks of type 2 diabetes. However, the cell subtypes involved in β-to-α-cell
transition are unknown. Using single-cell and single-nucleus RNA-seq, RNA
velocity, PAGA/cell trajectory inference, and gene commonality, we interrogated
α-β-cell fate switching in human islets. We found five α-cell subclusters with
distinct transcriptomes. PAGA analysis showed bifurcating cell trajectories in
non-diabetic while unidirectional cell trajectories from β-to-α-cells in type 2
diabetes islets suggesting dedifferentiation towards α-cells. Ten genes
comprised the common signature genes in trajectories towards α-cells. Among
these, the α-cell gene SMOC1 was expressed in β-cells in type 2 diabetes.
Enhanced SMOC1 expression in β-cells decreased insulin expression and secretion
and increased β-cell dedifferentiation markers. Collectively, these studies
reveal differences in α-β-cell trajectories in non-diabetes and type 2 diabetes
human islets, identify signature genes for β-to-α-cell trajectories, and
discover SMOC1 as an inducer of β-cell dysfunction and dedifferentiation.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-025-62670-5
PMCID: PMC12504421
PMID: 41057332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: G.L., A.F.S. and A.G.-O.
are inventors on patents filed by The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai.
A.G.-O. consults for Sun Pharmaceuticals. A.F.S. and A.G.-O. are members of the
Scientific Advisory Board of Paulex Bio. These authors declare no competing
financial and/or non-financial interests in relation to the work described in
the submitted manuscript. All other authors declare no competing interests.
