---
reference_id: "PMID:35188187"
title: "RAS and beyond: the many faces of the neurofibromatosis type 1 protein."
authors:
- Anastasaki C
- Orozco P
- Gutmann DH
journal: Dis Model Mech
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1242/dmm.049362
keywords:
- "Genes, Neurofibromatosis 1"
- Humans
- Neurofibromatosis 1/genetics
- Neurofibromin 1/genetics
- Proteins
- Signal Transduction/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# RAS and beyond: the many faces of the neurofibromatosis type 1 protein.
**Authors:** Anastasaki C, Orozco P, Gutmann DH
**Journal:** Dis Model Mech (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dmm.049362](https://doi.org/10.1242/dmm.049362)

## Content

1. Dis Model Mech. 2022 Feb 1;15(2):dmm049362. doi: 10.1242/dmm.049362. Epub 2022
 Feb 21.

RAS and beyond: the many faces of the neurofibromatosis type 1 protein.

Anastasaki C(1), Orozco P(1), Gutmann DH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
MO 63110, USA.

Neurofibromatosis type 1 is a rare neurogenetic syndrome, characterized by 
pigmentary abnormalities, learning and social deficits, and a predisposition for 
benign and malignant tumor formation caused by germline mutations in the NF1 
gene. With the cloning of the NF1 gene and the recognition that the encoded 
protein, neurofibromin, largely functions as a negative regulator of RAS 
activity, attention has mainly focused on RAS and canonical RAS effector pathway 
signaling relevant to disease pathogenesis and treatment. However, as 
neurofibromin is a large cytoplasmic protein the RAS regulatory domain of which 
occupies only 10% of its entire coding sequence, both canonical and 
non-canonical RAS pathway modulation, as well as the existence of potential 
non-RAS functions, are becoming apparent. In this Special article, we discuss 
our current understanding of neurofibromin function.

© 2022. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.049362
PMCID: PMC8891636
PMID: 35188187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.