---
reference_id: "PMID:38125244"
title: "Familial Hypercholesterolemia: A Literature Review of the Pathophysiology and Current and Novel Treatments."
authors:
- Suryawanshi YN
- Warbhe RA
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.49121
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial Hypercholesterolemia: A Literature Review of the Pathophysiology and Current and Novel Treatments.
**Authors:** Suryawanshi YN, Warbhe RA
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.49121](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.49121)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Nov 20;15(11):e49121. doi: 10.7759/cureus.49121. eCollection 2023
 Nov.

Familial Hypercholesterolemia: A Literature Review of the Pathophysiology and 
Current and Novel Treatments.

Suryawanshi YN(1), Warbhe RA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Datta Meghe 
Institute of Higher Education and Research, Wardha, IND.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Datta Meghe 
Institute of Higher Education and Research, Wardha, IND.

Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a genetically transmitted disorder. It 
shows an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. It is a metabolic disorder. 
Mutation in chromosome 19 leads to this disorder. Chromosome 19 codes data for 
low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor (LDLR). LDLR either reduces increased LDL 
levels from the circulation or maintains a normal level of LDL. It precipitates 
the risk of cardiovascular disease at an early age. Characteristic features of 
FH are elevated levels of LDL in the blood because of sudden changes in LDLR, 
which causes a decrease in the clearance of LDL from the blood. Plaque gets 
deposited in the lumen of the arteries, called atherosclerosis, which occurs at 
an early young age. If both genes are affected then it is homozygous FH (HoFH); 
such a case is very rare. When a single gene is affected then that condition is 
known as heterozygous FH (HeFH). HoFH comes up with more severe cardiac disease 
than HeFH at an early age. The major cause of FH is a mutation in the LDLR gene 
while other causes include mutation in various genes like apolipoprotein B (apo 
B), proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9), LDLR adaptor protein 
1 (LDLRAP 1). In order to prevent cardiovascular crises due to FH, it must be 
diagnosed early and treated effectively. With increasing research and advances 
in medical sciences, many kinds of current and novel therapies are emerging that 
aim to reduce the level of LDL in blood.

Copyright © 2023, Suryawanshi et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.49121
PMCID: PMC10732334
PMID: 38125244

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.