---
reference_id: "PMID:36483219"
title: "Mortality risk factors in febrile ulceronecrotic Mucha- Habermann disease: A systematic review of therapeutic outcomes and complications."
authors:
- Tasouli-Drakou V
- Nguyen M
- Guinn H
- Hassan O
- Butala S
- Phan S
journal: Dermatol Reports
year: '2022'
doi: 10.4081/dr.2022.9492
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mortality risk factors in febrile ulceronecrotic Mucha- Habermann disease: A systematic review of therapeutic outcomes and complications.
**Authors:** Tasouli-Drakou V, Nguyen M, Guinn H, Hassan O, Butala S, Phan S
**Journal:** Dermatol Reports (2022)
**DOI:** [10.4081/dr.2022.9492](https://doi.org/10.4081/dr.2022.9492)

## Content

1. Dermatol Reports. 2022 Nov 21;14(4):9492. doi: 10.4081/dr.2022.9492.
eCollection  2022 Nov 21.

Mortality risk factors in febrile ulceronecrotic Mucha- Habermann disease: A
systematic review of therapeutic outcomes and complications.

Tasouli-Drakou V(1), Nguyen M(1), Guinn H(2), Hassan O(1), Butala S(3), Phan
S(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Education, College of Osteopathic Medicine, Touro
University Nevada, Henderson, NV.
(2)Department of Physician Assistant Studies, College of Health and Human
Services, Touro University Nevada, Henderson, NV.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern
University, Chicago, IL, USA.

Febrile Ulceronecrotic Mucha- Habermann Disease (FUMHD) is a variant of
Pityriasis Lichenoides Et Varioliformis Acuta (PLEVA). Although rare, the
condition may progress to involve serious complications and even lead to fatal
outcomes if diagnosis and appropriate treatment is delayed. A PubMed search
following Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses
(PRIMSA) guidelines was performed to find cases of FUMHD from the earliest
records to October 2021. Treatments, complications, and patient outcomes were
extracted from the literature and summarized, while a review of quality was also
performed. A total of 63 publications with 68 patients were found. Successful
treatment modalities for FUMHD included antibiotics, antivirals, systemic
steroids, Methotrexate (MTX), cyclophosphamide, Cyclosporine (CYA), Intravenous
Immunoglobulins (IVIG), pentoxifylline, and ultraviolet B phototherapy. Out of
68 patients, 55 patients had their condition fully resolved and 13 cases were
fatal. Increased age, systemic involvement, and monoclonal T-cell receptor
rearrangement were associated with worst prognosis, but mucosal involvement did
not affect mortality risk. Overall, the publications had low risk of bias, but
most lacked adequate follow-up periods. FUMHD is a diagnostic and therapeutic
challenge due to the lack of clearly defined diagnostic criteria and optimum
treatment. Further studies with larger patient populations and longer follow-up
periods may lead to refinement of diagnostic criteria, establish an optimum
treatment regimen, and better estimate the likelihood of recurrence.

©Copyright: the Author(s).

DOI: 10.4081/dr.2022.9492
PMCID: PMC9724728
PMID: 36483219

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare that
they have no conflict of interest.
