---
reference_id: "PMID:23244084"
title: Hematuria screening test for urinary bladder mucosal infiltration in cervical cancer.
authors:
- Chuttiangtum A
- Udomthavornsuk B
- Chumworathayi B
journal: Asian Pac J Cancer Prev
year: '2012'
doi: 10.7314/apjcp.2012.13.10.4931
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/urine"
- Biopsy
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/etiology, secondary"
- Cystoscopy
- "Diagnostic Techniques, Urological"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Hematuria/diagnosis, etiology"
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Staging
- Prognosis
- Prospective Studies
- Urinalysis
- Urinary Bladder/pathology
- "Urinary Bladder Neoplasms/diagnosis, etiology"
- "Uterine Cervical Neoplasms/complications, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hematuria screening test for urinary bladder mucosal infiltration in cervical cancer.
**Authors:** Chuttiangtum A, Udomthavornsuk B, Chumworathayi B
**Journal:** Asian Pac J Cancer Prev (2012)
**DOI:** [10.7314/apjcp.2012.13.10.4931](https://doi.org/10.7314/apjcp.2012.13.10.4931)

## Content

1. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2012;13(10):4931-3. doi:
10.7314/apjcp.2012.13.10.4931.

Hematuria screening test for urinary bladder mucosal infiltration in cervical 
cancer.

Chuttiangtum A(1), Udomthavornsuk B, Chumworathayi B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, Khon Kaen 
University. Ayuth401@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To determine the diagnostic performance of hematuria as a screening 
test for urinary bladder infiltration in cervical cancer patients with a 
prospective study design.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Newly diagnosed cervical cancer patients at Srinagarind 
hospital from 14 June 2011 to 30 April 2012 were enrolled in this study. We 
collected midstream urine samples for urinalysis from every patient before 
routine cystoscopic exam for clinical staging. The presence of 3 or more red 
blood cells (RBCs) per high power field was defined as positive for hematuria. A 
two-by-two table was used to determine the diagnostic performance of hematuria 
to detect urinary bladder mucosal infiltration using cystoscopy and biopsy as 
the gold standard.
RESULT: A total of 130 were patients included, 54 of which (41.5%) had 
hematuria. Of these, four patients (3.08%) had pathological report from 
cystoscopic biopsy confirmed metastatic squamous cell carcinoma. The 
sensitivity, specificity, PPV, NPV, and accuracy of hematuria as a screening 
test to detect urinary bladder mucosal infiltration of cervical cancer were 
100%, 60.3%, 7.4%, 100%, and 61.5%, respectively. There was no single case of 
urinary bladder mucosal infiltration in patients initially staged less than 
stage III.
CONCLUSIONS: Hematuria can be used as a screening test to detect urinary bladder 
mucosal infiltration of cervical cancer. This can reduce the number of cervical 
cancer patients who really need to undergo cystoscopy as a staging procedure to 
less than half and to less than 20% if stage III or more were included without 
missing a single case of urinary bladder mucosal infiltration.

DOI: 10.7314/apjcp.2012.13.10.4931
PMID: 23244084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]