---
reference_id: "PMID:17229609"
title: "Generalized pustular psoriasis (Zumbusch): a French epidemiological survey."
authors:
- Augey F
- Renaudier P
- Nicolas JF
journal: Eur J Dermatol
year: '2006'
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Analysis of Variance
- Female
- France/epidemiology
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Multivariate Analysis
- "Psoriasis/classification, epidemiology"
- Registries
- Surveys and Questionnaires
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Generalized pustular psoriasis (Zumbusch): a French epidemiological survey.
**Authors:** Augey F, Renaudier P, Nicolas JF
**Journal:** Eur J Dermatol (2006)

## Content

1. Eur J Dermatol. 2006 Nov-Dec;16(6):669-73.

Generalized pustular psoriasis (Zumbusch): a French epidemiological survey.

Augey F(1), Renaudier P, Nicolas JF.

Author information:
(1)Université Claude-Bernard Lyon I, Department of Immunoallergology, Pavillon 
Dufourt, Centre Hospitalier Lyon Sud, 69495 Pierre-Benite Cedex. France. 
frederic.augey@chu-lyon.fr

A retrospective epidemiological survey of generalized pustular psoriasis (GPP) 
was carried out in France in 2005. 121 dermatological wards received a 
questionnaire concerning the patients treated in 2004. It related to demographic 
data, morbidity, mortality, failures and the therapeutic practices of each ward. 
CNAMTS, the main French health insurance, was also questioned about its registry 
concerning GPP.112 wards (92.5%) answered the questionnaire, totalling 99 cases 
(sex ratio male/female: 0.77, mean age 52.5 years +/- 18), which were handled by 
46 wards. Incidence and prevalence were estimated in 2004 at a minimum of 0.64 
and 1.76/million respectively. Incidence deduced from the CNAMTS data in 1998 
and 2001 was similar. The treatment habits were the same in the 46 wards, which 
used acitretin as first line treatment (89%), followed by methotrexate (8%). 
High potency dermatocorticosteroids (DC) were most often used (87%). 
Complications and death were noted in 17% and 2% of the cases respectively, 
recalcitrant GPP in 42%. Immunobiologics were required in 13% of patients. 
Univariate analysis showed that treatment failure was related to: i) management 
in a university ward (OR: 2.9, p = 0.03) probably reflecting the management of 
the more severe cases ii) prescription of high or very high potency DC as first 
line local therapy (OR: 7.6, p = 0.05) iii) therapies other than retinoids as 
first line systemic therapy (OR: 5.5, p = 0.04). The systemic treatment is well 
codified but future studies will have to confirm the usefulness of DC in the 
management of GPP.

PMID: 17229609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]