---
reference_id: "PMID:22009788"
title: "Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly and Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome: clinical, molecular-cytogenetic, and DNA array analyses of three patients with chromosomal defects at 6p25."
authors:
- Tonoki H
- Harada N
- Shimokawa O
- Yosozumi A
- Monzaki K
- Satoh K
- Kosaki R
- Sato A
- Matsumoto N
- Iizuka S
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33858
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly and Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome: clinical, molecular-cytogenetic, and DNA array analyses of three patients with chromosomal defects at 6p25.
**Authors:** Tonoki H, Harada N, Shimokawa O, Yosozumi A, Monzaki K, Satoh K, Kosaki R, Sato A, Matsumoto N, Iizuka S
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.33858](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.33858)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Dec;155A(12):2925-32. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33858. Epub 
2011 Oct 18.

Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly and Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome: clinical, 
molecular-cytogenetic, and DNA array analyses of three patients with chromosomal 
defects at 6p25.

Tonoki H(1), Harada N, Shimokawa O, Yosozumi A, Monzaki K, Satoh K, Kosaki R, 
Sato A, Matsumoto N, Iizuka S.

Author information:
(1)Section of Clinical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Tenshi Hospital, 
Sapporo, Japan. hidefumi.tonoki@tenshi.or.jp

Clinical phenotypes of and genetic aberrations in three unrelated Japanese 
patients with Axenfeld-Rieger anomalies and various accompanying malformations 
of systemic organs are described. GTG-banded chromosome analysis showed terminal 
deletions of the short arm of chromosome 6 in two patients and an inversion, 
inv(6)(p25q14), in the other. FISH and DNA array analyses revealed that the two 
patients with deletions had 5.0-5.7 Mb and 6.6 Mb 6p terminal deletions, 
respectively, and FOXC1 was apparently deleted in both patients. In the other 
patient, the inversion breakpoint at 6p25 was estimated to be in or very close 
to the FOXC1 locus, but DNA array analysis did not reveal a deletion around the 
breakpoint. Common extraocular findings in these patients included broad 
forehead, brachycephaly, hypertelorism, downslanting palpebral fissures, small 
anteverted nose, and cardiac defects. Two patients also exhibited autistic 
characteristics. The two patients with deletions exhibited poor muscle tone and 
developmental delays. Most of these extraocular findings were similar to those 
found in previous patients with FOXC1 mutations and distinct from those found in 
patients with PITX2 mutations, who frequently develop umbilical and dental 
anomalies. We suggest that the psychomotor retardation is a clinical 
manifestation associated with a deletion of multiple contiguous genes in the 6p 
terminus and that this phenomenon is similar to the 6p25 deletion syndrome. 
Understanding the relationship between genetic lesions and the spectrum of 
extraocular findings in patients with Axenfeld-Rieger anomalies may lead to 
better clinical management.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33858
PMID: 22009788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]