---
reference_id: "PMID:39536114"
title: INF2 mutations cause kidney disease through a gain-of-function mechanism.
authors:
- Subramanian B
- Williams S
- Karp S
- Hennino MF
- Jacas S
- Lee M
- Riella CV
- Alper SL
- Higgs HN
- Pollak MR
journal: Sci Adv
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1126/sciadv.adr1017
keywords:
- Animals
- "Formins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Mice
- Gain of Function Mutation
- "Podocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- "Glomerulosclerosis, Focal Segmental/genetics, pathology, metabolism"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Kidney Diseases/genetics, pathology, metabolism"
- Mutation
- "Mitochondria/metabolism, genetics"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Actin Cytoskeleton/metabolism
- "Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease/genetics, pathology, metabolism"
- "Organoids/metabolism, pathology"
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# INF2 mutations cause kidney disease through a gain-of-function mechanism.
**Authors:** Subramanian B, Williams S, Karp S, Hennino MF, Jacas S, Lee M, Riella CV, Alper SL, Higgs HN, Pollak MR
**Journal:** Sci Adv (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1126/sciadv.adr1017](https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.adr1017)

## Content

1. Sci Adv. 2024 Nov 15;10(46):eadr1017. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.adr1017. Epub 2024
Nov  13.

INF2 mutations cause kidney disease through a gain-of-function mechanism.

Subramanian B(1)(2), Williams S(1), Karp S(1), Hennino MF(1), Jacas S(1), Lee 
M(3), Riella CV(1), Alper SL(1)(4), Higgs HN(3), Pollak MR(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical 
Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Kidney Bioengineering Resource Center, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Geisel School of Medicine, Dartmouth College, 
Hanover, NH, USA.
(4)Broad Institute of Harvard and Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA, USA.

Heterozygosity for inverted formin-2 (INF2) mutations causes focal segmental 
glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) with or without Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease. A key 
question is whether the disease is caused by gain-of-function effects on INF2 or 
loss of function (haploinsufficiency). Despite established roles in multiple 
cellular processes, neither INF2 knockout mice nor mice with a 
disease-associated point mutation display an evident kidney or neurologic 
phenotype. Here, we compared responses to puromycin aminonucleoside 
(PAN)-induced kidney injury between INF2 R218Q and INF2 knockout mice. R218Q 
INF2 mice are susceptible to glomerular disease, in contrast to INF2 knockout 
mice. Colocalization, coimmunoprecipitation analyses, and cellular actin 
measurements showed that INF2 R218Q confers a gain-of-function effect on the 
actin cytoskeleton. RNA expression analysis showed that adhesion and 
mitochondria-related pathways were enriched in the PAN-treated R218Q mice. Both 
podocytes from INF2 R218Q mice and human kidney organoids with an INF2 mutation 
(S186P) recapitulate adhesion and mitochondrial phenotypes. Thus, 
gain-of-function mechanisms drive INF2-related FSGS and explain this disease's 
autosomal dominant inheritance.

DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.adr1017
PMCID: PMC11559609
PMID: 39536114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]