---
reference_id: "PMID:2572591"
title: Glycine to serine substitution in the triple helical domain of pro-alpha 1 (II) collagen results in a lethal perinatal form of short-limbed dwarfism.
authors:
- Vissing H
- "D'Alessio M"
- Lee B
- Ramirez F
- Godfrey M
- Hollister DW
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1989'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glycine to serine substitution in the triple helical domain of pro-alpha 1 (II) collagen results in a lethal perinatal form of short-limbed dwarfism.
**Authors:** Vissing H, D'Alessio M, Lee B, Ramirez F, Godfrey M, Hollister DW
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1989)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 1989 Nov 5;264(31):18265-7.

Glycine to serine substitution in the triple helical domain of pro-alpha 1 (II) 
collagen results in a lethal perinatal form of short-limbed dwarfism.

Vissing H(1), D'Alessio M, Lee B, Ramirez F, Godfrey M, Hollister DW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, State University of New York Health Science 
Center, Brooklyn 11203.

Previous biochemical studies on cartilage tissue from a proband with Type II 
achondrogenesis-hypochondrogenesis (Godfrey, M., and Hollister, D. W. (1988) Am. 
J. Hum. Genet. 43, 904-913) indicated heterozygosity for a structural 
abnormality in the triple helical domain of pro-alpha 1 (II) collagen. Here we 
demonstrate that the mutation in the type II procollagen gene is a single base 
change that converts the codon for glycine (GGC) at amino acid 943 of the alpha 
1 (II) chain to a codon for serine (AGC). The substitution disrupts the 
invariant Gly-X-Y structural motif necessary for perfect triple helix formation 
and leads to extensive overmodification, intracellular retention, and reduced 
secretion of type II collagen. These findings confirm the proposal that new 
dominant mutations in the type II procollagen gene may account for some cases of 
Type II achondrogenesis-hypochondrogenesis. Since recent studies (Lee, B., 
Vissing, H., Ramirez, F., Rogers, D., and Rimoin, D. (1989) Science 244, 
978-980) have identified a dominantly inherited type II procollagen gene 
deletion in a non-lethal form of skeletal dysplasia, namely spondyloepiphyseal 
dysplasia, the data more generally demonstrate that different type II 
procollagen gene mutations eventuate in a wide and diverse spectrum of clinical 
phenotypes.

PMID: 2572591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]