---
reference_id: "PMID:25066220"
title: "Hirschsprung's disease prevalence in Europe: a register based study."
authors:
- Best KE
- Addor MC
- Arriola L
- Balku E
- Barisic I
- Bianchi F
- Calzolari E
- Curran R
- Doray B
- Draper E
- Garne E
- Gatt M
- Haeusler M
- Bergman J
- Khoshnood B
- Klungsoyr K
- Martos C
- Materna-Kiryluk A
- Matias Dias C
- McDonnell B
- Mullaney C
- Nelen V
- O'Mahony M
- Queisser-Luft A
- Randrianaivo H
- Rissmann A
- Rounding C
- Sipek A
- Thompson R
- Tucker D
- Wellesley D
- Zymak-Zakutnia N
- Rankin J
journal: Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/bdra.23269
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hirschsprung's disease prevalence in Europe: a register based study.
**Authors:** Best KE, Addor MC, Arriola L, Balku E, Barisic I, Bianchi F, Calzolari E, Curran R, Doray B, Draper E, Garne E, Gatt M, Haeusler M, Bergman J, Khoshnood B, Klungsoyr K, Martos C, Materna-Kiryluk A, Matias Dias C, McDonnell B, Mullaney C, Nelen V, O'Mahony M, Queisser-Luft A, Randrianaivo H, Rissmann A, Rounding C, Sipek A, Thompson R, Tucker D, Wellesley D, Zymak-Zakutnia N, Rankin J
**Journal:** Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/bdra.23269](https://doi.org/10.1002/bdra.23269)

## Content

1. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2014 Sep;100(9):695-702. doi: 
10.1002/bdra.23269. Epub 2014 Jul 26.

Hirschsprung's disease prevalence in Europe: a register based study.

Best KE(1), Addor MC, Arriola L, Balku E, Barisic I, Bianchi F, Calzolari E, 
Curran R, Doray B, Draper E, Garne E, Gatt M, Haeusler M, Bergman J, Khoshnood 
B, Klungsoyr K, Martos C, Materna-Kiryluk A, Matias Dias C, McDonnell B, 
Mullaney C, Nelen V, O'Mahony M, Queisser-Luft A, Randrianaivo H, Rissmann A, 
Rounding C, Sipek A, Thompson R, Tucker D, Wellesley D, Zymak-Zakutnia N, Rankin 
J.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Health & Society, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, 
England, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Hirschsprung's disease is a congenital gut motility disorder, 
characterised by the absence of the enteric ganglion cells along the distal gut. 
The aim of this study was to describe the epidemiology of Hirschsprung's 
disease, including additional congenital anomalies, total prevalence, trends, 
and association with maternal age.
METHODS: Cases of Hirschsprung's disease delivered during 1980 to 2009 notified 
to 31 European Surveillance of Congenital Anomaly registers formed the 
population-based case-series. Prevalence rates and 95% confidence intervals were 
calculated as the number of cases per 10,000 births. Multilevel Poisson 
regression was performed to investigate trends in prevalence, geographical 
variation and the association with maternal age.
RESULTS: There were 1,322 cases of Hirschsprung's disease among 12,146,210 
births. The total prevalence was 1.09 (95% confidence interval, 1.03-1.15) per 
10,000 births and there was a small but significant increase in prevalence over 
time (relative risk = 1.01; 95% credible interval, 1.00-1.02; p = 0.004). There 
was evidence of geographical heterogeneity in prevalence (p < 0.001). Excluding 
146 (11.0%) cases with chromosomal anomalies or genetic syndromes, there were 
1,176 cases (prevalence = 0.97; 95% confidence interval, 0.91-1.03 per 10,000 
births), of which 137 (11.6%) had major structural anomalies. There was no 
evidence of a significant increased risk of Hirschsprung's disease in cases born 
to women aged ≥35 years compared with those aged 25 to 29 (relative risk = 1.09; 
95% credible interval, 0.91-1.31; p = 0.355).
CONCLUSION: This large population-based study found evidence of a small 
increasing trend in Hirschsprung's disease and differences in prevalence by 
geographic location. There was also no evidence of an association with maternal 
age.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bdra.23269
PMID: 25066220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]