---
reference_id: "PMID:28321993"
title: Metatropic dysplasia-a skeletal dysplasia with challenging airway and other anesthetic concerns.
authors:
- Theroux MC
- Lopez M
- Olszewsky PJ
- DiCindio S
- Arai L
- Ditro C
- Bober MB
- Olla OO
- Uejima T
- West DW
- Mackenzie WG
journal: Paediatr Anaesth
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/pan.13101
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Airway Management/instrumentation, methods"
- Anesthesia/methods
- "Anesthesia, Spinal"
- Cervical Vertebrae/surgery
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Dwarfism/complications
- Female
- Fiber Optic Technology
- Humans
- Infant
- "Intubation, Intratracheal/instrumentation, methods"
- Male
- Osteochondrodysplasias/complications
- Retrospective Studies
- Spinal Fusion/methods
- Spinal Stenosis/complications
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Metatropic dysplasia-a skeletal dysplasia with challenging airway and other anesthetic concerns.
**Authors:** Theroux MC, Lopez M, Olszewsky PJ, DiCindio S, Arai L, Ditro C, Bober MB, Olla OO, Uejima T, West DW, Mackenzie WG
**Journal:** Paediatr Anaesth (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pan.13101](https://doi.org/10.1111/pan.13101)

## Content

1. Paediatr Anaesth. 2017 Jun;27(6):596-603. doi: 10.1111/pan.13101. Epub 2017
Mar  21.

Metatropic dysplasia-a skeletal dysplasia with challenging airway and other 
anesthetic concerns.

Theroux MC(1)(2)(3), Lopez M(4), Olszewsky PJ(5), DiCindio S(1)(2), Arai 
L(1)(2), Ditro C(6), Bober MB(7), Olla OO(1), Uejima T(1)(2)(3), West DW(3)(8), 
Mackenzie WG(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Perioperative Medicine, Nemours/Alfred I. 
duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, DE, USA.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Jefferson Medical College, Thomas Jefferson 
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Jefferson Medical College, Thomas Jefferson 
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Nemours Biomedical Research, Wilmington, DE, USA.
(5)Department of Nursing, Nemours/Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children, 
Wilmington, DE, USA.
(6)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Nemours/Alfred I. duPont Hospital for 
Children, Wilmington, DE, USA.
(7)Department of Genetics, Nemours/Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children, 
Wilmington, DE, USA.
(8)Nemours Health Informatics, Wilmington, DE, USA.

BACKGROUND: Metatropic dysplasia is a rare form of skeletal dysplasia requiring 
multiple anesthetics for surgical and imaging procedures, most of which are 
orthopedic procedures. We provide centralized care to patients with skeletal 
dysplasia at our tertiary care pediatric hospital, and we were able to collect 
the largest number of metatropic dysplasia patients reported to date.
AIM: The aim of this retrospective study was to describe and characterize the 
anesthetic difficulties in this high-risk population.
METHODS: Medical charts of all patients with metatropic dysplasia were reviewed 
to collect data, including anesthetics performed, difficulties, and 
complications related to the anesthetic care, co-morbid conditions, and related 
events.
RESULTS: Twenty-three patients with metatropic dysplasia underwent 188 
anesthetics with 61% of the anesthetics having been administered for orthopedic 
procedures. Fourteen of 23 (60.8%) progressively became difficult to intubate 
over the course of their care, with 12 out of 14 having undergone cervical spine 
fusion. These 14 patients had a total of 133 procedures. Sixty procedures 
(45.1%) had an airway described as difficult. Glidescope was the difficult 
airway tool most commonly used (68%) with flexible fiberoptic scope used 12% and 
Miller or Macintosh blade used 18% of the time. In addition to the airway 
difficulties, spinal canal narrowing or stenosis was widely prevalent, and no 
neuraxial anesthetic was performed in any of our patients.
CONCLUSION: Difficult airway is the most common co-morbid condition present in 
patients with metatropic dysplasia, especially if their cervical spine has been 
fused. Familiarity with the difficulties involving the airway and its management 
is critical in safe and successful management of anesthesia in this high-risk 
population.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pan.13101
PMID: 28321993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]