---
reference_id: "PMID:39492709"
title: "Treatment of cerebral venous thrombosis: a review."
authors:
- Patel H
- Lunn I
- Hameed S
- Khan M
- Siddiqui FM
- Borhani A
- Majid A
- Bell SM
- Wasay M
journal: Curr Med Res Opin
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/03007995.2024.2423740
keywords:
- Humans
- "Intracranial Thrombosis/therapy, drug therapy, surgery"
- "Venous Thrombosis/therapy, drug therapy"
- Anticoagulants/therapeutic use
- "COVID-19/complications, therapy"
- Platelet Aggregation Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Thrombectomy/methods
- Thrombolytic Therapy/methods
- SARS-CoV-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of cerebral venous thrombosis: a review.
**Authors:** Patel H, Lunn I, Hameed S, Khan M, Siddiqui FM, Borhani A, Majid A, Bell SM, Wasay M
**Journal:** Curr Med Res Opin (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/03007995.2024.2423740](https://doi.org/10.1080/03007995.2024.2423740)

## Content

1. Curr Med Res Opin. 2024 Dec;40(12):2223-2236. doi: 
10.1080/03007995.2024.2423740. Epub 2024 Nov 8.

Treatment of cerebral venous thrombosis: a review.

Patel H(1), Lunn I(2), Hameed S(3), Khan M(4), Siddiqui FM(5), Borhani A(6), 
Majid A(2), Bell SM(2), Wasay M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Broomhall, UK.
(2)The University of Sheffield Faculty of Medicine Dentistry and Health, 
Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience, Broomhall, UK.
(3)The Aga Khan University, Neurology, Department of Medicine, Aga Khan 
University, Karachi, Pakistan.
(4)Department of Neurology, Rashid Hospital, Dubai, UAE.
(5)University of Michigan Health-West, Neurosciences, Wyoming, Michigan, USA.
(6)Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Neurology, 203 Unit, Shiraz, Iran.

Cerebral venous thrombosis (CVT) is an uncommon cause of stroke. COVID-19 
infection and vaccination have been associated with CVT. Fibrinolysis and 
mechanical thrombectomy may play an emerging role in management. We conducted a 
literature review summarizing current evidence on use of antiplatelets, 
anticoagulants, thrombolysis, and mechanical thrombectomy for the management of 
CVT and COVID-19 related CVT. This was achieved through a review of MEDLINE, 
PubMed, and Cochrane Reviews databases, performed using the search terms CVT AND 
"antiplatelets' aspirin", "ticagrelor", "clopidogrel", "eptifibatide", 
"Low-molecular-weight-heparin (LMWH)", "Unfractionated heparin (UH)", 
"warfarin", "DOACs", "rivaroxaban", "apixaban", "dabigatran", "fibrinolysis", 
"intra-sinus thrombolysis", "mechanical thrombectomy", and "craniectomy". We 
found that LMWH and UH are safe and effective for the management of acute CVT 
and should be considered first line. Warfarin may be used in the sub-acute phase 
for secondary prevention but has weak evidence. DOACs are potentially a safe 
warfarin alternative, but only warfarin is currently recommended in 
international guidelines. Antiplatelets show little evidence for the prevention 
or management of CVT, but studies are currently limited. COVID-19 related CVT is 
treated similarly to non-COVID-19 CVT; however, vaccine-related CVT is a newly 
recognised disease with a different pathophysiology and is treated with a 
combination of non-heparin anticoagulants, immunotherapy, and steroids. 
Decompressive craniectomy may be used to reduce intracranial pressure in 
life-threatening cases. There is a small body of evidence for endovascular 
therapy in complex cases but should be reserved for complex cases in specialist 
centres. This paper is of relevance to clinical practice since the safe and 
effective management of CVT is important to reduce the risk of disability.

DOI: 10.1080/03007995.2024.2423740
PMID: 39492709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]