---
reference_id: "PMID:38103992"
title: Taking better advantage of the activity-based anorexia model.
authors:
- Foldi CJ
journal: Trends Mol Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2023.11.011
keywords:
- Rats
- Mice
- Humans
- Animals
- "Anorexia/etiology, therapy"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Anorexia Nervosa/therapy
- Cognition
- Neurobiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Taking better advantage of the activity-based anorexia model.
**Authors:** Foldi CJ
**Journal:** Trends Mol Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molmed.2023.11.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmed.2023.11.011)

## Content

1. Trends Mol Med. 2024 Apr;30(4):330-338. doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2023.11.011.
Epub  2023 Dec 15.

Taking better advantage of the activity-based anorexia model.

Foldi CJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Monash University, Department of Physiology, 26 Innovation Walk, Clayton, VIC
3800, Australia; Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, 23 Innovation Walk,
Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia. Electronic address: claire.foldi@monash.edu.

The lack of specific treatments for anorexia nervosa (AN) is partly driven by an
inadequate understanding of the neurobiological drivers of the condition. The
activity-based anorexia (ABA) model recapitulates key characteristics of AN in
rats and mice, and can be used to understand factors that predispose, maintain,
and rescue anorectic behaviour. With the rapidly evolving suite of technologies
to manipulate and record neural activity during the development of ABA, we are
better placed than ever before to take advantage of this unique biobehavioural
model in order to develop and refine novel treatments for AN. This will require
a collective effort to bridge research disciplines in order to capitalise on
knowledge gains from genetics, neurobiology, metabolism, and cognition.

Copyright © 2023 The Author. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molmed.2023.11.011
PMID: 38103992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests C.J.F. sits on the
scientific advisory board for Octarine Bio, Copenhagen, Denmark.
