---
reference_id: "PMID:21931168"
title: "Reversible infantile respiratory chain deficiency is a unique, genetically heterogenous mitochondrial disease."
authors:
- Uusimaa J
- Jungbluth H
- Fratter C
- Crisponi G
- Feng L
- Zeviani M
- Hughes I
- Treacy EP
- Birks J
- Brown GK
- Sewry CA
- McDermott M
- Muntoni F
- Poulton J
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2011.089995
keywords:
- "Acidosis, Lactic/genetics, metabolism"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Brain/pathology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Cytochrome-c Oxidase Deficiency/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Electron Transport Complex IV/genetics
- Face/pathology
- Family
- Female
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Histocytochemistry
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Liver/pathology
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Muscle Hypotonia
- "Muscle, Skeletal/pathology"
- Mutation/genetics
- Sequence Alignment
- tRNA Methyltransferases/genetics
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Reversible infantile respiratory chain deficiency is a unique, genetically heterogenous mitochondrial disease.
**Authors:** Uusimaa J, Jungbluth H, Fratter C, Crisponi G, Feng L, Zeviani M, Hughes I, Treacy EP, Birks J, Brown GK, Sewry CA, McDermott M, Muntoni F, Poulton J
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2011.089995](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2011.089995)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2011 Oct;48(10):660-668. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2011.089995.

Reversible infantile respiratory chain deficiency is a unique, genetically 
heterogenous mitochondrial disease.

Uusimaa J(#)(1), Jungbluth H(#)(2)(3), Fratter C(4), Crisponi G(5), Feng L(6), 
Zeviani M(7), Hughes I(8), Treacy EP(9), Birks J(10), Brown GK(11), Sewry CA(6), 
McDermott M(12), Muntoni F(6), Poulton J(1).

Author information:
(1)Nuffield Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Oxford, The 
Women's Centre, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.
(2)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, King's College Hospital, London, UK.
(3)Department of Paediatric Neurology - Neuromuscular Service, Evelina 
Children's Hospital, St Thomas' Hospital, London, UK.
(4)Oxford Medical Genetics Lab, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, UK.
(5)Servizio di Puericultura, Universita' di Cagliari, Italy.
(6)Dubowitz Neuromuscular Centre, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, UK.
(7)Unit of Molecular Neurogenetics, "C. Besta" Neurological Institute - IRCCS 
Foundation, Milan, Italy.
(8)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Manchester Children's Hospital, 
Manchester, UK.
(9)National Centre for Inherited Metabolic Disease, Children's University 
Hospital, Dublin Republic of Ireland.
(10)Centre for Statistics in Medicine, University of Oxford, UK.
(11)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, UK.
(12)Our Lady's Hospital for Sick Children, Dublin, Ireland.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVES: Homoplasmic maternally inherited, m.14674T>C or m. 14674T>G 
mt-tRNA(Glu) mutations have recently been identified in reversible infantile 
cytochrome c oxidase deficiency (or 'benign COX deficiency'). This study sought 
other genetic defects that may give rise to similar presentations.
PATIENTS: Eight patients from seven families with clinicopathological features 
of infantile reversible cytochrome c oxidase deficiency were investigated.
METHODS: The study reviewed the diagnostic features and performed molecular 
genetic analyses of mitochondrial DNA and nuclear encoded candidate genes.
RESULTS: Patients presented with subacute onset of profound hypotonia, feeding 
difficulties and lactic acidosis within the first months of life. Although 
recovery was remarkable, a mild myopathy persisted into adulthood. 
Histopathological findings in muscle included increased lipid and/or glycogen 
content, ragged-red and COX negative fibres. Biochemical studies suggested more 
generalised abnormalities than pure COX deficiency. Clinical improvement was 
reflected by normalisation of lactic acidosis and histopathological 
abnormalities. The m.14674T>C mt-tRNA(Glu) mutation was identified in four 
families, but none had the m. 14674T>G mutation. Furthermore, in two families 
pathogenic mutations were also found in the nuclear TRMU gene which has not 
previously been associated with this phenotype. In one family, the genetic 
aetiology still remains unknown.
CONCLUSIONS: Benign COX deficiency is better described as 'reversible infantile 
respiratory chain deficiency'. It is genetically heterogeneous, and patients not 
carrying the m.14674T>C or T>G mt-tRNA(Glu) mutations may have mutations in the 
TRMU gene. Diagnosing this disorder at the molecular level is a significant 
advance for paediatric neurologists and intensive care paediatricians, enabling 
them to select children with an excellent prognosis for continuing respiratory 
support from those with severe mitochondrial presentation in infancy.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2011.089995
PMCID: PMC4562368
PMID: 21931168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Mitochondrial diseases are clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorders with highly variable outcome. Both the nuclear and mitochondrial genomes are involved in assembly and function of the mitochondrial machinery and specific disorders may be associated with defects affecting nuclear or mitochondrial genes or the communication between the two genomes. Unlike nuclear DNA, the 16 kb circular mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is maternally inherited and exists in multiple copies in each cell. ”Typical” mtDNA diseases such as MELAS (Mitochondrial Encephalopathy with Lactic Acidosis and Stroke-like episodes) or MILS (Maternally Inherited Leigh Syndrome) are therefore exclusively inherited from the mother, whilst other mitochondrial disorders due to mutations in nuclear genes may follow both autosomal recessive and autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. Most maternally inherited mtDNA diseases are heteroplasmic (mutant and normal mtDNA co-existing in the same individual), with the load of mutant mtDNA being a determinant of disease severity. However, Leber’s Hereditary Optic Neuropathy (LHON) is classically homoplasmic (only mutant mtDNA), the cause of the variable penetrance being uncertain.

Both isolated cytochrome c oxidase (COX or complex IV) and combined deficiencies of mitochondrial respiratory chain (RC) enzymes can be caused by mutations in either autosomal or mitochondrial genes. This is because three of the 13 subunits of COX are encoded by mtDNA, whilst all of the assembly factors and the other ten COX subunits are encoded by nuclear DNA, synthesized in the cytoplasm and transported into the mitochondria. Childhood presentations of autosomally inherited COX defects include a severe generalized COX deficient encephalomyopathy (“Leigh syndrome”) and two major muscle specific COX deficiencies, fatal infantile and reversible benign infantile myopathy [1-10], mainly distinguished by their very different clinical progression. Correct diagnosis of reversible benign infantile myopathy is important because it is unusual in having such a good prognosis, compared with other infantile-onset mitochondrial disorders. Whilst recessive mutations in the SURF1 gene encoding a COX assembly protein can be identified in the majority of cases of Leigh syndrome associated with generalized COX deficiency, reversible benign infantile respiratory chain deficiency has recently been associated with the maternally inherited, homoplasmic m.14674T>C mt-tRNA Glu mutation in 17 cases [11]. All cases reported in above cohort carried the homoplasmic m.14674T>C mt-tRNA Glu mutation, and it is currently uncertain whether reversible infantile respiratory chain enzyme deficiency is genetically homogeneous or if other genetic defects may give rise to similar presentations.

Furthermore, acute reversible infantile-onset liver failure was recently associated with reversible COX deficiency due to mutations in the TRMU gene, which is a nuclear gene encoding a mitochondria-specific tRNA-modifying enzyme, tRNA 5-methylaminomethyl-2-thiouridylate methyltransferase [12, 13]. In patients harbouring a homoplasmic A1555G mutation in MTRNR1 (MIM 561000), TRMU variants have also been associated with sensorineural hearing impairment [14]. As this mutation lies within the mitochondrially encoded 12S rRNA, gene, TRMU variations may also play a modifying role in other defects of mitochondrial translation.

Here we present clinical, laboratory and histopathological features in 8 individuals from 7 families with reversible infantile cytochrome c oxidase deficiency. Our longitudinal follow-up data from early infancy into adulthood of patients with or without the m.14674T>C mt-tRNA Glu mutation suggest that subtle myopathic features persist despite overall resolution of the profound muscle weakness found at presentation. We provide evidence for genetic heterogeneity within this clinical group, since the m.14674T>C mt-tRNAGlu mutation was identified only in 4 families. In addition we found pathogenic mutations in the nuclear encoded TRMU gene, not previously associated with myopathy, in two additional families. In one family the genetic etiology still remains unknown. As the biochemical defect is more generalized than isolated COX deficiency we suggest that this entity is better described as “Reversible Infantile Respiratory Chain Deficiency”. The recognition of this unique mitochondrial disease is very important because of its favourable prognosis compared to other forms of infantile COX deficiency.

Clinical histories from our patients with clinico-pathological features of infantile reversible cytochrome c oxidase deficiency myopathy are detailed in Appendix 1 (Supplementary file S1). Patient 4 [15] and Patient 8 [10] have been partly reported previously.

We reviewed the clinical and laboratory data from the 8 patients from 7 families with clinico-pathological features consistent with a diagnosis of infantile reversible cytochrome c oxidase deficiency myopathy. All patients were from Caucasian backgrounds except Patient 5 who was of Turkish-Cypriot origin. Because we observed that the facial appearance of the recently published patients carrying the m.14674T>C mt-tRNAGlu mutation was similar to our own cohort of mutation-positive individuals, we compared the clinical photographs to the published series [11] with the help of clinical geneticists.

Muscle biopsies were obtained according to standard procedures and, if not performed at one of the participating centres, personally reviewed by CAS. Muscle histology and histochemistry were performed by standard methods. The activities of respiratory chain complexes I–IV were determined from skeletal muscle samples as previously described [16].

Total genomic DNA was isolated from blood leukocytes, saliva, skeletal muscle samples or liver tissue and RNA was isolated from cultured fibroblasts and converted to cDNA by standard methods. Sequencing of mtDNA, Southern blot and long-range PCR for mtDNA rearrangements and mtDNA depletion analysis (from the liver DNA of Patient 8) were carried out using standard methods. Levels of m.14674T>C mutant mtDNA in blood leukocyte or saliva DNA in the probands and their relatives were assessed by PCR/RFLP as described by Horvath et al. [11], and full mtDNA sequencing was carried out. The coding region of the TRMU gene was amplified from cDNA in a single fragment, then sequenced with two overlapping internal sequencing primers (sequences available on request). The individual exons and and intron-exon boundaries were amplified using eight out of nine previously described pairs of primers (Guan et al. 2006) and one new primer pair (forward primer: 5′GTAAAACGACGGCCAGTCGTAGTGGCAGAGAATAACACC-3′ and reverse primer: 5′-CAGGAAACAGCTATGACACAGTTGTGACACCATCTCCAC-3′).

The 8 individuals in our cohort came from 7 families, three being male and five female. There was one aunt/niece pair but all other cases were sporadic cases of reversible myopathy. Two patients had been previously reported (P4, P8) [10,15]. Key clinical features of these patients are listed in Table 1. Age at presentation ranged from birth to 4 months but on careful review, subtle symptoms, namely hypotonia and feeding difficulties, were apparent from birth even in those who presented later in infancy. Acute deterioration occasionally triggered by intercurrent viral illness, of pre-existing feeding difficulties with or without associated respiratory impairment was the most consistent presenting feature. Although one child required persistent gastrostomy feeds into childhood (P7), the majority could be managed with intermittent nasogastric tube feeds before feeding normalized; however, at least two patients experienced difficulties with more textured food well into childhood (P5) or even adulthood (P3). Respiratory impairment was less prominent but a temporary tracheostomy was required in one case (P3). Whilst none of our cases had evidence of persistent cardiac involvement, transient cardiac impairment was noted in two patients (P3, P5). All patients eventually achieved the ability to walk after a consistent but mild delay. At a median current age of 14 years (range 2 to 35 years) patients experienced relatively minor functional difficulties but marked fatiguability and intense myalgia were almost invariable and in some patients associated with substantial disability. Findings on the most recent examinations ranged from normal to mild weakness of the hip girdle and of ankle dorsiflexion, muscle hypertrophy and TA contractures. Facial weakness, ptosis and a “characteristic” myopathic facial appearance became more prominent with age (Figure 1). Marked maxillary hypoplasia was noticed in one patient (P3), probably reflective of long-term non-invasive ventilation.

In two families (F2, F5), the mother of the index case had mild to moderate myopathic features without a preceding history of the more “typical” infantile presentation. Once genetic results were available we re-examined the clinical data to look for differences in the clinical presentation between individuals positive for the m.14674T>C mt-tRNA Glu mutation, patients with TRMU gene mutations and one patient from whom both these gene defects were excluded. In essence, whilst the principal clinical presentation with subacute infantile lactic acidosis, profound hypotonic and feeding difficulties was similar in both groups, m. 14674T>C mt-tRNAGlu mutation negative individuals had more prominent extraocular involvement (P6, P7). In addition, the prominent hepatic presentation in Patient 8 was not observed in any of the patients carrying the m.14674T>C mt-tRNAGlu mutation, however, in the recent publication by Horvath et al. [11] three out of 17 patients with m.14674T>C mutation presented also with hepatic manifestations. Patient 8 was also the only patient who had abnormalities on brain MRI, which showed an abnormal high signal in the right thalamus (Figure 2). In addition, magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) demonstrated a lactate peak in the corresponding area (Fig. 2C). However, both changes had disappeared when imaging was repeated at 1 year of age. Furthermore, our patients with the m.14674T>C mt-tRNAGlu mutation presented a similar facial appearance in clinical photographs when compared to recently published patients carrying this substitution [11], characterized by an elongated face and chin, a relatively flat midface and narrow upslanting palpebral fissures. Geneticists were able to use facial appearance to sort mutation positive and negative patients into groups more accurately than by chance alone (p=0.025, see supplementary information).

Biochemical features of our patients are listed in Table 2. CK was mildly to moderately elevated (range 266-900 IU/ml) in 5 patients but normal in others. Plasma lactate levels were elevated in all patients from whom this was checked immediately at presentation (ranging from 3.2 to 16.4 mM) but normal in patients in whom this was done at an interval (P3, P6). Plasma lactate levels then normalized as patients improved. In addition, two patients (P1, P6) developed hypothyroidism, as did the mother of patient 6.

All patients except Patient 2 had muscle biopsies at or shortly after presentation and three patients (P1, P3, P4) had follow-up biopsies at an interval of up to 28 years after the initial muscle biopsy. The most prominent findings at presentation were areas within fibres with increased glycogen and/or lipid content, ragged-red fibres on the modified Gomori trichrome stain (Figure 3D), and fibres with reduced or absent COX activity on oxidative stains (Figure 3A). The respiratory chain defects were not confined to cytochrome oxidase deficiency. Respiratory chain analysis at or soon after initial presentation showed reduced complex I and complex IV activities in Patient 5 and a reduction of all respiratory chain complexes in Patient 6. Respiratory chain analysis on follow-up biopsy suggested that any specific cytochrome oxidase deficiency had resolved by age 4 years in Patient 3. Ragged red fibres were apparent in the first biopsy of Patient 1 but no COX activities were measured; by the second biopsy at 28 years of age the ragged-red fibres had disappeared and there was an overwhelming type 2 predominance (Figure 3F). There was also increased variability in fibre size and increase in connective tissue on the H&E (Figure 3C). Respiratory chain enzyme analysis was normal at this stage. In Patient 5, muscle biopsy performed at the peak of her weakness showed widespread, often small, COX deficient fibres, predominantly of type 1 (Figure 3A, 3B, 3E). These findings are consistent with progressive loss of a subpopulation of COX negative fibres, predominantly of type 1, corresponding to the improvement of clinical features. Patient 8 presented with acute liver failure and fulminant lactic acidosis with profound COX deficiency in both muscle and liver samples. At 3 months of age patient 8 experienced clinical resolution which was confirmed by normal COX activity from a muscle biopsy. Liver histology of Patient 8 revealed significant distortion of normal liver architecture with cell necrosis, widespread balloon degeneration and microvesicular steatosis (Figure 4).

Molecular genetic analyses did not reveal any mtDNA deletions or major arrangements in all the available muscle samples. Sequencing of the entire mitochondrial genome revealed common nucleotide polymorphisms (http://www.genpat.uu.se/mtDB/ and http://www.mitomap.org). In addition, the homoplasmic m.14674T>C mt-tRNAGlu mutation was identified in 5 patients from 4 families with typical features of reversible infantile respiratory chain enzyme deficiency, namely the index Patient 1 (Family 1) and a similarly affected niece, Patient 2 (Family 1), Patient 3 (Family 2), Patient 4 (Family 3) and Patient 5 (Family 4). The m.14674T>C mt-tRNA Glu mutation was homoplasmic in all cases, mtDNA sequence analysis demonstrating that all 4 families had different additional polymorphisms (Supplementary file S2), families 4 and 5 being the most closely related. The m.14674T>C mt-tRNA Glu mutation was also identified in the mother (with mild facial weakness) of Patient 4 (Family 3). The m.14674T>C mt-tRNA Glu mutation could not be identified in Family 5, Family 6 and Family 7. This was homoplasmic in all cases. MtDNA sequence analysis (Supplementary table) demonstrated that all 4 families had additional polymorphisms. The most common mutations (p.A467T, p.W748S, and p.G848S) in the mitochondrial DNA polymerase gamma 1 gene (POLG1) were absent and a screen for major mitochondrial DNA rearrangements and for mitochondrial DNA depletion analysis was negative in liver-derived DNA of Patient 8 with hepatic manifestations.

The TRMU gene was investigated as a possible candidate in genetically unresolved cases with infantile reversible cytochrome c oxidase deficiency in whom the homoplasmic m.14674T>C mt-tRNAGlu mutation had been excluded.

Patient 7 was found to have a heterozygous c. 28G>T mutation in exon 1 of the TRMU gene, altering an invariant amino acid residue from alanine to serine at position 10 in the evolutionarily conserved N-terminal region of the TRMU protein (Figure 5A). Both parents were asymptomatic and the mother was found to be heterozygous for the p. A10S mutation, whereas father was negative for this TRMU variant.

Patient 8 was found to be a compound heterozygote for the TRMU (Figure 5B) missense mutation c.835 G>A (p.V279M) involving a highly conserved amino acid residue (Figure 5C), and a splicing mutation, IVS11-3, C>G generating a new AG acceptor dinucleotide immediately upstream of the normal site. Aberrantly spliced transcript was ~50% of the total. This leads to a frameshift with an altered sequence of 50 amino acids before a premature stop codon four amino acids from the normal position. Sequencing of parental DNA confirmed that these mutations were in trans. No TRMU mutations were identified in any of the other patients

We present 8 individuals from 7 families with signs and symptoms of reversible infantile respiratory chain enzyme deficiency and provide evidence for genetic heterogeneity.

Benign respiratory chain enzyme deficiency is an apparently rare condition. With the exception of two recently published reports describing the condition in 17 patients from 12 families with a homoplasmic m. 14674T>C [11], and 8 patients with m. 14 674T>C or m. 14674T>G [34], most previous reports mainly concerned isolated cases or small sibships without including detailed longitudinal follow-up data beyond early childhood. The natural history of the condition into adult life is not well known. All patients had an episode of acute clinical deterioration shortly after birth or within the first months of life during which respiratory chain enzymes were abnormal, characterized clinically by lactic acidosis, profound hypotonia and feeding difficulties with or without respiratory impairment, followed by improvement over a period of months or years. Despite the subacute onset of more severe symptoms in all patients, hypotonia and motor delay had usually been suspected, suggesting onset of the condition from birth. Moreover, whilst all patients showed remarkable and sustained improvement following the acute episode, subtle symptoms in addition to mild muscle hypertrophy, tendo achilles contractures and facial weakness in adults, suggesting that not all features of this disorder are entirely transient. Characteristic facial features in particular became more prominent and recognizable with age, corresponding to craniofacial abnormalities recently described in patients with complex I and complex IV deficiency [17] as well as in offspring of mothers harbouring the MELAS-associated m.3243A>G mutation [18]. Fatiguability with or without myalgia was a particularly disabling complaint, easily overlooked by health professional. As the prime long-term symptom this is important to recognize. However, the overall excellent outcome for these individuals, illustrates that it is mandatory to consider reversible infantile respiratory chain enzyme deficiency in all early-onset cases. Other features not previously well recognized were the marked clinical variability and the relatively high incidence of hypothyroidism in adult patients but also their immediate relatives.

Muscle biopsies in our cohort suggested that the clinical recovery in these patients is due to a loss of a subpopulation of COX negative muscle fibres, also in keeping with a more generalized reduction in respiratory chain enzyme activities. In one of the best characterized patients in the series (Patient 5) there was evidence of selective atrophy of high oxidative type 1/slow fibres; at the time of biopsy, this patient did not have pure COX deficiency, but a combined complex I and IV deficiency. Clinical recovery in this patient may therefore be associated with a loss of type 1 fibres on the histopathological level, a hypothesis supported by the finding of marked type 2 predominance in another patient (Patient 1) when biopsied later in life after improvement of symptoms. Patient 6 with reversible infantile respiratory chain enzyme deficiency in whom no genetic defect could be identified showed a very similar presentation and further course compared to other patients. The presence of subtle myopathic features in the mother of Patient 6 would suggest dominant transmission.

Because reversible benign infantile myopathy has been recently associated with the m.14674T>C mt-tRNAGlu mutation in 12 families with suggestive features [11], we were interested to determine whether our own cohort was genetically homogeneous. However, although the m.14674T>C mt-tRNAGlu mutation could be confirmed as the most common cause of this phenotype, it was only present in 4/7 families, suggesting further genetic heterogeneity. Our findings confirm that the m.14674T>C mt-tRNAGlu mutation is common in patients with benign respiratory chain enzyme deficiency and indicate that the m.14674T>C mt-tRNAGlu carrier state may also be associated with features of a subtle myopathy, namely myalgia, marked fatiguability and/or mild weakness, even without a preceding history of the more typical subacute infantile presentation. The clinical phenotype of these patients is completely unlike that of the other previously reported tRNAGlu mutations, which are not associated with reversibility of symptoms [19-33] (Supplementary file S3). Homoplasmy for the m.14674T>C mt-tRNAGlu mutation was the rule in our patients and their asymptomatic mothers, as in the previous study; hence, the pathophysiology of this disorder appears to be unique because the reversibility is completely unexplained. The frequency of this substitution, initially considered a neutral polymorphism, is reported as almost 0.1% in both the mtDB and MITOMAP databases (www.mitomap.org), suggesting 60,000 potential carriers in the United Kingdom alone. Considering the overall rarity of reversible infantile respiratory chain enzyme deficiency, it will be of interest to investigate if the extreme variability of the condition is compatible with what is observed in other mitochondrial cytopathies or, alternatively, could be attributed to additional modifying factors.

The three patients in whom the m.14674T>C mt-tRNAGlu mutation was excluded showed similar clinical features. In one case we clearly documented parallel improvements in muscle COX activity and symptoms. We subsequently investigated the nuclear TRMU gene, encoding a mitochondria-specific tRNA-modifying enzyme and previously associated with acute infantile liver failure due to reversible hepatic COX deficiency [12, 34], as a candidate also for reversible benign infantile myopathy and found mutations in two patients. In particular, Patient 8 was found to be a compound heterozygote for a missense mutation, c.835G>A, P.V279M (Figure 5B) and a splicing mutation, c.1102-3C>G. This generates a new AG acceptor dinucleotide immediately upstream of the normal site (Figure 5C). Although the missense mutation appears to be a relatively conservative substitution, it involves a highly conserved amino acid residue which is constant in vertebrates and many invertebrates. The methionine substitution is predicted not to be tolerated by the PolyPhen mutation analysis programme and it is not recorded in the human SNP database. This variant has been identified only in this family, and in none of many normal controls analysed by the laboratory. Both mutations were initially detected in cDNA prepared patient fibroblast mRNA. In the case of the splicing mutation, the aberrant transcript, with a 2 bp insertion, constituted ~50% of the total (Figure 5C). The insertion leads to a frameshift, with an altered sequence of 50 amino acids before a premature stop codon four amino acids from the normal position. Both mutations were confirmed in genomic DNA from patient cells. Analysis of parental DNA showed that the father was heterozygous for the missense mutation and the mother was heterozygous for the splicing mutation. Hence it is highly likely that these TRMU mutations are pathogenic. Furthermore, in addition to transient hypotonia and feeding difficulties, this patient had transient liver failure and profound deficiency of complex IV activity was demonstrated in both liver and muscle biopsies, the latter also showing several COX-depleted fibers. These findings are particularly interesting, as in the original series by Zeharia et al. [12] recessive TRMU mutations were associated with clinical signs of acute reversible hepatic but not muscle involvement [12]; however, although muscle light microscopy was invariably normal in these patients, complex IV activity in muscle was reduced, consistent with our own findings. Prominent hepatic involvement was also a feature in three out of 17 patients with the m.14674T>C mutation reported by Horvath et al. [11] but not in our own cohort.

In addition, a heterozygous p.A10S mutation (c.G28T) in exon 1 of the TRMU gene was found in Patient 7, who had signs and symptoms of reversible benign infantile myopathy but no evidence of transient hepatic failure or sensorineural deafness. The homozygous TRMU p.A10S mutation has previously been shown in mutant cells to lead to a marked failure in mitochondrial tRNA metabolism [13] and to aggravate the deafness phenotype of patients harbouring the A1555G mutation in the mitochondrial MTRNR1 gene (MIM 561000) [13]. However, it has been proposed that the homozygous p.A10S mutation itself is not sufficient to cause a clinical phenotype [13]. We suggest that the heterozygous p.A10S mutation that we found is highly unlikely to be the sole mutation responsible for causing the phenotype and there must be modifying factors which we have not yet identified in Patient 7. The mechanisms by which TRMU mutations cause transient benign infantile myopathy are not well understood but are likely to be similar to those proposed for reversible infantile hepatic failure [13], probably involving reduced modification of several mitochondrial tRNAs resulting in a transient defect in mitochondrial translation.

We show genetic heterogeneity in reversible infantile respiratory chain enzyme deficiency. We broaden the phenotype associated with both the m.14674T>C or T>G mt-tRNA Glu mutations and TRMU gene mutations, the latter not being previously linked with this phenotype. Our findings have important implications for genetic counselling as cases other than those harbouring m.14674T>C or T>G mt-tRNAGlu or TRMU gene mutations may still follow a relatively benign course and have an overall good prognosis.