---
reference_id: "PMID:31961822"
title: Donor glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency decreases blood quality for transfusion.
authors:
- Francis RO
- D'Alessandro A
- Eisenberger A
- Soffing M
- Yeh R
- Coronel E
- Sheikh A
- Rapido F
- La Carpia F
- Reisz JA
- Gehrke S
- Nemkov T
- Thomas T
- Schwartz J
- Divgi C
- Kessler D
- Shaz BH
- Ginzburg Y
- Zimring JC
- Spitalnik SL
- Hod EA
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1172/JCI133530
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Donor glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency decreases blood quality for transfusion.
**Authors:** Francis RO, D'Alessandro A, Eisenberger A, Soffing M, Yeh R, Coronel E, Sheikh A, Rapido F, La Carpia F, Reisz JA, Gehrke S, Nemkov T, Thomas T, Schwartz J, Divgi C, Kessler D, Shaz BH, Ginzburg Y, Zimring JC, Spitalnik SL, Hod EA
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI133530](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI133530)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2020 May 1;130(5):2270-2285. doi: 10.1172/JCI133530.

Donor glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency decreases blood quality for 
transfusion.

Francis RO(1), D'Alessandro A(2), Eisenberger A(3), Soffing M(4), Yeh R(4), 
Coronel E(4), Sheikh A(5), Rapido F(6), La Carpia F(1), Reisz JA(2), Gehrke 
S(2), Nemkov T(2), Thomas T(1), Schwartz J(1), Divgi C(4), Kessler D(7), Shaz 
BH(7), Ginzburg Y(8), Zimring JC(9), Spitalnik SL(1), Hod EA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University Vagelos College 
of Physicians and Surgeons and NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New 
York, USA.
(2)University of Colorado Denver-Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine and.
(4)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Columbia University Vagelos College of 
Physicians and Surgeons and NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York, 
USA.
(5)Division of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, New York, USA.
(6)Department of Anesthesia and Critical Care Medicine, Montpellier University 
Hospital Gui de Chauliac, Montpellier, France.
(7)New York Blood Center, New York, New York, USA.
(8)Division of Hematology Oncology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai 
Hospital, New York, New York, USA.
(9)Carter Immunology Center, University of Virginia School of Medicine, 
Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.

BACKGROUNDGlucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency decreases the 
ability of red blood cells (RBCs) to withstand oxidative stress. Refrigerated 
storage of RBCs induces oxidative stress. We hypothesized that G6PD-deficient 
donor RBCs would have inferior storage quality for transfusion as compared with 
G6PD-normal RBCs.METHODSMale volunteers were screened for G6PD deficiency; 27 
control and 10 G6PD-deficient volunteers each donated 1 RBC unit. After 42 days 
of refrigerated storage, autologous 51-chromium 24-hour posttransfusion RBC 
recovery (PTR) studies were performed. Metabolomics analyses of these RBC units 
were also performed.RESULTSThe mean 24-hour PTR for G6PD-deficient subjects was 
78.5% ± 8.4% (mean ± SD), which was significantly lower than that for 
G6PD-normal RBCs (85.3% ± 3.2%; P = 0.0009). None of the G6PD-normal volunteers 
(0/27) and 3 G6PD-deficient volunteers (3/10) had PTR results below 75%, a key 
FDA acceptability criterion for stored donor RBCs. As expected, fresh 
G6PD-deficient RBCs demonstrated defects in the oxidative phase of the pentose 
phosphate pathway. During refrigerated storage, G6PD-deficient RBCs demonstrated 
increased glycolysis, impaired glutathione homeostasis, and increased purine 
oxidation, as compared with G6PD-normal RBCs. In addition, there were 
significant correlations between PTR and specific metabolites in these 
pathways.CONCLUSIONBased on current FDA criteria, RBCs from G6PD-deficient 
donors would not meet the requirements for storage quality. Metabolomics 
assessment identified markers of PTR and G6PD deficiency (e.g., pyruvate/lactate 
ratios), along with potential compensatory pathways that could be leveraged to 
ameliorate the metabolic needs of G6PD-deficient RBCs.TRIAL 
REGISTRATIONClinicalTrials.gov NCT04081272.FUNDINGThe Harold Amos Medical 
Faculty Development Program, Robert Wood Johnson Foundation grant 71590, the 
National Blood Foundation, NIH grant UL1 TR000040, the Webb-Waring Early Career 
Award 2017 by the Boettcher Foundation, and National Heart, Lung, and Blood 
Institute grants R01HL14644 and R01HL148151.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI133530
PMCID: PMC7191001
PMID: 31961822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: AD and TN are founders of 
Omix Technologies, Inc. and Altis Biosciences, LLC. SLS is a consultant for 
Tioma, Inc. AD and SLS are members of the Scientific Advisory Board of Hemanext, 
Inc.