---
reference_id: "PMID:36138075"
title: Genomic landscape of pleural and peritoneal mesothelioma tumours.
authors:
- Hiltbrunner S
- Fleischmann Z
- Sokol ES
- Zoche M
- Felley-Bosco E
- Curioni-Fontecedro A
journal: Br J Cancer
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41416-022-01979-0
keywords:
- Humans
- Lung Neoplasms/pathology
- Hedgehog Proteins
- "Mesothelioma/genetics, pathology"
- "Mesothelioma, Malignant/genetics"
- "Peritoneal Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- "Pleural Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Genomics
- Ubiquitin Thiolesterase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genomic landscape of pleural and peritoneal mesothelioma tumours.
**Authors:** Hiltbrunner S, Fleischmann Z, Sokol ES, Zoche M, Felley-Bosco E, Curioni-Fontecedro A
**Journal:** Br J Cancer (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41416-022-01979-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41416-022-01979-0)

## Content

1. Br J Cancer. 2022 Nov;127(11):1997-2005. doi: 10.1038/s41416-022-01979-0. Epub
 2022 Sep 22.

Genomic landscape of pleural and peritoneal mesothelioma tumours.

Hiltbrunner S(1)(2), Fleischmann Z(3), Sokol ES(3), Zoche M(4), Felley-Bosco
E(2)(5), Curioni-Fontecedro A(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology and Hematology, University Hospital Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Foundation Medicine, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)Pathology Department, University Hospital Zurich, 8091, Zurich, Switzerland.
(5)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Department of Thoracic Surgery, University
Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Medical Oncology and Hematology, University Hospital Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland. alessandra.curioni@usz.ch.
(7)University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. alessandra.curioni@usz.ch.

BACKGROUND: Malignant pleural and peritoneal mesotheliomas are rare malignancies
with unacceptable poor prognoses and limited treatment options. The genomic
landscape is mainly characterised by the loss of tumour suppressor genes and
mutations in DNA repair genes. Currently, data from next-generation sequencing
(NGS) of mesothelioma tumours is restricted to a limited number of cases;
moreover, data comparing molecular features of mesothelioma from the pleural and
peritoneal origin with NGS are lacking.
METHODS: We analysed 1113 pleural mesothelioma and 355 peritoneal mesothelioma
samples. All tumours were sequenced with the FoundationOne® or FoundationOne®CDx
assay for detection of substitutions, insertion-deletions, copy-number
alterations and selected rearrangements in at least 324 cancer genes.
RESULTS: This analysis revealed alterations in 19 genes with an overall
prevalence of at least 2%. Alterations in BAP1, CDKN2A, CDKN2B, NF2, MTAP, TP53
and SETD2 occurred with a prevalence of at least 10%. Peritoneal, compared to
pleural mesothelioma, was characterised by a lower prevalence of alterations in
CDKN2A, CDKN2B and MTAP. Moreover, we could define four distinct subgroups
according to alterations in BAP1 and CDKN2A/B. Alterations in Hedgehog
pathway-related genes (PTCH1/2 and SUFU) and Hippo pathway-related gene (NF2) as
well as KRAS, EGFR, PDGFRA/B, ERBB2 and FGFR3 were detected in both cohorts.
CONCLUSION: Here, we report the molecular aberrations from the largest cohort of
patients with mesothelioma. This analysis identified a proportion of patients
with targetable alterations and suggests that molecular profiling can identify
new treatment options for patients with mesothelioma.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41416-022-01979-0
PMCID: PMC9681755
PMID: 36138075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ACF reports honoraria for lectures and advisory
fees from Astra Zeneca, BMS, Boehringer Ingelheim, MSD, Pfizer, Roche, Takeda.
ESS and ZF are employees of Foundation Medicine and Shareholders in Roche.
