---
reference_id: "PMID:36543534"
title: Biallelic frameshift variants in PHLDB1 cause mild-type osteogenesis imperfecta with regressive spondylometaphyseal changes.
authors:
- Tuysuz B
- Uludag Alkaya D
- Geyik F
- Alaylıoğlu M
- Kasap B
- Kurugoğlu S
- Akman YE
- Vural M
- Bilguvar K
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/jmg-2022-108763
keywords:
- Humans
- "Child, Preschool"
- Osteogenesis Imperfecta/genetics
- Heterozygote
- Phenotype
- Frameshift Mutation/genetics
- "Fractures, Bone"
- Collagen Type I/genetics
- Mutation
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biallelic frameshift variants in PHLDB1 cause mild-type osteogenesis imperfecta with regressive spondylometaphyseal changes.
**Authors:** Tuysuz B, Uludag Alkaya D, Geyik F, Alaylıoğlu M, Kasap B, Kurugoğlu S, Akman YE, Vural M, Bilguvar K
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg-2022-108763](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg-2022-108763)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2023 Aug;60(8):819-826. doi: 10.1136/jmg-2022-108763. Epub 2022
Dec  21.

Biallelic frameshift variants in PHLDB1 cause mild-type osteogenesis imperfecta 
with regressive spondylometaphyseal changes.

Tuysuz B(1), Uludag Alkaya D(2), Geyik F(2)(3), Alaylıoğlu M(4), Kasap B(2)(3), 
Kurugoğlu S(5), Akman YE(6), Vural M(7), Bilguvar K(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Istanbul University-Cerrahpasa, Cerrahpasa 
Medical Faculty, Istanbul, Turkey beyhan@istanbul.edu.tr.
(2)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Istanbul University-Cerrahpasa, Cerrahpasa 
Medical Faculty, Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Department of Genetics, Aziz Sancar Experimental Medicine Research Institute, 
Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(4)Institute of Neurological Sciences, Brain and Neurodegenerative Disorders 
Research Laboratory, Istanbul University-Cerrahpasa, Istanbul, Turkey.
(5)Department of Pediatric Radiology, Istanbul University-Cerrahpasa, Cerrahpasa 
Medical Faculty, Istanbul, Turkey.
(6)Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, University of Health Sciences 
Turkey, Baltalimani Bone Diseases Training and Research Center, Istanbul, 
Turkey.
(7)Department of Neonatology, Istanbul University-Cerrahpasa, Cerrahpasa Medical 
Faculty, Istanbul, Turkey.
(8)Departments of Neurosurgery and Genetics, Yale Center for Genome Analysis, 
Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.

BACKGROUND: Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heterogeneous group of inherited 
disorders characterised by susceptibility to fractures, primarily due to defects 
in type 1 collagen. The aim of this study is to present a novel OI phenotype and 
its causative candidate gene.
METHODS: Whole-exome sequencing and clinical evaluation were performed in five 
patients from two unrelated families. PHLDB1 mRNA expression in blood and 
fibroblasts was investigated by real-time PCR, and western blot analysis was 
further performed on skin fibroblasts.
RESULTS: The common findings among the five affected children were recurrent 
fractures and/or osteopaenia, platyspondyly, short and bowed long bones, and 
widened metaphyses. Metaphyseal and vertebral changes regressed after early 
childhood, and no fractures occurred under bisphosphonate treatment. We 
identified biallelic NM_001144758.3:c.2392dup and NM_001144758.3:c.2690_2693del 
pathogenic variants in PHLDB1 in the affected patients, respectively, in the 
families; parents were heterozygous for these variants. PHLDB1 encodes 
pleckstrin homology-like domain family B member-1 (PHLDB1) protein, which has a 
role in insulin-dependent Akt phosphorylation. Compared with controls, a 
decrease in the expression levels of PHLDB1 in the blood and skin fibroblast 
samples was detected. Western blot analysis of cultured fibroblasts further 
confirmed the loss of PHLDB1.
CONCLUSION: Two biallelic frameshift variants in the candidate gene PHLDB1 were 
identified in independent families with a novel, mild-type, autosomal recessive 
OI. The demonstration of decreased PHLDB1 mRNA expression levels in blood and 
fibroblast samples supports the hypothesis that PHLDB1 pathogenic variants are 
causative for the observed phenotype.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2023. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg-2022-108763
PMID: 36543534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.