---
reference_id: "PMID:37040138"
title: Deficits in Analytic and Common-Sense Reasoning in Schizophrenia.
authors:
- Bora E
- Yalincetin B
- Akdede BB
- Alptekin K
journal: J Nerv Ment Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/NMD.0000000000001635
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deficits in Analytic and Common-Sense Reasoning in Schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Bora E, Yalincetin B, Akdede BB, Alptekin K
**Journal:** J Nerv Ment Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/NMD.0000000000001635](https://doi.org/10.1097/NMD.0000000000001635)

## Content

1. J Nerv Ment Dis. 2023 May 1;211(5):376-381. doi: 10.1097/NMD.0000000000001635.

Deficits in Analytic and Common-Sense Reasoning in Schizophrenia.

Bora E, Yalincetin B(1), Akdede BB, Alptekin K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Health Sciences Institute, Dokuz Eylul 
University, Izmir, Turkey.

Human rationality has a dual nature including analytic and common-sense 
thinking. Symptoms of schizophrenia have been suggested to be related to 
deficits in these aspects of logical reasoning. However, empirical studies 
investigating logical reasoning errors in schizophrenia and their clinical and 
neurocognitive correlates are scarce. Formal thought disorder and theory of mind 
(ToM) might be particularly important for understanding logical reasoning errors 
in schizophrenia. The current study compared the performances of 80 patients 
with schizophrenia with those of 49 healthy controls on syllogistic and 
counterfactual reasoning tasks and investigated clinical, neuropsychological, 
and social cognitive correlates of logical reasoning in schizophrenia. Patients 
with schizophrenia were impaired in both analytic and common-sense thinking. ToM 
impairment was a significant predictor of analytic reasoning abilities in 
schizophrenia. Executive functions and verbal memory were also significantly 
associated with analytic reasoning in schizophrenia. Further studies 
investigating logical reasoning errors in the early phases of the illness are 
needed.

Copyright © 2023 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/NMD.0000000000001635
PMID: 37040138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]