---
reference_id: "PMID:11148551"
title: Long-term correction of urea cycle disorders.
authors:
- Lee B
- Goss J
journal: J Pediatr
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1067/mpd.2001.111838
keywords:
- Adenoviridae/genetics
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/metabolism, physiopathology, surgery, therapy"
- Animals
- Child
- Contraindications
- Genetic Vectors
- Humans
- Liver Transplantation
- Urea/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term correction of urea cycle disorders.
**Authors:** Lee B, Goss J
**Journal:** J Pediatr (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1067/mpd.2001.111838](https://doi.org/10.1067/mpd.2001.111838)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 2001 Jan;138(1 Suppl):S62-71. doi: 10.1067/mpd.2001.111838.

Long-term correction of urea cycle disorders.

Lee B(1), Goss J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Long-term correction of urea cycle disorders is achieved by correction of the
enzymatic defect in hepatocytes. Currently, orthotopic liver transplantation is
the primary means of achieving this correction. In the United States most liver
transplantations for urea cycle disorders have been restricted to patients with
ornithine transcarbamylase deficiency and argininosuccinic aciduria. However,
patients with citrullinemia have also received transplants, but more so in
Europe and Japan. Recent advances in organ procurement, surgical technique, and
immunosuppression have significantly decreased morbidity and mortality. However,
unique short-term complications associated with surgery and long-term
complications associated with chronic immunosuppression have spurred continued
efforts to develop gene replacement therapies for management of acute metabolic
decompensations as intercurrent therapy until liver transplantation, and
ultimately, for long-term correction. The pathophysiology of urea cycle
disorders requires gene vector delivery systems that are highly efficient for
liver transduction and transgene expression. To date, adenoviral vectors are
unique in fulfilling these criteria, and significant data have been gained in
both animal and human studies with early versions of adenoviral vectors.
Ultimately, the development of helper-dependent adenoviral vectors may offer the
long-term expression and increased margin of safety necessary for adjunctive
therapies.

DOI: 10.1067/mpd.2001.111838
PMID: 11148551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
