---
reference_id: "PMID:37086818"
title: Exercise and asthma - trigger or treatment?
authors:
- Price OJ
- Simpson AJ
journal: Respir Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2023.107247
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exercise and asthma - trigger or treatment?
**Authors:** Price OJ, Simpson AJ
**Journal:** Respir Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rmed.2023.107247](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rmed.2023.107247)

## Content

1. Respir Med. 2023 Jul;213:107247. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2023.107247. Epub 2023
Apr  20.

Exercise and asthma - trigger or treatment?

Price OJ(1), Simpson AJ(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of 
Leeds, UK; Leeds Institute of Medical Research at St. James's, University of 
Leeds, Leeds, UK; Department of Respiratory Medicine, Leeds Teaching Hospitals 
NHS Trust, Leeds, UK. Electronic address: o.price1@leeds.ac.uk.
(2)School of Sport, Exercise and Rehabilitation Sciences, University of Hull, 
Hull, UK.

Exercise is one of the most commonly reported symptom triggers for people with 
asthma. However, a growing body of evidence indicates that regular exercise and 
physical activity are associated with improved clinical and patient reported 
outcomes. In this article, we summarise and consolidate recent original studies 
evaluating exercise and physical activity profiles in people with asthma and 
provide an up-to-date perspective concerning the role of exercise training and 
physical activity promotion in the context of asthma management. To conclude, we 
identify key unmet needs and provide directions for future research.

Crown Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2023.107247
PMID: 37086818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest OJP and AJS 
have no conflict of interest in respect to the submitted work.