---
reference_id: "PMID:37987424"
title: "Imaging Features of Alveolar Soft Part Sarcoma: Single Institution Experience and Literature Review."
authors:
- Spinnato P
- Papalexis N
- Colangeli M
- Miceli M
- Crombé A
- Parmeggiani A
- Palmerini E
- Righi A
- Bianchi G
journal: Clin Pract
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/clinpract13060123
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Imaging Features of Alveolar Soft Part Sarcoma: Single Institution Experience and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Spinnato P, Papalexis N, Colangeli M, Miceli M, Crombé A, Parmeggiani A, Palmerini E, Righi A, Bianchi G
**Journal:** Clin Pract (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/clinpract13060123](https://doi.org/10.3390/clinpract13060123)

## Content

1. Clin Pract. 2023 Nov 1;13(6):1369-1382. doi: 10.3390/clinpract13060123.

Imaging Features of Alveolar Soft Part Sarcoma: Single Institution Experience 
and Literature Review.

Spinnato P(1), Papalexis N(1), Colangeli M(2), Miceli M(1), Crombé A(3), 
Parmeggiani A(1), Palmerini E(4), Righi A(5), Bianchi G(6).

Author information:
(1)Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, 
40136 Bologna, Italy.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Oncology, IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, 40136 
Bologna, Italy.
(3)Department of Musculoskeletal Imaging, Pellegrin University Hospital, 
University of Bordeaux, 33000 Bordeaux, France.
(4)Osteoncology, Bone and Soft Tissue Sarcomas and Innovative Therapies Unit, 
IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, 40136 Bologna, Italy.
(5)Department of Pathology, IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, 40136 Bologna, 
Italy.
(6)Orthopaedic Oncology Unit, IRCCS Istituto Ortopedico Rizzoli, 40136 Bologna, 
Italy.

Alveolar soft part sarcoma (ASPS) is an extremely rare and aggressive 
soft-tissue sarcoma (STS) subtype with poor prognosis and limited response to 
radiation therapy and chemotherapy. Prompt recognition and referral to sarcoma 
centers for appropriate management are crucial for patients' survival. The 
purpose of this study was to report ASPS pre-treatment imaging features and to 
examine the existing literature on this topic. Twelve patients (7 women, 5 
men-mean age 27.1 ± 10.7 years) were included from our single-center experience. 
Ultrasonography (US), computed tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) available were reviewed according to an analysis grid incorporating 
features from the latest research on STS. Clinical, histological, and outcome 
data were collected. MRI was available in 10 patients (83.3%), US in 7 patients 
(58.3%), and CT in 3 patients (25%). Mean longest tumor diameter was 7.6 ± 2.9 
cm, and all tumors were deeply seated. Large peritumoral feeding vessels were 
systematically found and identified on ultrasonography (7/7), MRI (10/10), and 
CT (3/3). US revealed a well-defined heterogeneous hypoechoic pattern, with 
abundant flow signals in all patients (7/7). In all patients, MRI showed mildly 
high signal intensity (SI) on T1-WI and high SI on T2-WI and peritumoral edema. 
Moreover, flow-voids (due to arteriosus high-flow) into the 
peritumoral/intratumoral feeding vessels were detected in the MRI 
fluid-sensitive sequences of all patients. At baseline, whole-body 
contrast-enhanced CT revealed metastases in 8/12 (66.7%) patients. A 
pre-treatment longest diameter > 5 cm was significantly associated with distant 
metastases at diagnosis (p = 0.01). A maximum diameter > 5 cm represents a risk 
of metastatic disease at diagnosis (odds ratio = 45.0000 (95% CI: 
1.4908-1358.3585), p = 0.0285). In the comprehensive literature review, we found 
14 articles (case series or original research) focusing on ASPS imaging, with a 
total of 151 patients included. Merging our experience with the data from the 
existing literature, we conclude that the hallmark of ASPS imaging at 
presentation are the following characteristics: deep location, a slight 
hyperintense MRI SI on T1-WI and a hyperintense SI on T2-WI, numerous MRI flow 
voids, high internal vascularization, and large peritumoral feeding vessels.

DOI: 10.3390/clinpract13060123
PMCID: PMC10660714
PMID: 37987424

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.