---
reference_id: "PMID:33222246"
title: Dual Targeting of G9a and DNA Methyltransferase-1 for the Treatment of Experimental Cholangiocarcinoma.
authors:
- Colyn L
- Bárcena-Varela M
- Álvarez-Sola G
- Latasa MU
- Uriarte I
- Santamaría E
- Herranz JM
- Santos-Laso A
- Arechederra M
- Ruiz de Gauna M
- Aspichueta P
- Canale M
- Casadei-Gardini A
- Francesconi M
- Carotti S
- Morini S
- Nelson LJ
- Iraburu MJ
- Chen C
- Sangro B
- Marin JJG
- Martinez-Chantar ML
- Banales JM
- Arnes-Benito R
- Huch M
- Patino JM
- Dar AA
- Nosrati M
- Oyarzábal J
- Prósper F
- Urman J
- Cubero FJ
- Trautwein C
- Berasain C
- Fernandez-Barrena MG
- Avila MA
journal: Hepatology
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/hep.31642
keywords:
- Animals
- "Bile Duct Neoplasms/drug therapy, metabolism"
- CCAAT-Enhancer-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- "Cholangiocarcinoma/drug therapy, metabolism"
- "DNA (Cytosine-5-)-Methyltransferase 1/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- "DNA Methylation/drug effects, physiology"
- Enzyme Inhibitors/pharmacology
- "Epigenesis, Genetic/drug effects"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic/drug effects"
- Histocompatibility Antigens/metabolism
- "Histone Code/drug effects, physiology"
- "Histone-Lysine N-Methyltransferase/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Humans
- Mice
- Treatment Outcome
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/metabolism
- Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dual Targeting of G9a and DNA Methyltransferase-1 for the Treatment of Experimental Cholangiocarcinoma.
**Authors:** Colyn L, Bárcena-Varela M, Álvarez-Sola G, Latasa MU, Uriarte I, Santamaría E, Herranz JM, Santos-Laso A, Arechederra M, Ruiz de Gauna M, Aspichueta P, Canale M, Casadei-Gardini A, Francesconi M, Carotti S, Morini S, Nelson LJ, Iraburu MJ, Chen C, Sangro B, Marin JJG, Martinez-Chantar ML, Banales JM, Arnes-Benito R, Huch M, Patino JM, Dar AA, Nosrati M, Oyarzábal J, Prósper F, Urman J, Cubero FJ, Trautwein C, Berasain C, Fernandez-Barrena MG, Avila MA
**Journal:** Hepatology (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/hep.31642](https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.31642)

## Content

1. Hepatology. 2021 Jun;73(6):2380-2396. doi: 10.1002/hep.31642.

Dual Targeting of G9a and DNA Methyltransferase-1 for the Treatment of 
Experimental Cholangiocarcinoma.

Colyn L(1), Bárcena-Varela M(1), Álvarez-Sola G(1)(2), Latasa MU(1), Uriarte 
I(1)(2), Santamaría E(1)(2), Herranz JM(1)(2), Santos-Laso A(3), Arechederra 
M(1), Ruiz de Gauna M(4), Aspichueta P(4), Canale M(5), Casadei-Gardini A(6), 
Francesconi M(7), Carotti S(7)(8), Morini S(7), Nelson LJ(9), Iraburu MJ(10), 
Chen C(11), Sangro B(2)(12)(13), Marin JJG(2)(14), Martinez-Chantar ML(2)(15), 
Banales JM(2)(3), Arnes-Benito R(16), Huch M(16), Patino JM(17), Dar AA(17), 
Nosrati M(17), Oyarzábal J(18), Prósper F(13)(19), Urman J(13)(20), Cubero 
FJ(11), Trautwein C(21), Berasain C(#)(1)(2)(13), Fernandez-Barrena 
MG(#)(1)(2)(13), Avila MA(#)(1)(2)(13).

Author information:
(1)Hepatology Program, CIMA, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.
(2)CIBERehd, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Liver and Gastrointestinal Diseases, Biodonostia Health 
Research Institute, Donostia University Hospital, Ikerbasque, Donostia-San 
Sebastian, Spain.
(4)Biocruces Health Research Institute, Department of Physiology, University of 
the Basque Country, Leioa, Spain.
(5)Biosciences Laboratory, Istituto Scientifico Romagnolo per lo Studio e la 
Cura dei Tumori (IRST) IRCCS, Meldola, Italy.
(6)School of Medicine, Vita-Salute San Raffaele University and Unit of Oncology, 
IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
(7)Unit of Microscopic and Ultrastructural Anatomy, University Campus 
Bio-Medico, Rome, Italy.
(8)Predictive Molecular Diagnostic Division, Pathology Department, Campus 
Bio-Medico University Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(9)School of Engineering, Institute of Engineering, The University of Edimburgh, 
Edimburgh, United Kingdom.
(10)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Navarra, Pamplona, 
Spain.
(11)Department of Immunology, Ophtalmology and ENT, School of Medicine, 
Complutense University, Madrid, Spain.
(12)Hepatology Unit, Navarra University Clinic, Pamplona, Spain.
(13)Instituto de Investigaciones Sanitarias de Navarra IdiSNA, Pamplona, Spain.
(14)Experimental Hepatology and Drug Targeting (HEVEFARM), University of 
Salamanca, IBSAL, Salamanca, Spain.
(15)Liver Disease Laboratory, Center for Cooperative Research in Biosciences 
(CICbioGUNE), Basque Research and Technology Alliance (BRTA), Bizkaia Technology 
Park, Derio, Spain.
(16)Max Plank Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, Dresden, 
Germany.
(17)California Pacific Medical Center Research Institute, San Francisco, CA.
(18)Molecular Therapies Program, CIMA, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.
(19)Oncohematology Program, CIMA, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.
(20)Department of Digestive Diseases, Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, 
Pamplona, Spain.
(21)Department of Internal Medicine III, University Hospital, RWTH Aachen, 
Aachen, Germany.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) is a devastating disease often 
detected at advanced stages when surgery cannot be performed. Conventional and 
targeted systemic therapies perform poorly, and therefore effective drugs are 
urgently needed. Different epigenetic modifications occur in CCA and contribute 
to malignancy. Targeting epigenetic mechanisms may thus open therapeutic 
opportunities. However, modifications such as DNA and histone methylation often 
coexist and cooperate in carcinogenesis. We tested the therapeutic efficacy and 
mechanism of action of a class of dual G9a histone-methyltransferase and 
DNA-methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) inhibitors.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: Expression of G9a, DNMT1, and their molecular adaptor, 
ubiquitin-like with PHD and RING finger domains-1 (UHRF1), was determined in 
human CCA. We evaluated the effect of individual and combined pharmacological 
inhibition of G9a and DNMT1 on CCA cell growth. Our lead G9a/DNMT1 inhibitor, 
CM272, was tested in human CCA cells, patient-derived tumoroids and xenograft, 
and a mouse model of cholangiocarcinogenesis with hepatocellular deletion of 
c-Jun-N-terminal-kinase (Jnk)-1/2 and diethyl-nitrosamine (DEN) plus CCl4 
treatment (JnkΔhepa + DEN + CCl4 mice). We found an increased and correlative 
expression of G9a, DNMT1, and UHRF1 in CCAs. Cotreatment with independent 
pharmacological inhibitors G9a and DNMT1 synergistically inhibited CCA cell 
growth. CM272 markedly reduced CCA cell proliferation and synergized with 
Cisplatin and the ERBB-targeted inhibitor, Lapatinib. CM272 inhibited CCA 
tumoroids and xenograft growth and significantly antagonized CCA progression in 
JnkΔhepa + DEN + CCl4 mice without apparent toxicity. Mechanistically, CM272 
reprogrammed the tumoral metabolic transcriptome and phenotype toward a 
differentiated and quiescent status.
CONCLUSIONS: Dual targeting of G9a and DNMT1 with epigenetic small molecule 
inhibitors such as CM272 is a potential strategy to treat CCA and/or enhance the 
efficacy of other systemic therapies.

© 2020 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep.31642
PMID: 33222246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]