---
reference_id: "PMID:29128194"
title: "Treatment of electrical status epilepticus in sleep: Clinical and EEG characteristics and response to 147 treatments in 47 patients."
authors:
- van den Munckhof B
- Alderweireld C
- Davelaar S
- van Teeseling HC
- Nikolakopoulos S
- Braun KPJ
- Jansen FE
journal: Eur J Paediatr Neurol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2017.08.006
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- Anticonvulsants/therapeutic use
- Benzodiazepines/therapeutic use
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Cognitive Dysfunction/etiology, physiopathology"
- Electroencephalography
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Neuropsychological Tests
- Retrospective Studies
- "Sleep Wake Disorders/complications, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- "Status Epilepticus/complications, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Syndrome
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of electrical status epilepticus in sleep: Clinical and EEG characteristics and response to 147 treatments in 47 patients.
**Authors:** van den Munckhof B, Alderweireld C, Davelaar S, van Teeseling HC, Nikolakopoulos S, Braun KPJ, Jansen FE
**Journal:** Eur J Paediatr Neurol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejpn.2017.08.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejpn.2017.08.006)

## Content

1. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2018 Jan;22(1):64-71. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2017.08.006. 
Epub 2017 Oct 26.

Treatment of electrical status epilepticus in sleep: Clinical and EEG 
characteristics and response to 147 treatments in 47 patients.

van den Munckhof B(1), Alderweireld C(2), Davelaar S(3), van Teeseling HC(3), 
Nikolakopoulos S(4), Braun KPJ(2), Jansen FE(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Brain Center Rudolf Magnus, University 
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
B.vandenMunckhof@umcutrecht.nl.
(2)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Brain Center Rudolf Magnus, University 
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pediatric Neuropsychology, University Medical Center Utrecht, 
Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Biostatistics and Research Support, Julius Center for Health 
Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Electrical status epilepticus in sleep (ESES) syndrome is 
characterized by near-continuous sleep-induced epileptiform activity and 
acquired cognitive deficits. Treatment is assumed mandatory to improve cognitive 
outcome. We aimed to compare EEG characteristics, subjective evaluation and 
objective neuropsychological assessment as measures to evaluate treatment 
efficacy, and to analyze possible predictors.
METHODS: We retrospectively included patients with ESES syndrome treated in our 
center. Treatment effect was analyzed on sleep EEG spike wave index (SWI) and 
cognitive functioning.
RESULTS: 47 patients had 147 (43 steroid and 104 non-steroid) treatments. 
Cognitive improvement was reported after 36% of treatments at first follow-up 
and 45% of treatments at last follow-up. The median SWI change for treatments 
resulting in subjective cognitive improvement was -44%, and 0% for those not 
resulting in subjective cognitive improvement at first follow-up (p = 0.008) and 
-50% vs. +5% at last follow-up (p = 0.002). No clear association between 
subjective cognitive improvement and IQ change, and between SWI and IQ change 
was found. By means of logistic regression we found that steroid treatment, as 
compared to non-steroid treatment, was associated with cognitive improvement at 
first follow-up (multivariate OR after multiple imputation 2.5, 95% CI 1.1-5.7), 
while at last follow-up, higher age at diagnosis was related to cognitive 
improvement only in univariate analysis (OR 1.02, 95% CI 1.01-1.04).
CONCLUSIONS: We found that in children with ESES, cognitive improvement after 
treatment was strongly associated with SWI decrease, while it was not reflected 
by a significant IQ increase. Steroid treatment was most successful in improving 
cognitive performance.

Copyright © 2017 European Paediatric Neurology Society. Published by Elsevier 
Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2017.08.006
PMID: 29128194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]