---
reference_id: "PMID:38384638"
title: "Assessment of Patients' Quality-of-Life Post-Thyroidectomy."
authors:
- Alnefaie SM
- Alotaibi MS
- Alsobaie AE
- Alotaibi WB
- Alwuthaynani MI
- Alotibi AR
- Alayyaf FA
- Almnjwami RF
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.52744
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Assessment of Patients' Quality-of-Life Post-Thyroidectomy.
**Authors:** Alnefaie SM, Alotaibi MS, Alsobaie AE, Alotaibi WB, Alwuthaynani MI, Alotibi AR, Alayyaf FA, Almnjwami RF
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.52744](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.52744)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Jan 22;16(1):e52744. doi: 10.7759/cureus.52744. eCollection 2024
Jan.

Assessment of Patients' Quality-of-Life Post-Thyroidectomy.

Alnefaie SM(1), Alotaibi MS(1), Alsobaie AE(1), Alotaibi WB(1), Alwuthaynani
MI(1), Alotibi AR(1), Alayyaf FA(1), Almnjwami RF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, College of Medicine, Taif University, Taif, SAU.

INTRODUCTION: The assessment of quality of life (QOL) after thyroidectomy has
been a focus of medical research, aiming to understand its impact on patients'
overall well-being and functional status. Studies have examined the physical,
psychological, and social dimensions of QOL, providing valuable insights into
the outcomes of thyroidectomy and improving patient care. The aim of the study
is to evaluate the long-term impact of different aspects of patients' quality of
life post-thyroidectomy.
METHODS: This cross-sectional study was conducted in Taif City and included 100
participants post-thyroidectomy. Data were collected from medical records and
telephone interviews using the modified Arabic version of the EROTC QLQ-H&N43
questionnaire. The collected data were analyzed using R software version 4.2.2.
RESULTS: The majority of the 100 participants were female (76%), and most were
over 50 years old (38%). The types of surgery performed included
hemithyroidectomy (36%), subtotal thyroidectomy (6%), and total thyroidectomy
(58%). Participants reported difficulties related to their senses, body
satisfaction, sexual satisfaction, eating, speaking, and social interactions.
Pain in the mouth and jaw, as well as swallowing difficulties, showed variations
among the surgery groups. Other symptoms, such as tooth problems, dry mouth, and
swelling in the neck, did not differ significantly among the groups. Numbness in
the hands or feet was associated with a subtotal or total thyroidectomy.
Difficulties with enjoying meals, eating in front of others, and communication
issues showed variations among the surgery groups.
CONCLUSION: This study provided insights into the QOL of thyroidectomy survivors
in Taif City. Participants reported challenges related to sensory, body, and
sexual issues, as well as difficulties with eating, speaking, and social
interactions. The findings highlight the need for interventions and support to
address these challenges and optimize the QOL of thyroidectomy patients.
Furthermore, research is warranted to explore specific factors contributing to
these difficulties and to develop targeted interventions for better patient
outcomes.

Copyright © 2024, Alnefaie et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.52744
PMCID: PMC10881216
PMID: 38384638

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared financial
relationships, which are detailed in the next section.
