---
reference_id: "PMID:22351073"
title: Synaptic dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Marcello E
- Epis R
- Saraceno C
- Di Luca M
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-0932-8_25
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Synaptic dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Marcello E, Epis R, Saraceno C, Di Luca M
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-7091-0932-8_25](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-7091-0932-8_25)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2012;970:573-601. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-0932-8_25.

Synaptic dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease.

Marcello E(1), Epis R, Saraceno C, Di Luca M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacological Sciences and Centre of Excellence on 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Milan, Via Balzaretti 9, 20133 Milan, 
Italy. elena.marcello@unimi.it

Generation of amyloid peptide (Aβ) is at the beginning of a cascade that leads 
to Alzheimer's disease (AD). Amyloid precursor protein (APP), as well as β- and 
γ-secretases, is the principal player involved in Aβ production, while 
α-secretase cleavage on APP prevents Aβ deposition. Recent studies suggested 
that soluble assembly states of Aβ peptides can cause cognitive problems by 
disrupting synaptic function in the absence of significant neurodegeneration. 
Therefore, current research investigates the relative importance of these 
various soluble Aβ assemblies in causing synaptic dysfunction and cognitive 
deficits. Several Aβ oligomers targets and cellular mechanisms responsible of 
Aβ-induced synaptic failure have been identified. The first and most important 
mechanism impugns a toxic gain of function for Aβ which results due to 
self-association and attainment of new structures capable of novel interactions 
that lead to impaired plasticity. Other scenarios predicate that Aβ has a normal 
physiological role. On the one hand, insufficient Aβ could lead to a loss of 
normal function, whereas excess Aβ may precipitate dysfunction. How this occurs 
and which the main target/s is/are for the synaptic action of Aβ remains to be 
fully understood and would certainly represent one of the main challenges to 
future AD research.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-0932-8_25
PMID: 22351073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]