---
reference_id: "PMID:35754516"
title: "Lumping versus splitting: How to approach defining a disease to enable accurate genomic curation."
authors:
- Thaxton C
- Goldstein J
- DiStefano M
- Wallace K
- Witmer PD
- Haendel MA
- Hamosh A
- Rehm HL
- Berg JS
journal: Cell Genom
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.xgen.2022.100131
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lumping versus splitting: How to approach defining a disease to enable accurate genomic curation.
**Authors:** Thaxton C, Goldstein J, DiStefano M, Wallace K, Witmer PD, Haendel MA, Hamosh A, Rehm HL, Berg JS
**Journal:** Cell Genom (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.xgen.2022.100131](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xgen.2022.100131)

## Content

1. Cell Genom. 2022 May 11;2(5):100131. doi: 10.1016/j.xgen.2022.100131.

Lumping versus splitting: How to approach defining a disease to enable accurate
genomic curation.

Thaxton C(1)(2), Goldstein J(1), DiStefano M(3), Wallace K(1), Witmer PD(4),
Haendel MA(5), Hamosh A(6), Rehm HL(7)(8), Berg JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599,
USA.
(2)Lead contact.
(3)Precision Health Program, Geisinger, Danville, PA 17822, USA.
(4)Johns Hopkins Genomics, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA.
(5)Center for Health AI, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora,
CO 80045, USA.
(6)McKusick-Nathans Department of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
(7)Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA
02114, USA.
(8)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

The dilemma of how to categorize and classify diseases has been debated for
centuries. The field of medical genetics has historically approached nosology
based on clinical phenotypes observed in patients and families. Advances in
genomic sequencing and understanding of genetic contributions to disease often
provoke a need to reassess these classifications. The Clinical Genome Resource
(ClinGen) has developed frameworks to classify the strength of evidence
underlying monogenic gene-disease relationships, variant pathogenicity, and
clinical actionability. It is therefore necessary to define the disease entity
being evaluated, which can be challenging for genes associated with multiple
conditions and/or a broad phenotypic spectrum. We therefore developed criteria
to guide "lumping and splitting" decisions and improve consistency in defining
monogenic gene-disease relationships. Here, we outline the precuration process,
the lumping and splitting guidelines with examples, and describe the
implications for clinical diagnosis, informatics, and care management.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xgen.2022.100131
PMCID: PMC9221396
PMID: 35754516

Conflict of interest statement: DECLARATION OF INTERESTS H.L.R. is a member of
the Cell Genomics advisory board. The other authors declare no competing
interests.
