---
reference_id: "PMID:20439745"
title: Impairment of neutrophil extracellular trap degradation is associated with lupus nephritis.
authors:
- Hakkim A
- Fürnrohr BG
- Amann K
- Laube B
- Abed UA
- Brinkmann V
- Herrmann M
- Voll RE
- Zychlinsky A
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0909927107
keywords:
- Deoxyribonuclease I/metabolism
- Extracellular Space
- Female
- Humans
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/blood, enzymology, pathology, therapy"
- "Lupus Nephritis/blood, enzymology, pathology"
- Male
- Neutrophils/enzymology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impairment of neutrophil extracellular trap degradation is associated with lupus nephritis.
**Authors:** Hakkim A, Fürnrohr BG, Amann K, Laube B, Abed UA, Brinkmann V, Herrmann M, Voll RE, Zychlinsky A
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0909927107](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0909927107)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 May 25;107(21):9813-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0909927107. Epub 2010 May 3.

Impairment of neutrophil extracellular trap degradation is associated with lupus
nephritis.

Hakkim A(1), Fürnrohr BG, Amann K, Laube B, Abed UA, Brinkmann V, Herrmann M,
Voll RE, Zychlinsky A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular Microbiology and Microscopy Core Facility, Max-Planck
Institute for Infection Biology, Berlin 10117, Germany.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease in which patients
develop autoantibodies to DNA, histones, and often to neutrophil proteins. These
form immune complexes that are pathogenic and may cause lupus nephritis. In SLE
patients, infections can initiate flares and are a major cause of mortality.
Neutrophils respond to infections and release extracellular traps (NETs), which
are antimicrobial and are made of DNA, histones, and neutrophil proteins. The
timely removal of NETs may be crucial for tissue homeostasis to avoid
presentation of self-antigens. We tested the hypothesis that SLE patients cannot
clear NETs, contributing to the pathogenesis of lupus nephritis. Here we show
that serum endonuclease DNase1 is essential for disassembly of NETs.
Interestingly, a subset of SLE patients' sera degraded NETs poorly. Two
mechanisms caused this impaired NET degradation: (i) the presence of DNase1
inhibitors or (ii) anti-NET antibodies prevented DNase1 access to NETs.
Impairment of DNase1 function and failure to dismantle NETs correlated with
kidney involvement. Hence, identification of SLE patients who cannot dismantle
NETs might be a useful indicator of renal involvement. Moreover, NETs might
represent a therapeutic target in SLE.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0909927107
PMCID: PMC2906830
PMID: 20439745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
