---
reference_id: "PMID:2102678"
title: A mutation in the tRNA(Leu)(UUR) gene associated with the MELAS subgroup of mitochondrial encephalomyopathies.
authors:
- Goto Y
- Nonaka I
- Horai S
journal: Nature
year: '1990'
doi: 10.1038/348651a0
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- "Brain Diseases/classification, diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- "Mitochondria, Muscle/metabolism"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- "RNA, Transfer, Leu/genetics"
- Reference Values
- Restriction Mapping
- "Sequence Homology, Nucleic Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A mutation in the tRNA(Leu)(UUR) gene associated with the MELAS subgroup of mitochondrial encephalomyopathies.
**Authors:** Goto Y, Nonaka I, Horai S
**Journal:** Nature (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1038/348651a0](https://doi.org/10.1038/348651a0)

## Content

1. Nature. 1990 Dec 13;348(6302):651-3. doi: 10.1038/348651a0.

A mutation in the tRNA(Leu)(UUR) gene associated with the MELAS subgroup of 
mitochondrial encephalomyopathies.

Goto Y(1), Nonaka I, Horai S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Ultrastructural Research, National Center of Neurology and 
Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    Nature. 1991 May 16;351(6323):194. doi: 10.1038/351194a0.

Mitochondrial encephalomyopathies are usually divided into three distinct 
clinical subgroups: (1) mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis 
and stroke-like episodes (MELAS); (2) myoclonus epilepsy associated with 
ragged-red fibres (MERRF); and (3) chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia 
(CPEO) including Kearns-Sayre syndrome. Large deletions of human mitochondrial 
DNA and a transition mutation at the mitochondrial transfer RNALys gene give 
rise to CPEO including Kearns-Sayre syndrome and MERRF, respectively. Here we 
report an A-to-G transition mutation at nucleotide pair 3,243 in the 
dihydrouridine loop of mitochondrial tRNA(Leu)(UUR) that is specific to patients 
with MELAS. Because this mutation creates an ApaI restriction site, we could 
perform a simple molecular diagnostic test for the disease. The mutation was 
present in 26 out of 31 independent MELAS patients and 1 out of 29 CPEO 
patients, but absent in the 5 MERRF and 50 controls tested. Southern blot 
analysis confirmed that the mutant DNA always coexists with the wild-type DNA 
(heteroplasmy).

DOI: 10.1038/348651a0
PMID: 2102678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]