---
reference_id: "PMID:40048192"
title: "Eating Disorders: A Review."
authors:
- Attia E
- Walsh BT
journal: JAMA
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1001/jama.2025.0132
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Anorexia Nervosa/complications, epidemiology, psychology, therapy"
- "Bulimia Nervosa/complications, epidemiology, psychology, therapy"
- "Feeding and Eating Disorders/complications, epidemiology, psychology, therapy"
- Psychotherapy/methods
- Prevalence
- "Depression/epidemiology, prevention & control, psychology, therapy"
- Nutritional Support/methods
- Antidepressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Central Nervous System Stimulants/therapeutic use
- "Bradycardia/epidemiology, etiology, prevention & control"
- "Bone Diseases, Metabolic/etiology, prevention & control"
- "Suicide/psychology, statistics & numerical data"
- Suicide Prevention
- "Anxiety/epidemiology, prevention & control, psychology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Eating Disorders: A Review.
**Authors:** Attia E, Walsh BT
**Journal:** JAMA (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.2025.0132](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2025.0132)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2025 Apr 8;333(14):1242-1252. doi: 10.1001/jama.2025.0132.

Eating Disorders: A Review.

Attia E(1)(2)(3), Walsh BT(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New
York, New York.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York.
(3)New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York.

IMPORTANCE: Eating disorders are characterized by disturbances in eating
behavior and occur worldwide, with a lifetime prevalence of 2% to 5%. They are
more common among females than males and may be associated with medical and
psychiatric complications, impaired functioning, and decreased quality of life.
OBSERVATIONS: Common eating disorders include anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa,
binge-eating disorder, and avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder. These
disorders may be associated with changes in weight, electrolyte abnormalities
(eg, hyponatremia, hypokalemia), bradycardia, disturbances in reproductive
hormones (eg, decreased estradiol levels in females), and decreased bone
density. Individuals with anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge-eating
disorder have high lifetime rates of depression (76.3% for bulimia nervosa,
65.5% for binge-eating disorder, and 49.5% for anorexia nervosa) and higher
rates of suicide attempts than those without eating disorders. Anorexia nervosa
is associated with a mortality rate of 5.1 deaths per 1000 person-years (95% CI,
4.0-6.1), nearly 6 times higher than that of individuals of the same age without
anorexia nervosa; 25% of deaths among individuals with anorexia nervosa are from
suicide. First-line treatments for eating disorders include nutritional support,
psychotherapy, and pharmacotherapy. Behaviorally focused therapies, including
cognitive behavioral therapy, may be effective, especially for bulimia nervosa
and binge-eating disorder. Youth with anorexia nervosa benefit from family-based
treatment with parental oversight of eating, resulting in a remission rate at 6
to 12 months of 48.6% vs 34.3% with individual treatment (odds ratio, 2.08; 95%
CI, 1.07-4.03; P = .03). Fluoxetine and other antidepressants decrease episodes
of binge eating in individuals with bulimia nervosa, even in those without
depression (fluoxetine vs placebo, standardized mean difference = -0.24 [small
effect size; 95% CI, -0.41 to -0.08]). Antidepressants and the central nervous
system stimulant lisdexamfetamine reduce binge frequency in binge-eating
disorder compared with placebo (antidepressants vs placebo, standardized mean
difference = -0.29 [small effect size; 95% CI, -0.51 to -0.06]; lisdexamfetamine
vs placebo, Hedges g = 0.57 [medium effect size; 95% CI, 0.28-0.86]). There are
currently no effective medications for treatment of anorexia nervosa.
Individuals with serious medical or psychiatric complications of eating
disorders such as bradycardia or suicidality should be hospitalized for
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Globally, eating disorders affect 2% to 5% of
individuals during their lifetime and are more common in females than males. In
addition to weight changes, eating disorders may cause electrolyte
abnormalities, bradycardia, disturbances in reproductive hormones, and decreased
bone density, and are associated with increased risk of depression, anxiety, and
suicide attempts. First-line treatments of eating disorders include nutritional
support, psychotherapy, and pharmacotherapy.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2025.0132
PMID: 40048192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
