---
reference_id: "PMID:34431088"
title: Effect of sex chromosome number variation on attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder symptoms, executive function, and processing speed.
authors:
- Green T
- Flash S
- Shankar G
- Bade Shrestha S
- Jo B
- Klabunde M
- Hong DS
- Reiss AL
journal: Dev Med Child Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/dmcn.15020
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of sex chromosome number variation on attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder symptoms, executive function, and processing speed.
**Authors:** Green T, Flash S, Shankar G, Bade Shrestha S, Jo B, Klabunde M, Hong DS, Reiss AL
**Journal:** Dev Med Child Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/dmcn.15020](https://doi.org/10.1111/dmcn.15020)

## Content

1. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2022 Mar;64(3):331-339. doi: 10.1111/dmcn.15020. Epub
2021  Aug 24.

Effect of sex chromosome number variation on attention-deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder symptoms, executive function, and processing speed.

Green T(1)(2), Flash S(1)(2), Shankar G(1)(2), Bade Shrestha S(1)(2), Jo 
B(1)(2), Klabunde M(3), Hong DS(1)(2), Reiss AL(1)(2)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Interdisciplinary Brain Sciences, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Essex, Colchester, UK.
(4)Department of Radiology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
CA, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
CA, USA.

AIM: To study sex differences in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 
symptoms, we explored whether X chromosome absence or excess is independently 
associated with deficits in attention and hyperactivity, executive function, and 
processing speed.
METHOD: We assessed 116 children (ages 3y 10mo-11y 11mo, mean 8y 5mo, SD 1y 
11mo) with a variable number of sex chromosomes: 36 females with Turner syndrome 
(45, X0), 20 males with Klinefelter syndrome (47, XXY), 37 typically developing 
females (XX), and 23 typically developing males (XY).
RESULTS: X chromosome absence was associated with increased attention problems, 
hyperactivity, and deficits in inhibitory control, compared with female children 
with XX (all p<0.003). Conversely, X chromosome excess was associated with 
weakness in working memory (p=0.018) and approached significance for attention 
problems (p=0.071) but not with hyperactivity, or weakness in inhibitory control 
relative to male children with XY. Using non-parametric effect size to quantify 
the clinical effect revealed that X chromosome absence affected attention, 
hyperactivity, executive function, and processing speed (all r>0.4), while X 
excess affected in-laboratory as well as parent-reported working memory (all 
r>0.4).
INTERPRETATION: Our observations provide compelling evidence that the absence or 
excess of an X chromosome distinctly affects cognition and behaviors associated 
with ADHD.

© 2021 Mac Keith Press.

DOI: 10.1111/dmcn.15020
PMCID: PMC8816867
PMID: 34431088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]