---
reference_id: "PMID:39046420"
title: "Immune recovery uveitis: an ocular manifestation in HIV/AIDS receiving treatment."
authors:
- Dionson MM
journal: Curr Opin Ophthalmol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/ICU.0000000000001078
keywords:
- Humans
- "Uveitis/immunology, drug therapy, diagnosis"
- "HIV Infections/drug therapy, immunology, complications"
- "Antiretroviral Therapy, Highly Active"
- "Cytomegalovirus Retinitis/drug therapy, diagnosis, immunology"
- "AIDS-Related Opportunistic Infections/immunology, drug therapy, diagnosis"
- Immune Reconstitution
- "Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome/drug therapy, immunology, complications"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immune recovery uveitis: an ocular manifestation in HIV/AIDS receiving treatment.
**Authors:** Dionson MM
**Journal:** Curr Opin Ophthalmol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/ICU.0000000000001078](https://doi.org/10.1097/ICU.0000000000001078)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Ophthalmol. 2024 Nov 1;35(6):507-512. doi: 
10.1097/ICU.0000000000001078. Epub 2024 Jul 16.

Immune recovery uveitis: an ocular manifestation in HIV/AIDS receiving 
treatment.

Dionson MM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Vicente Sotto Memorial Medical Center, Cebu 
City, Philippines.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This article intends to briefly discuss AIDS, summarize the 
current literature on immune recovery uveitis, describe its ocular 
manifestations and complications, and tackle its complex management.
RECENT FINDINGS: The clinical picture of immune recovery uveitis is still 
evolving. Up to today, there are still no definite criteria for immune recovery 
uveitis, and although closely associated with cytomegalovirus retinitis and 
HIV/AIDS, there are several cases of similar intraocular response in non-HIV 
patients. The exact pathology for this paradoxical inflammatory reaction remains 
unclear; however, there is an interest in identifying biomarkers to determine 
underlying mechanisms and identify patients at risk. The management of this 
disease also remains a challenge and no standardized treatment approach exists 
currently.
SUMMARY: Immune recovery uveitis is an important cause of visual morbidity 
particularly in HIV/AIDS patients receiving highly active antiretroviral. It is 
a paradoxical reaction that is frequently associated with a prior 
cytomegalovirus retinitis infection. Although it can be a transient and 
self-limiting process, there is a complex decision on the timing of antiviral 
treatment and the initiation of antiretroviral treatment to prevent immune 
recovery uveitis. Furthermore, a substantial challenge arises in 
balancingtreatment decisions for complications in refractory cases.

Copyright © 2024 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/ICU.0000000000001078
PMID: 39046420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]