---
reference_id: "PMID:36549335"
title: Preoperative Bladder Capacity Predicts Social Continence following Bladder Neck Reconstruction in Children Born with Exstrophy-Epispadias Complex.
authors:
- Bar-Yosef Y
- Savin Z
- Ekstein M
- Ben-David R
- Dekalo S
- Bar-Yaakov N
- Sofer M
- Ben-Chaim J
journal: Eur J Pediatr Surg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1055/a-2003-1823
keywords:
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Child, Preschool"
- Urinary Bladder/surgery
- "Epispadias/complications, surgery"
- "Bladder Exstrophy/complications, surgery"
- Urologic Surgical Procedures
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Preoperative Bladder Capacity Predicts Social Continence following Bladder Neck Reconstruction in Children Born with Exstrophy-Epispadias Complex.
**Authors:** Bar-Yosef Y, Savin Z, Ekstein M, Ben-David R, Dekalo S, Bar-Yaakov N, Sofer M, Ben-Chaim J
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr Surg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1055/a-2003-1823](https://doi.org/10.1055/a-2003-1823)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr Surg. 2023 Dec;33(6):510-514. doi: 10.1055/a-2003-1823. Epub
2022  Dec 22.

Preoperative Bladder Capacity Predicts Social Continence following Bladder Neck 
Reconstruction in Children Born with Exstrophy-Epispadias Complex.

Bar-Yosef Y(1), Savin Z(1), Ekstein M(2), Ben-David R(1), Dekalo S(1), 
Bar-Yaakov N(1), Sofer M(1), Ben-Chaim J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Urology, Dana-Dwek Children's Hospital, Tel-Aviv 
University Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
(2)Department of Pediatric Anesthesia, Dana-Dwek Children's Hospital, Tel-Aviv 
University Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv, Israel.

INTRODUCTION:  The aim of the study is to review the continence and volitional 
voiding rate in a single center cohort of exstrophy-epispadias patients 
following Young-Dees-Leadbetter bladder neck reconstruction and to explore 
factors which predict continence.
MATERIALS AND METHODS:  Children who underwent Young-Dees-Leadbetter bladder 
neck reconstruction as a final stage of repair in a large single low-volume 
center in a small-population country between 1997 and 2019 were included. 
Demographic and clinical details were extracted from the patients' charts. The 
primary end point was continence and volitional voiding. Patients were 
categorized as incontinent, socially continent (daytime dry intervals > 3 hours, 
wet nights) and fully continent (daytime dry intervals > 3 hours, dry nights).
RESULTS:  The study cohort included 27 patients whose median age at 
reconstruction was 5 years, and median follow-up was 7.8 years (interquartile 
range [IQR] 6-11.2). The cohort included 24 classic exstrophy patients (89%, 17 
males and 7 females) and 3 isolated complete epispadias patients (11%, 1 male 
and 2 females). Nine (33%) patients achieved full continence and social 
continence was achieved by nine (33%) patients, for an overall social continence 
rate of 67%. Preoperative bladder capacity of 110 mL or more was associated with 
achieving social continence (odds ratio = 6.4, p = 0.047). The overall 
volitional voiding rate was 67%.
CONCLUSION:  Young-Dees-Leadbetter bladder neck reconstruction yielded rates of 
33% for full continence and 67% for social continence and volitional voiding. 
These rates are comparable to those of large high-volume centers. A preoperative 
capacity of 110 mL or more was the sole predictor of social continence.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/a-2003-1823
PMID: 36549335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.