---
reference_id: "PMID:38243953"
title: "Missed Opportunities in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: A Narrative Review."
authors:
- Kwok CS
- Phillips A
- Mukherjee S
- Patel MG
- Hanif W
journal: Curr Diabetes Rev
year: '2024'
doi: 10.2174/0115733998274651231117101511
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Missed Opportunities in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: A Narrative Review.
**Authors:** Kwok CS, Phillips A, Mukherjee S, Patel MG, Hanif W
**Journal:** Curr Diabetes Rev (2024)
**DOI:** [10.2174/0115733998274651231117101511](https://doi.org/10.2174/0115733998274651231117101511)

## Content

1. Curr Diabetes Rev. 2024;20(9):e150124225648. doi: 
10.2174/0115733998274651231117101511.

Missed Opportunities in Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus: A Narrative Review.

Kwok CS(1)(2), Phillips A(1), Mukherjee S(3), Patel MG(1)(4), Hanif W(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department for Post-Qualifying Healthcare Practice, Birmingham City 
University, Birmingham, UK.
(2)Department of Cardiology, University Hospitals of North Midlands NHS Trust, 
Stoke-on-Trent, UK.
(3)Research Centre for Diabetes Hypertension and Obesity (RCDHO) Dr. Rajendra 
Praad Central Agriculture University, Samastipur, India.
(4)Nuffield Department of Primary Care Health Sciences, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, UK.
(5)Department of Diabetes, University Hospital Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.

BACKGROUND: Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a significant health problem 
around the world.
OBJECTIVE: This review aims to define missed opportunities and how they apply to 
patients with T2DM.
METHOD: This narrative review describes the natural history of T2DM and also 
describes where missed opportunities may arise.
RESULTS: Missed opportunities may relate to prevention, early detection, 
diagnosis, and treatment of diabetes. The cornerstone of T2DM prevention is the 
control of modifiable risk factors and lifestyle changes to potentially prevent 
diabetes. Early detection of T2DM is important as it is a chronic condition that 
can progress rapidly if untreated. Missed opportunities related to the diagnosis 
of T2DM draw attention to the heterogeneous presentation of diabetes. The 
condition can be incidentally identified in asymptomatic patients, so all 
healthcare professionals should be aware of the disease. Furthermore, it is not 
unexpected that patients with atypical symptoms may have a delay in diagnosis. 
The treatment-related missed opportunities in T2DM are broad and include 
self-care, education, remission of T2DM, risk factor management, prevention of 
complications, medication therapy and compliance, as well as individualized 
care. Considering patient pathways is a useful approach to evaluate missed 
opportunities in patient care.
CONCLUSION: Missed opportunities are a concept that is not often considered in 
diabetes care, which calls upon reflection of real-world activities and 
consideration of whether patient outcomes could have been improved with changes 
in decision-making. Future studies that aim to improve patient care should 
consider this concept.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/0115733998274651231117101511
PMID: 38243953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]