---
reference_id: "PMID:24080990"
title: Visit-to-visit blood pressure variability, silent cerebral injury, and risk of stroke.
authors:
- Nagai M
- Kario K
journal: Am J Hypertens
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/ajh/hpt167
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Visit-to-visit blood pressure variability, silent cerebral injury, and risk of stroke.
**Authors:** Nagai M, Kario K
**Journal:** Am J Hypertens (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ajh/hpt167](https://doi.org/10.1093/ajh/hpt167)

## Content

1. Am J Hypertens. 2013 Dec;26(12):1369-76. doi: 10.1093/ajh/hpt167. Epub 2013
Sep  30.

Visit-to-visit blood pressure variability, silent cerebral injury, and risk of 
stroke.

Nagai M(1), Kario K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Jichi Medical 
University School of Medicine, Tochigi, Japan.

Apart from the well-known role of hypertension in cerebrovascular disease, 
visit-to-visit blood pressure (BP) variability is emerging as an independent 
risk factor for stroke. Although the underlying mechanism is not fully 
understood, artery remodeling is thought to be closely involved in the 
relationship between visit-to-visit BP variability and stroke. This review 
article summarizes the recent literature on these topics. Silent cerebral injury 
is considered to serve as a common pathophysiology in the relationship of 
visit-to-visit BP variability with cognitive impairment and stroke. Here we 
review visit-to-visit BP variability, some comparisons of the effects of 
antihypertensive agents on visit-to-visit BP variability, and an issue regarding 
the impact of these agents on stroke.

DOI: 10.1093/ajh/hpt167
PMID: 24080990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]