---
reference_id: "PMID:22157157"
title: New insights into pathogenesis of exercise-induced bronchoconstriction.
authors:
- Hallstrand TS
journal: Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1097/ACI.0b013e32834ecc67
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New insights into pathogenesis of exercise-induced bronchoconstriction.
**Authors:** Hallstrand TS
**Journal:** Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1097/ACI.0b013e32834ecc67](https://doi.org/10.1097/ACI.0b013e32834ecc67)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2012 Feb;12(1):42-8. doi: 
10.1097/ACI.0b013e32834ecc67.

New insights into pathogenesis of exercise-induced bronchoconstriction.

Hallstrand TS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, University 
of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA. tealh@uw.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Exercise-induced bronchoconstriction (EIB) refers to acute 
airflow obstruction that is triggered by a period of physical exertion. Here we 
review recent findings about the epidemiology of EIB, immunopathology leading to 
EIB, and the latest understanding of the pathogenesis of EIB.
RECENT FINDINGS: Longitudinal studies demonstrated that airway 
hyper-responsiveness to exercise or cold air at an early age are among the 
strongest predictors of persistent asthma. Patients that are susceptible to EIB 
have epithelial disruption and increased levels of inflammatory eicosanoids such 
as cysteinyl leukotrienes (CysLT)s. The leukocytes implicated in production of 
eicosanoids in the airways include both a unique mast cell population as well as 
eosinophils. A secreted phospholipase A(2) (sPLA(2)) enzyme that serves as a 
regulator of CysLT formation is present in increased quantities in asthma. 
Transglutaminase 2 (TGM2) is expressed at increased levels in asthma and serves 
as a regulator of secreted phospholipase A(2) group X (sPLA(2)-X). Further, 
sPLA(2)-X acts on target cells such as eosinophils to initiate cellular 
eicosanoid synthesis.
SUMMARY: Recent studies have advanced our understanding of EIB as a syndrome 
that is caused by the increased production of inflammatory eicosanoids. The 
airway epithelium may be an important regulator of the production of 
inflammatory eicosanoids by leukocytes.

DOI: 10.1097/ACI.0b013e32834ecc67
PMCID: PMC3289409
PMID: 22157157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]