---
reference_id: "PMID:37974208"
title: "Clinical features, imaging findings and molecular data of limb-girdle muscular dystrophies in a cohort of Chinese patients."
authors:
- Lin F
- Yang K
- Lin X
- Jin M
- Chen L
- Zheng FZ
- Qiu LL
- Ye ZX
- Chen HZ
- Lin MT
- Wang N
- Wang ZQ
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02897-x
keywords:
- Humans
- Child
- East Asian People
- "Muscular Dystrophies, Limb-Girdle/diagnosis"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/pathology"
- Muscle Weakness/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical features, imaging findings and molecular data of limb-girdle muscular dystrophies in a cohort of Chinese patients.
**Authors:** Lin F, Yang K, Lin X, Jin M, Chen L, Zheng FZ, Qiu LL, Ye ZX, Chen HZ, Lin MT, Wang N, Wang ZQ
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-02897-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-02897-x)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 Nov 16;18(1):356. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02897-x.

Clinical features, imaging findings and molecular data of limb-girdle muscular 
dystrophies in a cohort of Chinese patients.

Lin F(1), Yang K(1), Lin X(1), Jin M(1)(2), Chen L(1), Zheng FZ(1)(2), Qiu 
LL(1)(2), Ye ZX(1), Chen HZ(1)(2), Lin MT(1)(2), Wang N(3)(4), Wang ZQ(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Institute of Neurology, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Fujian Medical University, 20 Cha Zhong Road, Fuzhou, 350005, 
Fujian, China.
(2)Fujian Key Laboratory of Molecular Neurology, Fuzhou, 350005, China.
(3)Department of Neurology and Institute of Neurology, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Fujian Medical University, 20 Cha Zhong Road, Fuzhou, 350005, 
Fujian, China. ningwang@fjmu.edu.cn.
(4)Fujian Key Laboratory of Molecular Neurology, Fuzhou, 350005, China. 
ningwang@fjmu.edu.cn.
(5)Department of Neurology and Institute of Neurology, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Fujian Medical University, 20 Cha Zhong Road, Fuzhou, 350005, 
Fujian, China. fmuwzq@fjmu.edu.cn.
(6)Fujian Key Laboratory of Molecular Neurology, Fuzhou, 350005, China. 
fmuwzq@fjmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Limb-girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMDs) are a group of 
heterogeneous inherited diseases predominantly characterized by limb-girdle 
muscle weakness and dystrophic changes on histological analysis. The frequency 
of LGMD subtypes varies among regions in China and ethnic populations worldwide. 
Here, we analyzed the prevalence of LGMD subtypes, their corresponding clinical 
manifestations, and molecular data in a cohort of LGMD patients in Southeast 
China.
METHODS: A total of 81 consecutive patients with clinically suspected LGMDs from 
62 unrelated families across Southeast China were recruited for targeted 
next-generation sequencing and whole-exome sequencing from July 2017 to February 
2020.
RESULTS: Among 50 patients (41 families) with LGMDs, the most common subtypes 
were LGMD-R2/LGMD2B (36.6%) and LGMD-R1/LGMD2A (29.3%). Dystroglycanopathies 
(including LGMD-R9/LGMD2I, LGMD-R11/LGMD2K, LGMD-R14/LGMD2N and LGMD-R20/LGMD2U) 
were the most common childhood-onset subtypes and were found in 12.2% of the 
families. A total of 14.6% of the families had the LGMD-R7/LGMD2G subtype, and 
the mutation c.26_33dupAGGTGTCG in TCAP was the most frequent (83.3%). The only 
patient with the rare subtype LGMD-R18/LGMD2S had TRAPPC11 mutations; had a 
later onset than those previously reported, and presented with proximal‒distal 
muscle weakness, walking aid dependency, fatty liver disease and diabetes at 
33 years of age. A total of 22.0% of the patients had cardiac abnormalities, and 
one patient with LMNA-related muscular dystrophy/LGMD1B experienced sudden 
cardiac death at 37 years of age. A total of 15.4% of the patients had 
restrictive respiratory insufficiency. Muscle imaging in patients with 
LGMD-R1/LGMD2A and LGMD-R2/LGMD2B showed subtle differences, including more 
severe fatty infiltration of the posterior thigh muscles in those with 
LGMD-R1/LGMD2A and edema in the lower leg muscles in those with LGMD-R2/LGMD2B.
CONCLUSION: We determined the prevalence of different LGMD subtypes in Southeast 
China, described the detailed clinical manifestations and distinct muscle MRI 
patterns of these LGMD subtypes and reported the frequent mutations and the 
cardiorespiratory involvement frequency in our cohort, all of which might 
facilitate the differential diagnosis of LGMDs, allowing more timely treatment 
and guiding future clinical trials.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-02897-x
PMCID: PMC10652577
PMID: 37974208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.