---
reference_id: "PMID:33609196"
title: "Screening for ATTR amyloidosis in the clinic: overlapping disorders, misdiagnosis, and multiorgan awareness."
authors:
- Nativi-Nicolau JN
- Karam C
- Khella S
- Maurer MS
journal: Heart Fail Rev
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s10741-021-10080-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Screening for ATTR amyloidosis in the clinic: overlapping disorders, misdiagnosis, and multiorgan awareness.
**Authors:** Nativi-Nicolau JN, Karam C, Khella S, Maurer MS
**Journal:** Heart Fail Rev (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10741-021-10080-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10741-021-10080-2)

## Content

1. Heart Fail Rev. 2022 May;27(3):785-793. doi: 10.1007/s10741-021-10080-2. Epub 
2021 Feb 20.

Screening for ATTR amyloidosis in the clinic: overlapping disorders, 
misdiagnosis, and multiorgan awareness.

Nativi-Nicolau JN(1), Karam C(2), Khella S(3), Maurer MS(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah Health, Salt Lake City, 
UT, USA. jose.nativi@hsc.utah.edu.
(2)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, 
USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.

Amyloid transthyretin (ATTR) amyloidosis is a clinically heterogeneous and fatal 
disease that results from deposition of insoluble amyloid fibrils in various 
organs and tissues, causing progressive loss of function. The objective of this 
review is to increase awareness and diagnosis of ATTR amyloidosis by improving 
recognition of its overlapping conditions, misdiagnosis, and multiorgan 
presentation. Cardiac manifestations include heart failure, atrial fibrillation, 
intolerance to previously prescribed antihypertensives, sinus node dysfunction, 
and atrioventricular block, resulting in the need for permanent pacing. 
Neurologic manifestations include progressive sensorimotor neuropathy (e.g., 
pain, weakness) and autonomic dysfunction (e.g., erectile dysfunction, chronic 
diarrhea, orthostatic hypotension). Non-cardiac red flags often precede the 
diagnosis of ATTR amyloidosis and include musculoskeletal manifestations (e.g., 
carpal tunnel syndrome, lumbar spinal stenosis, spontaneous rupture of the 
distal tendon biceps, shoulder and knee surgery). Awareness and recognition of 
the constellation of symptoms, including cardiac, neurologic, and 
musculoskeletal manifestations, will help with early diagnosis of ATTR 
amyloidosis and faster access to therapies, thereby slowing the progression of 
this debilitating disease.

© 2021. This is a U.S. government work and not under copyright protection in the 
U.S.; foreign copyright protection may apply.

DOI: 10.1007/s10741-021-10080-2
PMCID: PMC9033715
PMID: 33609196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Jose N. Nativi-Nicolau reports funding for 
clinical trials from Pfizer, Akcea Therapeutics, and Eidos; educational grants 
from Pfizer; and consulting fees from Pfizer, Eidos, Akcea Therapeutics, and 
Alnylam. Chafic Karam reports consulting/educational activities for Akcea 
Therapeutics, Alexion, Alnylam, Argenx, Biogen, CSL Behring, Medscape, and 
Sanofi Genzyme; and has received research grants from Sanofi Genzyme and Akcea 
Therapeutics. Sami Khella reports honoraria from Akcea Therapeutics and Alnylam. 
Mathew S. Maurer reports grants from Pfizer and Alnylam; and personal fees from 
Pfizer, Eidos, GlaxoSmithKline, Prothena, Akcea Therapeutics, and Ionis.