---
reference_id: "PMID:33549739"
title: "The World Federation of ADHD International Consensus Statement: 208 Evidence-based conclusions about the disorder."
authors:
- Faraone SV
- Banaschewski T
- Coghill D
- Zheng Y
- Biederman J
- Bellgrove MA
- Newcorn JH
- Gignac M
- Al Saud NM
- Manor I
- Rohde LA
- Yang L
- Cortese S
- Almagor D
- Stein MA
- Albatti TH
- Aljoudi HF
- Alqahtani MMJ
- Asherson P
- Atwoli L
- Bölte S
- Buitelaar JK
- Crunelle CL
- Daley D
- Dalsgaard S
- Döpfner M
- Espinet S
- Fitzgerald M
- Franke B
- Gerlach M
- Haavik J
- Hartman CA
- Hartung CM
- Hinshaw SP
- Hoekstra PJ
- Hollis C
- Kollins SH
- Sandra Kooij JJ
- Kuntsi J
- Larsson H
- Li T
- Liu J
- Merzon E
- Mattingly G
- Mattos P
- McCarthy S
- Mikami AY
- Molina BSG
- Nigg JT
- Purper-Ouakil D
- Omigbodun OO
- Polanczyk GV
- Pollak Y
- Poulton AS
- Rajkumar RP
- Reding A
- Reif A
- Rubia K
- Rucklidge J
- Romanos M
- Ramos-Quiroga JA
- Schellekens A
- Scheres A
- Schoeman R
- Schweitzer JB
- Shah H
- Solanto MV
- Sonuga-Barke E
- Soutullo C
- Steinhausen HC
- Swanson JM
- Thapar A
- Tripp G
- van de Glind G
- van den Brink W
- Van der Oord S
- Venter A
- Vitiello B
- Walitza S
- Wang Y
journal: Neurosci Biobehav Rev
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.01.022
keywords:
- Humans
- Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/therapy
- Publication Bias
- Meta-Analysis as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The World Federation of ADHD International Consensus Statement: 208 Evidence-based conclusions about the disorder.
**Authors:** Faraone SV, Banaschewski T, Coghill D, Zheng Y, Biederman J, Bellgrove MA, Newcorn JH, Gignac M, Al Saud NM, Manor I, Rohde LA, Yang L, Cortese S, Almagor D, Stein MA, Albatti TH, Aljoudi HF, Alqahtani MMJ, Asherson P, Atwoli L, Bölte S, Buitelaar JK, Crunelle CL, Daley D, Dalsgaard S, Döpfner M, Espinet S, Fitzgerald M, Franke B, Gerlach M, Haavik J, Hartman CA, Hartung CM, Hinshaw SP, Hoekstra PJ, Hollis C, Kollins SH, Sandra Kooij JJ, Kuntsi J, Larsson H, Li T, Liu J, Merzon E, Mattingly G, Mattos P, McCarthy S, Mikami AY, Molina BSG, Nigg JT, Purper-Ouakil D, Omigbodun OO, Polanczyk GV, Pollak Y, Poulton AS, Rajkumar RP, Reding A, Reif A, Rubia K, Rucklidge J, Romanos M, Ramos-Quiroga JA, Schellekens A, Scheres A, Schoeman R, Schweitzer JB, Shah H, Solanto MV, Sonuga-Barke E, Soutullo C, Steinhausen HC, Swanson JM, Thapar A, Tripp G, van de Glind G, van den Brink W, Van der Oord S, Venter A, Vitiello B, Walitza S, Wang Y
**Journal:** Neurosci Biobehav Rev (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.01.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.01.022)

## Content

1. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2021 Sep;128:789-818. doi: 
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.01.022. Epub 2021 Feb 4.

The World Federation of ADHD International Consensus Statement: 208 
Evidence-based conclusions about the disorder.

Faraone SV(1), Banaschewski T(2), Coghill D(3), Zheng Y(4), Biederman J(5), 
Bellgrove MA(6), Newcorn JH(7), Gignac M(8), Al Saud NM(9), Manor I(10), Rohde 
LA(11), Yang L(12), Cortese S(13), Almagor D(14), Stein MA(15), Albatti TH(16), 
Aljoudi HF(17), Alqahtani MMJ(18), Asherson P(19), Atwoli L(20), Bölte S(21), 
Buitelaar JK(22), Crunelle CL(23), Daley D(24), Dalsgaard S(25), Döpfner M(26), 
Espinet S(27), Fitzgerald M(28), Franke B(29), Gerlach M(30), Haavik J(31), 
Hartman CA(32), Hartung CM(33), Hinshaw SP(34), Hoekstra PJ(35), Hollis C(36), 
Kollins SH(37), Sandra Kooij JJ(38), Kuntsi J(39), Larsson H(40), Li T(41), Liu 
J(42), Merzon E(43), Mattingly G(44), Mattos P(45), McCarthy S(46), Mikami 
AY(47), Molina BSG(48), Nigg JT(49), Purper-Ouakil D(50), Omigbodun OO(51), 
Polanczyk GV(52), Pollak Y(53), Poulton AS(54), Rajkumar RP(55), Reding A(56), 
Reif A(57), Rubia K(58), Rucklidge J(59), Romanos M(60), Ramos-Quiroga JA(61), 
Schellekens A(62), Scheres A(63), Schoeman R(64), Schweitzer JB(65), Shah H(66), 
Solanto MV(67), Sonuga-Barke E(68), Soutullo C(69), Steinhausen HC(70), Swanson 
JM(71), Thapar A(72), Tripp G(73), van de Glind G(74), van den Brink W(75), Van 
der Oord S(76), Venter A(77), Vitiello B(78), Walitza S(79), Wang Y(12).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Psychiatry and Neuroscience and Physiology, Psychiatry 
Research Division, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY, USA; World 
Federation of ADHD, Switzerland; American Professional Society of ADHD and 
Related Disorders (APSARD), USA. Electronic address: 
sfaraone@childpsychresearch.org.
(2)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Central 
Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, 
Mannheim, Germany; Child and Adolescent Psychiatrist's Representative, 
Zentrales-ADHS-Netz, Germany; The German Association of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Germany.
(3)Departments of Paediatrics and Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and 
Health Sciences, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia.
(4)Beijing Anding Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China; The 
National Clinical Research Center for Mental Disorders, Beijing, China; Beijing 
Key Laboratory of Mental Disorders, Beijing, China; Beijing Institute for Brain 
Disorders, Beijing, China; Asian Federation of ADHD, China; Chinese Society of 
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, China.
(5)Clinical & Research Programs in Pediatric Psychopharmacology & Adult ADHD, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; Department of Psychiatry, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(6)Turner Institute for Brain and Mental Health and School of Psychological 
Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia; Australian ADHD 
Professionals Association (AADPA), Australia.
(7)American Professional Society of ADHD and Related Disorders (APSARD), USA; 
Departments of Psychiatry and Pediatrics, Division of ADHD and Learning 
Disorders, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(8)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Montreal Children's Hospital, 
MUHC, Montreal, Canada; Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Division, McGill 
University, Montreal, Canada; Canadian ADHD Research Alliance (CADDRA), Canada.
(9)Saudi ADHD Society, Saudi Arabia.
(10)Chair, Israeli Society of ADHD (ISA), Israel; Co-chair of the 
neurodevelopmental section in EPA (the European Psychiatric Association), 
France.
(11)Department of Psychiatry, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil.
(12)Asian Federation of ADHD, China; Peking University Sixth Hospital/Institute 
of Mental Health, National Clinical Research Center for Mental Disorders (Peking 
University Sixth Hospital), Beijing, China; NHC Key Laboratory of Mental Health 
(Peking University), Beijing, China.
(13)Center for Innovation in Mental Health, School of Psychology, Faculty of 
Environmental and Life Sciences, University of Southampton, Southampton,UK; 
Clinical and Experimental Sciences (CNS and Psychiatry), Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Southampton, Southampton, UK; Solent NHS Trust, Southampton, UK; 
Hassenfeld Children's Hospital at NYU Langone, New York University Child Study 
Center, New York City, New York, USA; Division of Psychiatry and Applied 
Psychology, School of Medicine, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK; 
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(14)University of Toronto, SickKids Centre for Community Mental Health, Toronto, 
Canada; Canadian ADHD Research Alliance (CADDRA), Canada.
(15)University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA; Seattle Children's Hospital, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(16)Saudi ADHD Society Medical and Psychological Committee, Saudi Arabia.
(17)King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; 
Saudi ADHD Society Medical and Psychological Committee, Saudi Arabia.
(18)Clinical Psychology, King Khalid University, Abha, Saudi Arabia; Saudi ADHD 
Society, Saudi Arabia.
(19)Social Genetic & Developmental Psychiatry, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology, and Neuroscience, King's College London, UK.
(20)Department of Mental Health and Behavioural Science, Moi University School 
of Medicine, Eldoret, Kenya; Brain and Mind Institute, and Department of 
Internal Medicine, Medical College East Africa, the Aga Khan University, Kenya; 
African College of Psychopharmacology, Kenya; African Association of 
Psychiatrists, Kenya.
(21)Center of Neurodevelopmental Disorders (KIND), Centre for Psychiatry 
Research; Department of Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institutet & 
Stockholm Health Care Services, Region Stockholm, Sweden; Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry, Stockholm Healthcare Services, Region Stockholm, Sweden; Curtin 
Autism Research Group, School of Occupational Therapy, Social Work and Speech 
Pathology, Curtin University, Perth, Western Australia, Australia.
(22)Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition 
and Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(23)Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel (UZ 
Brussel), Dept. of Psychiatry, Brussel, Belgium; International Collaboration on 
ADHD and Substance Abuse (ICASA), Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(24)Division of Psychiatry and Applied Psychology, School of Medicine University 
of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK; NIHR MindTech Mental Health MedTech Cooperative & 
Centre for ADHD and Neurodevelopmental Disorders Across the Lifespan (CANDAL), 
Institute of Mental Health, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(25)National Centre for Register-based Research, Aarhus University, Aarhus, 
Denmark; The Lundbeck Foundation Initiative for Integrative Psychiatric 
Research, iPSYCH, Aarhus, Denmark.
(26)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and 
Psychotherapy, School of Child and Adolescent Cognitive Behavior Therapy (AKiP), 
Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, University Cologne, 
Cologne, Germany; Zentrales-ADHS-Netz, Germany.
(27)Canadian ADHD Resource Alliance (CADDRA), Canada.
(28)Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland.
(29)Departments of Human Genetics and Psychiatry, Donders Institute for Brain, 
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the 
Netherlands; Professional Board, ADHD Europe, Belgium.
(30)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and 
Psychotherapy, University Hospital Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany. Electronic 
address: manfred.gerlach@uni-wuerzburg.de.
(31)Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway; Division of 
Psychiatry, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(32)University of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands; University Medical 
Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands; Interdisciplinary Center 
Psychopathology and Emotion Regulation (ICPE), Groningen, the Netherlands; ADHD 
Across the Lifespan Network from European College of 
Neuropsychopharmacology(ECNP), the Netherlands.
(33)Department of Psychology, University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY, USA.
(34)University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA; University of California, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(35)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(36)Hassenfeld Children's Hospital at NYU Langone, New York University Child 
Study Center, New York City, New York, USA; Division of Psychiatry and Applied 
Psychology, School of Medicine, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK; 
Nottinghamshire Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust, Nottingham, UK; NIHR MindTech 
MedTech Co-operative, Nottingham, UK; NIHR Nottingham Biomedical Research 
Centre, Nottingham, UK.
(37)Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC, USA; Duke Clinical Research 
Institute, Durham, NC, USA.
(38)Amsterdam University Medical Center (VUMc), Amsterdam, the Netherlands; 
PsyQ, The Hague, the Netherlands; European Network Adult ADHD, the Netherlands; 
DIVA Foundation, the Netherlands; Neurodevelopmental Disorders Across Lifespan 
Section of European Psychiatric Association, France.
(39)Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of 
Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK.
(40)School of Medical Sciences, Örebro University, Örebro, Sweden; Department of 
Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Solna, Sweden.
(41)Growth, Development and Mental Health Center for Children and Adolescents, 
Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China; National 
Research Center for Clinical Medicine of Child Health and Disease, Chongqing, 
China; The Subspecialty Group of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, the 
Society of Pediatrics, Chinese Medical Association, China.
(42)Asian Federation of ADHD, China; Peking University Sixth Hospital/Institute 
of Mental Health, National Clinical Research Center for Mental Disorders (Peking 
University Sixth Hospital), Beijing, China; NHC Key Laboratory of Mental Health 
(Peking University), Beijing, China; The Chinese Society of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry, China; The Asian Society for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and 
Allied Professions, China.
(43)Department of Family Medicine, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv 
University, Tel Aviv, Israel; Leumit Health Services, Tel Aviv, Israel; Israeli 
Society of ADHD, Israel; Israeli National Diabetes Council, Israel.
(44)Washington University, St. Louis, MO, USA; Midwest Research Group, St 
Charles, MO, USA.
(45)Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; D'Or Institute 
for Research and Education, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; Brazilian Attention Deficit 
Association (ABDA), Brazil.
(46)School of Pharmacy, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland.
(47)University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(48)Departments of Psychiatry, Psychology, Pediatrics, Clinical & Translational 
Science, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(49)Center for ADHD Research, Department of Psychiatry, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Portland, OR, USA.
(50)University of Montpellier, CHU Montpellier Saint Eloi, MPEA, Medical and 
Psychological Unit for Children and Adolescents (MPEA), Montpellier, France; 
INSERM U 1018 CESP-Developmental Psychiatry, France.
(51)Centre for Child & Adolescent Mental Health, College of Medicine, University 
of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria; Department of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 
University College Hospital, Ibadan, Nigeria.
(52)Faculdade de Medicina FMUSP, Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, SP, 
Brazil.
(53)Seymour Fox School of Education, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel; 
The Israeli Society of ADHD (ISA), Israel.
(54)Brain Mind Centre Nepean, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia; 
Australian ADHD Professionals Association (AADPA), Australia.
(55)Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research, 
Pondicherry, India.
(56)USA.
(57)Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatic Medicine and Psychotherapy, 
University Hospital Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany; German Psychiatric 
Association, Germany.
(58)World Federation of ADHD, Switzerland; Department of Child & Adolescent 
Psychiatry, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & Neurosciences, King's College 
London, London, UK; European Network for Hyperkinetic Disorders (EUNETHYDIS), 
Germany.
(59)School of Psychology, Speech and Hearing, University of Canterbury, 
Christchurch, New Zealand.
(60)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and 
Psychotherapy, Center of Mental Health, University Hospital Würzburg, Würzburg, 
Germany; The German Association of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and 
Psychotherapy, Germany; Zentrales-ADHS-Netz, Germany.
(61)Department of Psychiatry, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Barcelona, 
Catalonia, Spain; Group of Psychiatry, Mental Health and Addictions, Vall 
d'Hebron Research Institute (VHIR), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain; Biomedical 
Network Research Centre on Mental Health (CIBERSAM), Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain; Department of Psychiatry and Forensic 
Medicine, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain; 
Neurodevelopmental Disorders Across Lifespan Section of European Psychiatric 
Association, France; International Collaboration on ADHD and Substance Abuse 
(ICASA), the Netherlands; DIVA Foundation, the Netherlands.
(62)Radboud University Medical Centre, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, 
and Behavior, Department of Psychiatry, Nijmegen, the Netherlands; International 
Collaboration on ADHD and Substance Abuse (ICASA), Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(63)Behavioural Science Institute, Radboud University, Nijmegen, the 
Netherlands.
(64)University of Stellenbosch Business School, Cape Town, South Africa; South 
African Special Interest Group for Adult ADHD, South Africa; The South African 
Society of Psychiatrists/Psychiatry Management Group Management Guidelines for 
ADHD, South Africa; World Federation of Biological Psychiatry, Germany; American 
Psychiatric Association, USA; Association for NeuroPsychoEconomics, USA.
(65)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences and the MIND Institute, 
University of California, Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA.
(66)Topiwala National Medical College & BYL Nair Ch. Hospital, Mumbai, India.
(67)The Zucker School of Medicine at Hofstra-Northwell, Northwell Health, 
Hemstead, NY, USA; Children and Adults with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity 
Disorder (CHADD), USA; American Professional Society of ADHD and Related 
Disorders (APSARD), USA; National Center for Children with Learning Disabilities 
(NCLD), USA.
(68)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology & Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK; Department of 
Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(69)American Professional Society of ADHD and Related Disorders (APSARD), USA; 
European Network for Hyperkinetic Disorders (EUNETHYDIS), Germany; Louis A. 
Faillace MD, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of 
Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX, USA.
(70)University of Zurich, CH, Switzerland; University of Basel, CH, Switzerland; 
University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark; Centre of Child and Adolescent 
Mental Health, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(71)Department of Pediatrics, University of California Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA.
(72)Division of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, MRC Centre 
for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Cardiff University School of 
Medicine, Wales, UK.
(73)Human Developmental Neurobiology Unit, Okinawa Institute of Science and 
Technology Graduate University, Okinawa, Japan.
(74)Hogeschool van Utrecht/University of Applied Sciences, Utrecht, the 
Netherlands.
(75)Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, 
the Netherlands.
(76)Psychology and Educational Sciences, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; European 
ADHD Guidelines Group, Germany.
(77)University of the Free State, Bloemfontein, South Africa.
(78)University of Torino, Torino, Italy; Johns Hopkins University School of 
Public Health, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(79)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University 
Hospital of Psychiatry Zurich, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Misconceptions about ADHD stigmatize affected people, reduce 
credibility of providers, and prevent/delay treatment. To challenge 
misconceptions, we curated findings with strong evidence base.
METHODS: We reviewed studies with more than 2000 participants or meta-analyses 
from five or more studies or 2000 or more participants. We excluded 
meta-analyses that did not assess publication bias, except for meta-analyses of 
prevalence. For network meta-analyses we required comparison adjusted funnel 
plots. We excluded treatment studies with waiting-list or treatment as usual 
controls. From this literature, we extracted evidence-based assertions about the 
disorder.
RESULTS: We generated 208 empirically supported statements about ADHD. The 
status of the included statements as empirically supported is approved by 80 
authors from 27 countries and 6 continents. The contents of the manuscript are 
endorsed by 366 people who have read this document and agree with its contents.
CONCLUSIONS: Many findings in ADHD are supported by meta-analysis. These allow 
for firm statements about the nature, course, outcome causes, and treatments for 
disorders that are useful for reducing misconceptions and stigma.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.01.022
PMCID: PMC8328933
PMID: 33549739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]