---
reference_id: "PMID:11287972"
title: Efficacy and safety of a specific inhibitor of the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase in chronic myeloid leukemia.
authors:
- Druker BJ
- Talpaz M
- Resta DJ
- Peng B
- Buchdunger E
- Ford JM
- Lydon NB
- Kantarjian H
- Capdeville R
- Ohno-Jones S
- Sawyers CL
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1056/NEJM200104053441401
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of a specific inhibitor of the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase in chronic myeloid leukemia.
**Authors:** Druker BJ, Talpaz M, Resta DJ, Peng B, Buchdunger E, Ford JM, Lydon NB, Kantarjian H, Capdeville R, Ohno-Jones S, Sawyers CL
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJM200104053441401](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJM200104053441401)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2001 Apr 5;344(14):1031-7. doi: 10.1056/NEJM200104053441401.

Efficacy and safety of a specific inhibitor of the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase in 
chronic myeloid leukemia.

Druker BJ(1), Talpaz M, Resta DJ, Peng B, Buchdunger E, Ford JM, Lydon NB, 
Kantarjian H, Capdeville R, Ohno-Jones S, Sawyers CL.

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Oregon Health Sciences 
University, Portland 97201, USA. drukerb@ohsu.edu

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2001 Apr 5;344(14):1084-6. doi: 10.1056/NEJM200104053441409.
    N Engl J Med. 2001 Aug 23;345(8):618-9. doi: 10.1056/NEJM200108233450814.

BACKGROUND: BCR-ABL is a constitutively activated tyrosine kinase that causes 
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). Since tyrosine kinase activity is essential to 
the transforming function of BCR-ABL, an inhibitor of the kinase could be an 
effective treatment for CML.
METHODS: We conducted a phase 1, dose-escalating trial of STI571 (formerly known 
as CGP 57148B), a specific inhibitor of the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase. STI571 was 
administered orally to 83 patients with CML in the chronic phase in whom 
treatment with interferon alfa had failed. Patients were successively assigned 
to 1 of 14 doses ranging from 25 to 1000 mg per day.
RESULTS: Adverse effects of STI571 were minimal; the most common were nausea, 
myalgias, edema, and diarrhea. A maximal tolerated dose was not identified. 
Complete hematologic responses were observed in 53 of 54 patients treated with 
daily doses of 300 mg or more and typically occurred in the first four weeks of 
therapy. Of the 54 patients treated with doses of 300 mg or more, cytogenetic 
responses occurred in 29, including 17 (31 percent of the 54 patients who 
received this dose) with major responses (0 to 35 percent of cells in metaphase 
positive for the Philadelphia chromosome); 7 of these patients had complete 
cytogenetic remissions.
CONCLUSIONS: STI571 is well tolerated and has significant antileukemic activity 
in patients with CML in whom treatment with interferon alfa had failed. Our 
results provide evidence of the essential role of BCR-ABL tyrosine kinase 
activity in CML and demonstrate the potential for the development of anticancer 
drugs based on the specific molecular abnormality present in a human cancer.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJM200104053441401
PMID: 11287972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]