---
reference_id: PMID:38946992
title: "Case Report: Longitudinal Evaluation and Treatment of a Melanoma-Associated Retinopathy Patient."
authors:
- Mosavi-Hecht R
- Yang P
- Heyer B
- Rosenberg CR
- White E
- Berry EG
- Duvoisin RM
- Morgans CW
journal: Res Sq
year: '2024'
doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-4595829/v1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case Report: Longitudinal Evaluation and Treatment of a Melanoma-Associated Retinopathy Patient.
**Authors:** Mosavi-Hecht R, Yang P, Heyer B, Rosenberg CR, White E, Berry EG, Duvoisin RM, Morgans CW
**Journal:** Res Sq (2024)
**DOI:** [10.21203/rs.3.rs-4595829/v1](https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-4595829/v1)

## Content

1. Res Sq [Preprint]. 2024 Jun 19:rs.3.rs-4595829. doi: 
10.21203/rs.3.rs-4595829/v1.

Case Report: Longitudinal Evaluation and Treatment of a Melanoma-Associated 
Retinopathy Patient.

Mosavi-Hecht R(1), Yang P(2), Heyer B(1), Rosenberg CR(2), White E(2), Berry 
EG(1), Duvoisin RM(1), Morgans CW(2).

Author information:
(1)Oregon Health and Science University.
(2)Oregon Health and Science University, Casey Eye Institute.

Update in
    Front Med (Lausanne). 2024 Sep 10;11:1445180. doi: 
10.3389/fmed.2024.1445180.

Melanoma-associated retinopathy (MAR) is a paraneoplastic syndrome associated 
with cutaneous metastatic melanoma in which patients develop vision deficits 
that include reduced night vision, poor contrast sensitivity, and photopsia. MAR 
is caused by autoantibodies targeting TRPM1, an ion channel found in melanocytes 
and retinal ON-bipolar cells (ON-BCs). The visual symptoms arise when TRPM1 
autoantibodies enter ON-BCs and block the function of TRPM1, thus detection of 
TRPM1 autoantibodies in patient serum is a key criterion in diagnosing MAR. 
Electroretinograms are used to measure the impact of TRPM1 autoantibodies on 
ON-BC function and represent another important diagnostic tool for MAR. To date, 
MAR case reports have included one or both diagnostic components, but only for a 
single time point in the course of a patient's disease. Here, we report a case 
of MAR supported by longitudinal analysis of serum autoantibody detection, 
visual function, ocular inflammation, vascular integrity, and response to 
slow-release intraocular corticosteroids. Integrating these data with the 
patient's oncological and ophthalmological records reveals novel insights 
regarding MAR pathogenesis, progression, and treatment, which may inform new 
research and expand our collective understanding of the disease. In brief, we 
find TRPM1 autoantibodies can disrupt vision even when serum levels are barely 
detectable by western blot and immunohistochemistry; intraocular dexamethasone 
treatment alleviates MAR visual symptoms despite high levels of circulating 
TRPM1 autoantibodies, implicating antibody access to the retina as a key factor 
in MAR pathogenesis. Elevated inflammatory cytokine levels in the patient's eyes 
may be responsible for the observed damage to the blood-retinal barrier and 
subsequent entry of autoantibodies into the retina.

DOI: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-4595829/v1
PMCID: PMC11213222
PMID: 38946992

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest E.G.B. serves on an 
advisory board for Bristol Myers Squibb for which she receives consulting fees.