---
reference_id: "PMID:38927070"
title: Advances in the Pathogenesis of Steroid-Associated Osteonecrosis of the Femoral Head.
authors:
- Zhang J
- Cao J
- Liu Y
- Zhao H
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/biom14060667
keywords:
- Humans
- "Femur Head Necrosis/pathology, metabolism, etiology, chemically induced"
- "Steroids/metabolism, adverse effects"
- "Femur Head/pathology, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- Animals
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Advances in the Pathogenesis of Steroid-Associated Osteonecrosis of the Femoral Head.
**Authors:** Zhang J, Cao J, Liu Y, Zhao H
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom14060667](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom14060667)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2024 Jun 6;14(6):667. doi: 10.3390/biom14060667.

Advances in the Pathogenesis of Steroid-Associated Osteonecrosis of the Femoral 
Head.

Zhang J(1), Cao J(1), Liu Y(1), Zhao H(2).

Author information:
(1)The First Clinical College of Medicine, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730000, 
China.
(2)Department of Orthopedics, The First Hospital of Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 
730000, China.

Osteonecrosis of the femoral head (ONFH) is a refractory orthopedic condition 
characterized by bone cell ischemia, necrosis, bone trabecular fracture, and 
clinical symptoms such as pain, femoral head collapse, and joint dysfunction 
that can lead to disability. The disability rate of ONFH is very high, which 
imposes a significant economic burden on both families and society. 
Steroid-associated osteonecrosis of the femoral head (SANFH) is the most common 
type of ONFH. However, the pathogenesis of SANFH remains unclear, and it is an 
urgent challenge for orthopedic surgeons to explore it. In this paper, the 
pathogenesis of SANFH and its related signaling pathways were briefly reviewed 
to enhance comprehension of the pathogenesis and prevention of SANFH.

DOI: 10.3390/biom14060667
PMCID: PMC11202272
PMID: 38927070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.