---
reference_id: "PMID:35563849"
title: Evaluation of Proteasome Inhibitors in the Treatment of Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis.
authors:
- Chen IC
- Liu YC
- Wu YH
- Lo SH
- Dai ZK
- Hsu JH
- Tseng YH
journal: Cells
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/cells11091543
keywords:
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung"
- Fibrosis
- Humans
- "Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis/drug therapy, metabolism"
- Lung Neoplasms
- "Proteasome Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of Proteasome Inhibitors in the Treatment of Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis.
**Authors:** Chen IC, Liu YC, Wu YH, Lo SH, Dai ZK, Hsu JH, Tseng YH
**Journal:** Cells (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells11091543](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells11091543)

## Content

1. Cells. 2022 May 4;11(9):1543. doi: 10.3390/cells11091543.

Evaluation of Proteasome Inhibitors in the Treatment of Idiopathic Pulmonary
Fibrosis.

Chen IC(1)(2)(3), Liu YC(1), Wu YH(1), Lo SH(1), Dai ZK(1)(2)(3), Hsu JH(1),
Tseng YH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung
Medical University, Kaohsiung 80756, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung
Medical University, Kaohsiung 80708, Taiwan.
(3)Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung 80708, Taiwan.

Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is the most common form of idiopathic
interstitial pneumonia, and it has a worse prognosis than non-small cell lung
cancer. The pathomechanism of IPF is not fully understood, but it has been
suggested that repeated microinjuries of epithelial cells induce a wound healing
response, during which fibroblasts differentiate into myofibroblasts. These
activated myofibroblasts express α smooth muscle actin and release extracellular
matrix to promote matrix deposition and tissue remodeling. Under physiological
conditions, the remodeling process stops once wound healing is complete.
However, in the lungs of IPF patients, myofibroblasts re-main active and deposit
excess extracellular matrix. This leads to the destruction of alveolar tissue,
the loss of lung elastic recoil, and a rapid decrease in lung function. Some
evidence has indicated that proteasomal inhibition combats fibrosis by
inhibiting the expressions of extracellular matrix proteins and
metalloproteinases. However, the mechanisms by which proteasome inhibitors may
protect against fibrosis are not known. This review summarizes the current
research on proteasome inhibitors for pulmonary fibrosis, and provides a
reference for whether proteasome inhibitors have the potential to become new
drugs for the treatment of pulmonary fibrosis.

DOI: 10.3390/cells11091543
PMCID: PMC9099509
PMID: 35563849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
