---
reference_id: "PMID:32407793"
title: "Estimates of the reproductive numbers and demographic reconstruction of outbreak associated with C:P1.5-1,10-8:F3-6:ST-11(cc11) Neisseria meningitidis strains."
authors:
- Lo Presti A
- Vacca P
- Neri A
- Fazio C
- Ambrosio L
- Rezza G
- Stefanelli P
journal: Infect Genet Evol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104360
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Estimates of the reproductive numbers and demographic reconstruction of outbreak associated with C:P1.5-1,10-8:F3-6:ST-11(cc11) Neisseria meningitidis strains.
**Authors:** Lo Presti A, Vacca P, Neri A, Fazio C, Ambrosio L, Rezza G, Stefanelli P
**Journal:** Infect Genet Evol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104360](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104360)

## Content

1. Infect Genet Evol. 2020 Oct;84:104360. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104360. Epub
 2020 May 11.

Estimates of the reproductive numbers and demographic reconstruction of outbreak 
associated with C:P1.5-1,10-8:F3-6:ST-11(cc11) Neisseria meningitidis strains.

Lo Presti A(1), Vacca P(1), Neri A(1), Fazio C(1), Ambrosio L(1), Rezza G(1), 
Stefanelli P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy. 
Electronic address: paola.stefanelli@iss.it.

BACKGROUND: Neisseria meningitidis can cause sporadic cases and outbreaks of 
invasive disease, including meningitis and sepsis. The meningococcal serogroup C 
(MenC) is the second most common serogroup in Italy after MenB. In this study we 
have estimated the reproductive numbers and the demographic reconstruction on 
the genomes of invasive N. meningitidis C:P1.5-1,10-8:F3-6:ST-11(cc11) strains 
isolated in Italy in 2012 - 2017, a period that includes the outbreak in 
Tuscany.
METHODS: The genomes of N. meningitidis were sequenced using the Illumina MiSeq 
platform, through the whole genome sequencing (WGS) method and were analyzed by 
the core genome MLST (cgMLST) approach, using the BIGSdb Genome Comparator tool 
implemented on the PubMLST website. A Bayesian method was applied to study 
population dynamics across the entire N. meningitidis dataset. The basic 
reproduction number R0, which indicates the average number of secondary cases 
generated by a single primary case, was calculated using a Bayesian method, on 
the dataset and on the two subsets. The effective reproduction number R(t), 
defined as the average number of secondary cases per infectious case in a 
population, made up of susceptible and non-susceptible hosts was studied on the 
Tuscany dataset, with a Bayesian method.
RESULTS: An increase in the effective number of the N. meningitidis infections 
was observed between 2013 and 2016. The estimated R0 parameter was 1.31 (95% 
HPD: 1.03 - 1.64), 1.22 (95% HPD: 0.90 - 1.64) and 1.4 (95% HPD: 0.91 - 1.9) for 
the entire dataset, first and second subset, respectively. The BDSKY estimated 
an initial R(t) of about 2.0 (95% HPD: 0.04 - 5.0), which showed a growing trend 
at the end of 2014, reaching an average value of 3.22 in 2015, and then 
declining below 1 from the year 2016.
CONCLUSION: Monitoring the effective reproduction number can help to inform 
future vaccination strategies. The increase in the reproductive number for the 
Tuscany dataset, was consistent with the amplification event that led to the 
Tuscany outbreak. Subsequently, the intervention that led to the decline of the 
cases was followed, suggesting a high effectiveness of the vaccination campaign.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2020.104360
PMID: 32407793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors do 
not have any disclosures to report.