---
reference_id: "PMID:38280573"
title: Causative mechanisms and clinical impact of immunoglobulin deficiencies in ataxia telangiectasia.
authors:
- Takada S
- Weitering TJ
- van Os NJH
- Du L
- Pico-Knijnenburg I
- Kuipers TB
- Mei H
- Salzer E
- Willemsen MAAP
- Weemaes CMR
- Pan-Hammarstrom Q
- van der Burg M
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2023.12.029
keywords:
- Humans
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/immunology, genetics"
- Adult
- Adolescent
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Child
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins/deficiency, genetics"
- B-Lymphocytes/immunology
- Immunoglobulin Class Switching
- Young Adult
- Aged
- "Somatic Hypermutation, Immunoglobulin"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Immunoglobulin A/immunology
- "Immunoglobulin G/immunology, blood"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Causative mechanisms and clinical impact of immunoglobulin deficiencies in ataxia telangiectasia.
**Authors:** Takada S, Weitering TJ, van Os NJH, Du L, Pico-Knijnenburg I, Kuipers TB, Mei H, Salzer E, Willemsen MAAP, Weemaes CMR, Pan-Hammarstrom Q, van der Burg M
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2023.12.029](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2023.12.029)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2024 May;153(5):1392-1405. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2023.12.029. Epub 2024 Jan 26.

Causative mechanisms and clinical impact of immunoglobulin deficiencies in
ataxia telangiectasia.

Takada S(1), Weitering TJ(1), van Os NJH(2), Du L(3), Pico-Knijnenburg I(1),
Kuipers TB(4), Mei H(4), Salzer E(1), Willemsen MAAP(5), Weemaes CMR(6),
Pan-Hammarstrom Q(7), van der Burg M(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Laboratory for Pediatric Immunology,
Willem-Alexander Children's Hospital, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Amalia Children's Hospital, Donders
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Department of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
Sweden.
(4)Sequencing Analysis Support Core Department of Biomedical Data Sciences,
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Amalia Children's Hospital, Donders
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Amalia Children's Hospital, Radboud University
Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Laboratory for Pediatric Immunology,
Willem-Alexander Children's Hospital, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
The Netherlands. Electronic address: m.van_der_burg@lumc.nl.

BACKGROUND: Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is characterized by cerebellar ataxia,
telangiectasia, immunodeficiency, and increased cancer susceptibility and is
caused by mutations in the ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) gene. The
immunodeficiency comprises predominantly immunoglobulin deficiency, mainly IgA
and IgG2, with a variable severity. So far, the exact mechanisms underlying the
immunoglobulin deficiency, especially the variable severity, remain
unelucidated.
OBJECTIVE: We characterized the clinical impact of immunoglobulin deficiencies
in AT and elucidated their mechanisms in AT.
METHODS: We analyzed long-term immunoglobulin levels, immunophenotyping, and
survival time in our cohort (n = 87, median age 16 years; maximum 64 years).
Somatic hypermutation and class-switch junctions in B cells were analyzed by
next-generation sequencing. Furthermore, an in vitro class-switching induction
assay was performed, followed by RNA sequencing, to assess the effect of ATM
inhibition.
RESULTS: Only the hyper-IgM AT phenotype significantly worsened survival time,
while IgA or IgG2 deficiencies did not. The immunoglobulin levels showed
predominantly decreased IgG2 and IgA. Moreover, flow cytometric analysis
demonstrated reduced naive B and T lymphocytes and a deficiency of
class-switched IgG2 and IgA memory B cells. Somatic hypermutation frequencies
were lowered in IgA- and IgG2-deficient patients, indicating hampered germinal
center reaction. In addition, the microhomology of switch junctions was
elongated, suggesting alternative end joining during class-switch DNA repair.
The in vitro class switching and proliferation were negatively affected by ATM
inhibition. RNA sequencing analysis showed that ATM inhibitor influenced
expression of germinal center reaction genes.
CONCLUSION: Immunoglobulin deficiency in AT is caused by disturbed development
of class-switched memory B cells. ATM deficiency affects both germinal center
reaction and choice of DNA-repair pathway in class switching.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2023.12.029
PMID: 38280573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
