---
reference_id: "PMID:27117334"
title: Lower motor neuron dysfunction in ALS.
authors:
- de Carvalho M
- Swash M
journal: Clin Neurophysiol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2016.03.024
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lower motor neuron dysfunction in ALS.
**Authors:** de Carvalho M, Swash M
**Journal:** Clin Neurophysiol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clinph.2016.03.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2016.03.024)

## Content

1. Clin Neurophysiol. 2016 Jul;127(7):2670-81. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2016.03.024.
 Epub 2016 Apr 6.

Lower motor neuron dysfunction in ALS.

de Carvalho M(1), Swash M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Hospital de Santa Maria-Centro Hospitalar de 
Lisboa Norte, Lisbon, Portugal; Institute of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Instituto de Medicina Molecular, University of Lisbon, Portugal. Electronic 
address: mamedemg@gmail.com.
(2)Institute of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Instituto de Medicina 
Molecular, University of Lisbon, Portugal; Department of Neurology, Barts and 
The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, 
London, UK.

Comment in
    Clin Neurophysiol. 2016 Jul;127(7):2668-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.clinph.2016.03.023.

In the motor system there is a complex interplay between cortical structures and 
spinal cord lower motor neurons (LMN). In this system both inhibitory and 
excitatory neurons have relevant roles. LMN loss is a marker of motor neuron 
disease/amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (MND/ALS). Conventional needle 
electromyography (EMG) does not allow LMN loss to be quantified. Measurement of 
compound muscle action potential (CMAP) amplitude or area, and the 
neurophysiological index, provide a surrogate estimate of the number of 
functional motor units. Increased motor neuronal excitability is a 
neurophysiological marker of ALS in the context of a suspected clinical and 
electrophysiological diagnosis. In the LMN system, fasciculation potentials 
(FPs) are the earliest changes observed in affected muscles, a feature of LMN 
hyperexcitability. Reinnervation is best investigated by needle EMG although 
other methods can be explored. Moreover needle EMG give information about the 
temporal profile of the reinnervation process, important ancillary data. 
Quantitative motor unit potential analysis is a valuable method of evaluating 
reinnervation. The importance of FPs has been recognized in the Awaji criteria 
for the electrodiagnosis of ALS, criteria that are a sensitive adjunct to the 
revised El Escorial criteria. Finally, functionality of LMN's, and perhaps 
excitability studies in motor nerves, aids understanding of the disease process, 
allowing measurement of potential treatment effects in clinical trials. Other 
investigational techniques, such as electrical impedance myography, muscle and 
nerve ultrasound, and spinal cord imaging methods may prove useful in future.

Copyright © 2016 International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology. Published 
by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinph.2016.03.024
PMID: 27117334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]