---
reference_id: "PMID:34829460"
title: "Chronic Autoimmune Gastritis: Modern Diagnostic Principles."
authors:
- Livzan MA
- Gaus OV
- Mozgovoi SI
- Bordin DS
journal: Diagnostics (Basel)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/diagnostics11112113
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic Autoimmune Gastritis: Modern Diagnostic Principles.
**Authors:** Livzan MA, Gaus OV, Mozgovoi SI, Bordin DS
**Journal:** Diagnostics (Basel) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/diagnostics11112113](https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics11112113)

## Content

1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2021 Nov 15;11(11):2113. doi:
10.3390/diagnostics11112113.

Chronic Autoimmune Gastritis: Modern Diagnostic Principles.

Livzan MA(1), Gaus OV(1), Mozgovoi SI(1), Bordin DS(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Omsk Sate Medical University, 644099 Omsk, Russia.
(2)A.S. Loginov Moscow Clinical Scientific Center, 111123 Moscow, Russia.
(3)A.I. Yevdokimov Moscow State University of Medicine and Dentistry, 127473 
Moscow, Russia.
(4)Tver State Medical University, 170100 Tver, Russia.

This article summarizes and systematizes the available data from the literature 
on chronic autoimmune gastritis (CAG) in order to increase the awareness of 
specialists about the modern possibilities for diagnosing the disease, including 
its early stages. The clinical manifestation of the disease includes possible 
variants such as gastrointestinal, hematological (first of all, the formation of 
iron deficiency and B12-deficiency anemia), and neurological variants. Patients 
with chronic autoimmune gastritis are characterized by comorbidity with other 
autoimmune diseases. In this paper, data on the most informative serological 
markers for the diagnosis of CAG, as well as laboratory tests to detect 
micronutrient deficiencies, information on the characteristic changes in the 
gastric mucosa, and the prognosis of the disease, are presented. The diagnosis 
of CAG should be based on a multidisciplinary approach that combines a thorough 
analysis of a patient's complaints with a mandatory assessment of nutritional 
status, as well as the results of serological, endoscopic, and histological 
research methods.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics11112113
PMCID: PMC8621657
PMID: 34829460

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.