---
reference_id: "PMID:8845844"
title: Missense FGFR3 mutations create cysteine residues in thanatophoric dwarfism type I (TD1).
authors:
- Rousseau F
- el Ghouzzi V
- Delezoide AL
- Legeai-Mallet L
- Le Merrer M
- Munnich A
- Bonaventure J
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/5.4.509
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- Cysteine/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- DNA Primers
- Histology
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases
- Radiology
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3"
- "Receptors, Fibroblast Growth Factor/genetics"
- Thanatophoric Dysplasia/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Missense FGFR3 mutations create cysteine residues in thanatophoric dwarfism type I (TD1).
**Authors:** Rousseau F, el Ghouzzi V, Delezoide AL, Legeai-Mallet L, Le Merrer M, Munnich A, Bonaventure J
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/5.4.509](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/5.4.509)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 1996 Apr;5(4):509-12. doi: 10.1093/hmg/5.4.509.

Missense FGFR3 mutations create cysteine residues in thanatophoric dwarfism type
I (TD1).

Rousseau F(1), el Ghouzzi V, Delezoide AL, Legeai-Mallet L, Le Merrer M, Munnich
A, Bonaventure J.

Author information:
(1)Unité de Recherches sur les Handicaps Génétiques de I'Enfant INSERM U-393,
CNRS ER 88, Paris, France.

Thanatophoric dwarfism (TD) is a sporadic lethal skeletal dysplasia with
micromelic shortening of the limbs, macrocephaly, platyspondyly and reduced
thoracic cavity. In the most common subtype (TD1), femurs are curved, while in
TD2, straight femurs are associated with cloverleaf skull. Mutations in the
fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) gene were identified in both
subtypes. While TD2 was accounted for by a single recurrent mutation in the
tyrosine kinase 2 domain, TD1 resulted from either stop codon mutations or
missense mutations in the extracellular domain of the gene. Here, we report the
identification of FGFR3 mutations in 25/26 TD cases. Two novel missense
mutations (Y373C and G370C) were detected in 8/26 and 1/26 TD1 cases
respectively. Both mutations created cysteine residues in the juxta
extramembrane domain of the receptor. Sixteen cases carried the previously
reported R248C (9/26 cases), S249C (2/26 cases) or stop codon FGFR3 mutations
(5/26 cases). Our results suggest that TD1 is a genetically homogeneous
condition and give additional support to the view that newly created cysteine
residues in the extracellular domain of the protein play a key role in the
severity of the disease.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/5.4.509
PMID: 8845844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
