---
reference_id: "PMID:38022159"
title: "Ocular Manifestations of Alport Syndrome: Report and Comparison of Two Cases."
authors:
- Sargazi M
- Dehghani S
- Dahmardeh M
- Mohammadi SO
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.47373
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ocular Manifestations of Alport Syndrome: Report and Comparison of Two Cases.
**Authors:** Sargazi M, Dehghani S, Dahmardeh M, Mohammadi SO
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.47373](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.47373)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Oct 20;15(10):e47373. doi: 10.7759/cureus.47373. eCollection 2023
 Oct.

Ocular Manifestations of Alport Syndrome: Report and Comparison of Two Cases.

Sargazi M(1), Dehghani S(1), Dahmardeh M(1), Mohammadi SO(2).

Author information:
(1)Ophthalmology, Zahedan University of Medical Sciences, Zahedan, IRN.
(2)Ophthalmology, Burnett School of Medicine at Texas Christian University, Fort
Worth, USA.

We report two cases of Alport syndrome and compare the clinical presentations
and imaging findings in these cases. The clinical examination consisted of
best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA), direct ophthalmoscopy, and slit-lamp
examination. Macular optical coherence tomography (OCT) and anterior segment OCT
(AS-OCT) and were utilized to document the details of the anterior and posterior
segment pathologies. In order to evaluate systemic presentations of Alport
syndrome, nephrology, and otolaryngology were consulted for each patient. In
this study, the first case was a 27-year-old female with progressive myopia,
anterior lenticonus, and temporal retinal thinning found in the ocular
examination that led to the diagnosis of Alport syndrome. She underwent clear
lens extraction and intraocular lens implantation, restoring acceptable visual
acuity. The second case was a 20-year-old male patient with low visual acuity,
severe bilateral anterior lenticonus, bilateral cataract, and temporal retinal
thinning. The patient later developed renal failure and is a candidate for
kidney transplantation. In this case report, progressive renal failure, hearing
loss, and ocular abnormalities were all observed. This is consistent with
previously reported cases given the typical characteristics of Alport syndrome,
a rare inherited disease. The severity of those characteristics was higher in
the male subject, a finding also consistent with prior reports indicating that
males are usually affected more frequently and more severely than females, given
that Alport syndrome is generally inherited as an X-linked disorder.
Additionally, anterior segment and macular OCTs seemed to be of considerable
significance in the early diagnosis of Alport syndrome given the typical ocular
manifestations e.g. anterior lenticonus or temporal retinal atrophy.

Copyright © 2023, Sargazi et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.47373
PMCID: PMC10657510
PMID: 38022159

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
