---
reference_id: "PMID:24816400"
title: "The relation between migraine, typical migraine aura and \"visual snow\"."
authors:
- Schankin CJ
- Maniyar FH
- Sprenger T
- Chou DE
- Eller M
- Goadsby PJ
journal: Headache
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1111/head.12378
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The relation between migraine, typical migraine aura and "visual snow".
**Authors:** Schankin CJ, Maniyar FH, Sprenger T, Chou DE, Eller M, Goadsby PJ
**Journal:** Headache (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1111/head.12378](https://doi.org/10.1111/head.12378)

## Content

1. Headache. 2014 Jun;54(6):957-66. doi: 10.1111/head.12378. Epub 2014 May 9.

The relation between migraine, typical migraine aura and "visual snow".

Schankin CJ(1), Maniyar FH, Sprenger T, Chou DE, Eller M, Goadsby PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; 
Headache Group, NIHR-Wellcome Trust Clinical Research Facility, King's College 
London, London, UK; Department of Neurology, University of Munich Hospital - 
Großhadern, Munich, Germany.

Erratum in
    Headache. 2015 Apr;55(4):592.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the relationship between the phenotype of the "visual snow" 
syndrome, comorbid migraine, and typical migraine aura on a clinical basis and 
using functional brain imaging.
BACKGROUND: Patients with "visual snow" suffer from continuous TV-static-like 
tiny flickering dots in the entire visual field. Most patients describe a 
syndrome with additional visual symptoms of the following categories: palinopsia 
("afterimages" and "trailing"), entopic phenomena arising from the optic 
apparatus itself (floaters, blue field entoptic phenomenon, photopsia, 
self-light of the eye), photophobia, nyctalopia (impaired night vision), as well 
as the non-visual symptom tinnitus. The high prevalence of migraine and typical 
migraine aura in this population has led to the assumption that "visual snow" is 
caused by persistent migraine aura. Due to the lack of objective measures, 
alternative diagnoses are malingering or a psychogenic disorder.
METHODS: (1) The prevalence of additional visual symptoms, tinnitus, and 
comorbid migraine as well as typical migraine aura was assessed in a prospective 
semi-structured telephone interview of patients with "visual snow." Correlations 
were calculated using standard statistics with P < .05 being considered 
statistically significant. (2) Areas with increased brain metabolism in a group 
of "visual snow" patients in comparison to healthy controls were identified 
using [(18) F]-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomography and 
statistical parametric mapping (SPM8 with whole brain analysis; statistical 
significance was defined by P < .001 uncorrected for multiple comparisons).
RESULTS: (1) Of 120 patients with "visual snow," 70 patients also had migraine 
and 37 had typical migraine aura. Having comorbid migraine was associated with 
an increased likelihood of having palinopsia (odds ratio [OR] 2.8; P = .04 for 
"afterimages" and OR 2.6; P = .01 for "trailing"), spontaneous photopsia (OR 
2.9; P = .004), photophobia (OR 3.2; P = .005), nyctalopia (OR 2.7; P = .01), 
and tinnitus (OR 2.9; P = .006). Typical migraine aura was associated with an 
increased likelihood of spontaneous photopsia (OR 2.4; P = .04). (2) After 
adjusting for typical migraine aura, comparison of 17 "visual snow" patients 
with 17 age and gender matched controls showed brain hypermetabolism in the 
right lingual gyrus (Montreal Neurological Institute coordinates 16-78-5; kE 
 = 101; ZE  = 3.41; P < .001) and the left cerebellar anterior lobe adjacent to 
the left lingual gyrus (Montreal Neurological Institute coordinates -12-62-9; kE 
 = 152; ZE  = 3.28; P = .001).
CONCLUSIONS: -Comorbid migraine aggravates the clinical phenotype of the "visual 
snow" syndrome by worsening some of the additional visual symptoms and tinnitus. 
This might bias studies on "visual snow" by migraineurs offering study 
participation more likely than non-migraineurs due to a more severe clinical 
presentation. The independence of entoptic phenomena from comorbid migraine 
indicates "visual snow" is the main determinant. The hypermetabolic lingual 
gyrus confirms a brain dysfunction in patients with "visual snow." The metabolic 
pattern differs from interictal migraine with some similarities to migrainous 
photophobia. The findings support the view that "visual snow," migraine, and 
typical migraine aura are distinct syndromes with shared pathophysiological 
mechanisms that need to be addressed in order to develop rational treatment 
strategies for this disabling condition.

© 2014 American Headache Society.

DOI: 10.1111/head.12378
PMID: 24816400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]