---
reference_id: "PMID:8309359"
title: Dermopathy of Graves disease (pretibial myxedema). Review of 150 cases.
authors:
- Fatourechi V
- Pajouhi M
- Fransway AF
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1097/00005792-199401000-00001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dermopathy of Graves disease (pretibial myxedema). Review of 150 cases.
**Authors:** Fatourechi V, Pajouhi M, Fransway AF
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00005792-199401000-00001](https://doi.org/10.1097/00005792-199401000-00001)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 1994 Jan;73(1):1-7. doi:
10.1097/00005792-199401000-00001.

Dermopathy of Graves disease (pretibial myxedema). Review of 150 cases.

Fatourechi V(1), Pajouhi M, Fransway AF.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN 55905.

Pretibial myxedema is an uncommon manifestation of Graves disease, and little 
information is available regarding its natural course and its relation to other 
manifestations of Graves disease. We reviewed 150 consecutive cases with the 
diagnosis of pretibial myxedema over a 20-year period in a referral center. Only 
1 patient in this group did not have ophthalmopathy, whereas 88% had significant 
proptosis and 30% required orbital decompression surgery. Dermopathy was a late 
manifestation of Graves disease, and its onset usually followed the diagnosis of 
hyperthyroidism and ophthalmopathy. In a few patients, dermopathy preceded 
diagnosis of hyperthyroidism or onset of ophthalmopathy. Fourteen patients were 
never clinically hyperthyroid; spontaneous hypothyroidism had developed in 11 in 
this group. All cases involved the lower extremities, with only 1 patient having 
combined upper and lower extremity involvement. The most common form of thyroid 
dermopathy was nonpitting edema, followed by nodular and plaque forms, which 
occurred with equal frequency. The polypoid form occurred in 1 patient and the 
elephantiasic form in another; 7.3% had thyroid acropachy. Follow-up was 
available for 120 patients (range, 3 mo to 19 yr; mean, 3.2 yr), and complete 
remission was observed in only 12 patients. Topically applied corticosteroid 
therapy was used in 76 patients, and in this group 38% had sustained long-term 
partial remission, as opposed to 18% in the group receiving no corticosteroid 
therapy.

DOI: 10.1097/00005792-199401000-00001
PMID: 8309359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]