---
reference_id: "PMID:36852577"
title: Serum Mediators in Patients with Both Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus and Pruritus.
authors:
- He GY
- Hsu TY
- Chen CW
- Nien FJ
- Chen HY
- Chu CY
- Wang LF
journal: Acta Derm Venereol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.2340/actadv.v103.4863
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serum Mediators in Patients with Both Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus and Pruritus.
**Authors:** He GY, Hsu TY, Chen CW, Nien FJ, Chen HY, Chu CY, Wang LF
**Journal:** Acta Derm Venereol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.2340/actadv.v103.4863](https://doi.org/10.2340/actadv.v103.4863)

## Content

1. Acta Derm Venereol. 2023 Feb 28;103:adv00875. doi: 10.2340/actadv.v103.4863.

Serum Mediators in Patients with Both Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus and Pruritus.

He GY(1), Hsu TY(2), Chen CW(3), Nien FJ(4), Chen HY(5), Chu CY(6), Wang LF(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, National Taiwan University Hospital Yunlin Branch, 
Yunlin, Taiwan; Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, 
National Taiwan University, Taipei City, Taiwan; Department of Dermatology, 
National Taiwan University Hospital and National Taiwan University College of 
Medicine, Taipei City, Taiwan.
(2)4School of Medicine, College of Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung 
City, Taiwan; Department of Emergency Medicine, China Medical University 
Hospital, Taichung City, Taiwan; Department of Public Health, China Medical 
University, Taichung City, Taiwan.
(3)Subdivision of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, 
National Taiwan University Hospital Yunlin Branch, Yunlin, Taiwan.
(4)Department of General Medicine, National Taiwan University Cancer Center, 
Taipei City, Taiwan.
(5)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei City, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Dermatology, National Taiwan University Hospital and National 
Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei City, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Dermatology, National Taiwan University Hospital and National 
Taiwan University College of Medicine, No. 8, Zhongshan S. Road, Zhongzheng 
District, Taipei City 100226, Taiwan. lifangwa@ntu.edu.tw.

Chronic pruritus is an unpleasant sensory perception that negatively affects 
quality of life and is common among patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
Current antipruritic therapies are insufficiently effective. Thus, the mediation 
of diabetic pruritus by histamine-independent pathways is likely. The aim of 
this study was to identify possible mediators responsible for diabetic pruritus. 
A total of 87 patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus were analysed, of whom 59 
had pruritus and 28 did not. The 2 groups were assessed for baseline 
demographics, serum biochemistry parameters, cytokines, and chemokines. This 
study also investigated the associations of these factors with the severity of 
itching. Neither haemoglobin A1c nor serum creatinine levels were correlated 
with severity of itching. Significantly higher levels of interleukin-4 
(p = 0.004), interleukin-13 (p = 0.006), granulocyte-macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor (p < 0.001) and C-X-C motif chemokine ligand 10 
(p = 0.028) were observed in the patients with pruritus than in those without 
pruritus. Moreover, the levels of these mediators were positively correlated 
with the severity of itching. Thus, novel antipruritic drugs can be developed to 
target these molecules. This is the first study to compare inflammatory 
mediators comprehensively in patients with diabetes mellitus with pruritus vs 
those without pruritus.

DOI: 10.2340/actadv.v103.4863
PMCID: PMC9986763
PMID: 36852577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.