---
reference_id: "PMID:35132468"
title: J wave syndromes in patients with spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy.
authors:
- Steinmetz K
- Rudic B
- Borggrefe M
- Müller K
- Siebert R
- Rottbauer W
- Ludolph A
- Buckert D
- Rosenbohm A
journal: J Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-022-10992-5
keywords:
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac"
- "Bulbo-Spinal Atrophy, X-Linked"
- Contrast Media
- Fibrosis
- Gadolinium
- Humans
- "Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Cine"
- Male
- Myocardium/pathology
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Stroke Volume
- Syndrome
- Testosterone
- "Ventricular Function, Left"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# J wave syndromes in patients with spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy.
**Authors:** Steinmetz K, Rudic B, Borggrefe M, Müller K, Siebert R, Rottbauer W, Ludolph A, Buckert D, Rosenbohm A
**Journal:** J Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-022-10992-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-022-10992-5)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2022 Jul;269(7):3690-3699. doi: 10.1007/s00415-022-10992-5. Epub
2022  Feb 7.

J wave syndromes in patients with spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy.

Steinmetz K(1), Rudic B(2)(3), Borggrefe M(2)(3), Müller K(1)(4), Siebert R(4), 
Rottbauer W(5), Ludolph A(1)(6), Buckert D(#)(5), Rosenbohm A(#)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Ulm, Oberer Eselsberg 45, 89081, Ulm, 
Germany.
(2)1st Department of Medicine, University Medical Centre Mannheim, 
Theodor-Kutzer-Ufer 1-3, 68167, Mannheim, Germany.
(3)DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), Partner Site 
Heidelberg/Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany.
(4)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Ulm and Ulm University Medical 
Center, Ulm, Germany.
(5)Department of Cardiology, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
(6)Deutsches Zentrum Für Neurodegenerative Erkrankungen (DZNE), Partner Site 
Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
(7)Department of Neurology, University of Ulm, Oberer Eselsberg 45, 89081, Ulm, 
Germany. angela.rosenbohm@uni-ulm.de.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Males with X-linked recessive spinobulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA) 
are reported to die suddenly and a Brugada electrocardiography (ECG) pattern may 
be present. A hallmark of this pattern is the presence of ST segment elevations 
in right precordial leads associated with an increased risk of sudden cardiac 
death.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to detect subtle myocardial abnormalities using ECG and 
cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) in patients with SBMA.
METHODS: 30 SBMA patients (55.7 ± 11.9 years) and 11 healthy male controls 
underwent 12-lead ECGs were recorded using conventional and modified chest 
leads. CMR included feature-tracking strain analysis, late gadolinium 
enhancement and native T1 and T2 mapping.
RESULTS: Testosterone levels were increased in 6/29 patients. Abnormal ECGs were 
recorded in 70%, consisting of a Brugada ECG pattern, early repolarization or 
fragmented QRS. Despite normal left ventricular ejection fraction (66 ± 5%), 
SBMA patients exhibited more often left ventricular hypertrophy as compared to 
controls (34.5% vs 20%). End-diastolic volumes were smaller in SBMA patients 
(left ventricular volume index 61.7 ± 14.7 ml/m2 vs. 79.1 ± 15.5 ml/m2; right 
ventricular volume index 64.4 ± 16.4 ml/m2 vs. 75.3 ± 17.5 ml/m2). Tissue 
characterization with T1-mapping revealed diffuse myocardial fibrosis in SBMA 
patients (73.9% vs. 9.1%, device-specific threshold for T1: 1030 ms).
CONCLUSION: SBMA patients show abnormal ECGs and structural abnormalities, which 
may explain an increased risk of sudden death. These findings underline the 
importance of ECG screening, measurement of testosterone levels and potentially 
CMR imaging to assess cardiac risk factors.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-022-10992-5
PMCID: PMC9217903
PMID: 35132468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.