---
reference_id: "PMID:20823844"
title: "Computational reconstruction of tissue-specific metabolic models: application to human liver metabolism."
authors:
- Jerby L
- Shlomi T
- Ruppin E
journal: Mol Syst Biol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1038/msb.2010.56
keywords:
- Algorithms
- Computational Biology
- Humans
- "Liver/anatomy & histology, metabolism"
- "Models, Theoretical"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Computational reconstruction of tissue-specific metabolic models: application to human liver metabolism.
**Authors:** Jerby L, Shlomi T, Ruppin E
**Journal:** Mol Syst Biol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1038/msb.2010.56](https://doi.org/10.1038/msb.2010.56)

## Content

1. Mol Syst Biol. 2010 Sep 7;6:401. doi: 10.1038/msb.2010.56.

Computational reconstruction of tissue-specific metabolic models: application to
human liver metabolism.

Jerby L(1), Shlomi T, Ruppin E.

Author information:
(1)The Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv,
Israel. livnatje@post.tau.ac.il

Comment in
    doi: 10.1038/msb201070.

The computational study of human metabolism has been advanced with the advent of
the first generic (non-tissue specific) stoichiometric model of human
metabolism. In this study, we present a new algorithm for rapid reconstruction
of tissue-specific genome-scale models of human metabolism. The algorithm
generates a tissue-specific model from the generic human model by integrating a
variety of tissue-specific molecular data sources, including literature-based
knowledge, transcriptomic, proteomic, metabolomic and phenotypic data. Applying
the algorithm, we constructed the first genome-scale stoichiometric model of
hepatic metabolism. The model is verified using standard cross-validation
procedures, and through its ability to carry out hepatic metabolic functions.
The model's flux predictions correlate with flux measurements across a variety
of hormonal and dietary conditions, and improve upon the predictive performance
obtained using the original, generic human model (prediction accuracy of 0.67
versus 0.46). Finally, the model better predicts biomarker changes in genetic
metabolic disorders than the generic human model (accuracy of 0.67 versus 0.59).
The approach presented can be used to construct other human tissue-specific
models, and be applied to other organisms.

DOI: 10.1038/msb.2010.56
PMCID: PMC2964116
PMID: 20823844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest.
