---
reference_id: "PMID:36264136"
title: Exploring Gene Expression Profiles in Primary Central Nervous System Vasculitis.
authors:
- Salvarani C
- Paludo J
- Hunder GG
- Ansell SM
- Giannini C
- Parisi JE
- Huston J 3rd
- Koster MJ
- Warrington KJ
- Croci S
- Brown RD Jr
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ana.26537
keywords:
- Humans
- Amyloid beta-Peptides/metabolism
- Transcriptome
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Vasculitis, Central Nervous System/genetics"
- RNA
- MicroRNAs
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exploring Gene Expression Profiles in Primary Central Nervous System Vasculitis.
**Authors:** Salvarani C, Paludo J, Hunder GG, Ansell SM, Giannini C, Parisi JE, Huston J 3rd, Koster MJ, Warrington KJ, Croci S, Brown RD Jr
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.26537](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.26537)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2023 Jan;93(1):120-130. doi: 10.1002/ana.26537. Epub 2022 Nov 9.

Exploring Gene Expression Profiles in Primary Central Nervous System Vasculitis.

Salvarani C(1)(2), Paludo J(3), Hunder GG(4), Ansell SM(3), Giannini C(5), 
Parisi JE(5), Huston J 3rd(6), Koster MJ(4), Warrington KJ(4), Croci S(7), Brown 
RD Jr(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, Local Health Unit Company-Institute of 
Hospitalization and Scientific Care, Reggio Emilia, Italy.
(3)Division of Hematology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(4)Division of Rheumatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(5)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(6)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(7)Clinical Immunology, Allergy and Advanced Biotechnologies Unit, USL-IRCCS of 
Reggio Emilia, Reggio Emilia, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: This study was undertaken to explore the gene expression profile of 
primary central nervous system vasculitis (PCNSV).
METHODS: Brain specimens of 4 patients with granulomatous vasculitis (GV), 5 
with lymphocytic vasculitis (LV), 4 with amyloid β-related angiitis (ABRA), and 
4 normal controls were studied. RNA-sequencing was performed using the Illumina 
Hiseq-4,000 platform and the Illumina TruSeq Total-RNA library. Student t test 
and false discovery rate tests were performed for each of the differentially 
expressed transcripts. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis was used for the pathway 
expression analysis. CIBERSORT was used to estimate the abundances of different 
immune cell subsets in the tissues based on gene expression data.
RESULTS: Transcripts differentially expressed between PCNSV and normal brain 
indicated that endosomal, mitochondrial, and ribosome dysfunction, alterations 
in protein synthesis, and noncoding RNAs might be involved in PCNSV. Pathway 
analysis revealed the activation of dendritic cell maturation and antigen 
processing as well as neuroinflammation in PCNSV versus normal brain, whereas 
oxidative phosphorylation was inhibited. CIBERSORT estimation of immune cell 
subsets suggested that activated NK cells, M1 macrophages, memory B cells, and 
follicular helper T cells were likely to be more prevalent in PCNSV samples. 
Naïve CD4 T cells and monocytes were mainly estimated to be present in GV and 
ABRA. Plasma cell and γδ T-cell signatures were mainly found in LV and normal 
brain. GV showed higher levels of genes associated with macrophage activities 
and T cells. ABRA showed higher levels of long noncoding RNAs and miR-616. LV 
showed higher levels of genes encoding immunoglobulins.
INTERPRETATION: RNA sequencing confirmed PCNSV heterogeneity. ANN NEUROL 
2023;93:120-130.

© 2022 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.26537
PMID: 36264136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]