---
reference_id: "PMID:41467628"
title: Clinical characteristics and genotype-phenotype correlation for patients with autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease and PKHD1 mutations.
authors:
- Wang Q
- Chu Y
- Ren G
- Yang X
- Gao E
journal: Clin Nephrol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.5414/CN111793
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical characteristics and genotype-phenotype correlation for patients with autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease and PKHD1 mutations.
**Authors:** Wang Q, Chu Y, Ren G, Yang X, Gao E
**Journal:** Clin Nephrol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.5414/CN111793](https://doi.org/10.5414/CN111793)

## Content

1. Clin Nephrol. 2025 Dec 30. doi: 10.5414/CN111793. Online ahead of print.

Clinical characteristics and genotype-phenotype correlation for patients with 
autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease and PKHD1 mutations.

Wang Q, Chu Y, Ren G, Yang X, Gao E.

BACKGROUND: Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) is a rare 
disorder mainly caused by mutations in the polycystic kidney and hepatic disease 
1 (PKHD1) gene. This study aimed to analyze the genotypes, clinical phenotypes, 
and their correlations of PKHD1 gene mutations in such patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A retrospective analysis was conducted using the clinical 
data of 11 patients diagnosed with or suspected of having ARPKD from August 2019 
to September 2024. The clinical phenotypes and laboratory evaluation results of 
PKHD1 gene mutations were analyzed. Whole exome sequencing and Sanger sequencing 
were used for the analysis of mutation gene loci and family verification.
RESULTS: The average age of the 11 patients was 28.1 ± 8.3 years old, with 7 
females (63.6%). All patients (100%) had heterozygous PKHD1 mutations, and the 
c.2507T>C (p.Val836Ala) variant site was detected in 3 patients (14.3%). The 
main clinical symptoms were chronic kidney disease stage 1 - 2 in 7/11 cases 
(63.6%), and systemic hypertension in 6/11 cases (54.5%). Additionally, missense 
mutations were present on the majority of alleles (11/19), and 7 (36.8%) were 
novel variant sites.
CONCLUSION: The clinical phenotypes of patients with ARPKD were highly variable. 
For suspected cases, genetic testing should be conducted as early as possible 
for diagnosis, which is of great significance for the prognosis of patients and 
genetic counseling of their families.

DOI: 10.5414/CN111793
PMID: 41467628