---
reference_id: "PMID:31775791"
title: "A 9-year-old Korean girl with Fontaine progeroid syndrome: a case report with further phenotypical delineation and description of clinical course during long-term follow-up."
authors:
- Ryu J
- Ko JM
- Shin CH
journal: BMC Med Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s12881-019-0921-9
keywords:
- Antiporters/genetics
- Calcium-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Child
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Progeria/genetics, pathology"
- Republic of Korea
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A 9-year-old Korean girl with Fontaine progeroid syndrome: a case report with further phenotypical delineation and description of clinical course during long-term follow-up.
**Authors:** Ryu J, Ko JM, Shin CH
**Journal:** BMC Med Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12881-019-0921-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12881-019-0921-9)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genet. 2019 Nov 27;20(1):188. doi: 10.1186/s12881-019-0921-9.

A 9-year-old Korean girl with Fontaine progeroid syndrome: a case report with
further phenotypical delineation and description of clinical course during
long-term follow-up.

Ryu J(1), Ko JM(2), Shin CH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul National University Children's Hospital, 101 Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul,
03080, South Korea.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul National University Children's Hospital, 101 Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul,
03080, South Korea. jmko@snu.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome (GCMS) and Fontaine-Farriaux syndrome
(FFS) are extremely rare genetic disorders that share similar clinical
manifestations. Because a de novo missense mutation of the solute carrier family
25 member 24 (SLC25A24) gene was suggested to be the common genetic basis of
both syndromes, it has been proposed recently that they be integrated into a
single disorder under the name of Fontaine progeroid syndrome (FPS).
CASE PRESENTATION: A 9-year-old Korean girl presented with typical clinical
features of FPS. She had generalized loose skin with decreased subcutaneous fat,
skin wrinkling on the forehead and limbs, skull deformities and a peculiar
facial appearance with microphthalmia and midface hypoplasia, anomalies of the
digits and nails, a large umbilical hernia and a nearly normal developmental
outcome. She exhibited prenatal and postnatal growth retardation together with
short stature, and records showed that her height and weight were invariably
under - 2.0 SD from birth to the age of 10 years. SLC25A24 analysis revealed a
heterozygous mutation reported previously, NM_013386:c.650G > A, p.[Arg217His].
After screening her family for the identified mutation, she was confirmed as
being a de novo case of FPS caused by an SLC25A24 mutation.
CONCLUSION: We describe a Korean girl with typical clinical findings of FPS and
a de novo mutation in SLC25A24, as well as 10 years of clinical follow-up,
including growth and developmental achievements.

DOI: 10.1186/s12881-019-0921-9
PMCID: PMC6882017
PMID: 31775791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
