---
reference_id: "PMID:31277442"
title: "Post-Exertional Malaise Is Associated with Hypermetabolism, Hypoacetylation and Purine Metabolism Deregulation in ME/CFS Cases."
authors:
- McGregor NR
- Armstrong CW
- Lewis DP
- Gooley PR
journal: Diagnostics (Basel)
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3390/diagnostics9030070
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Post-Exertional Malaise Is Associated with Hypermetabolism, Hypoacetylation and Purine Metabolism Deregulation in ME/CFS Cases.
**Authors:** McGregor NR, Armstrong CW, Lewis DP, Gooley PR
**Journal:** Diagnostics (Basel) (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3390/diagnostics9030070](https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics9030070)

## Content

1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2019 Jul 4;9(3):70. doi: 10.3390/diagnostics9030070.

Post-Exertional Malaise Is Associated with Hypermetabolism, Hypoacetylation and
Purine Metabolism Deregulation in ME/CFS Cases.

McGregor NR(1), Armstrong CW(2), Lewis DP(3), Gooley PR(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health Sciences, University of Melbourne,
Parkville VIC 3010, Australia. neilm@unimelb.edu.au.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and
Biochemistry Institute, 30 Flemington Road, Parkville VIC 3010, Australia.
(3)CFS Discovery, Donvale Medical Centre, Donvale VIC 3111, Australia.

Post-exertional malaise (PEM) is a cardinal predictive symptom in the definition
of Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS). If the cases
overexert themselves they have what is termed "payback" resulting in a worsening
of symptoms or relapse which can last for days, weeks or even months. The aim
was to assess the changes in biochemistry associated with the cases
self-reported PEM scores over a 7-day period and the frequency of reporting over
a 12-month period. Forty-seven ME/CFS cases and age/sex-matched controls had a
clinical examination, completed questionnaires; were subjected to standard serum
biochemistry; had their serum and urine metabolomes analyzed in an observational
study. Thirty-five of the 46 ME/CFS cases reported PEM in the last 7-days and
these were allocated to the PEM group. The principal biochemical change related
to the 7-day severity of PEM was the fall in the purine metabolite,
hypoxanthine. This decrease correlated with alterations in the glucose:lactate
ratio highly suggestive of a glycolytic anomaly. Increased excretion of urine
metabolites within the 7-day response period indicated a hypermetabolic event
was occurring. Increases in urine excretion of methylhistidine (muscle protein
degradation), mannitol (intestinal barrier deregulation) and acetate were noted
with the hypermetabolic event. These data indicate hypoacetylation was
occurring, which may also be related to deregulation of multiple cytoplasmic
enzymes and DNA histone regulation. These findings suggest the primary events
associated with PEM were due to hypoacetylation and metabolite loss during the
acute PEM response.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics9030070
PMCID: PMC6787670
PMID: 31277442

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.
