---
reference_id: "PMID:39020004"
title: A multicenter study of long-term outcomes of relapsing polychondritis in Iran.
authors:
- Jafarpour M
- Saberivand M
- Saemi M
- Sahebari M
- Seyedmardani S
- Salesi M
- Hosseinpoor S
- Faezi T
- Esalatmanesh K
- Hajialilo M
- Kolahi S
- Myrfeizi Z
- Khabbazi A
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-67530-8
keywords:
- Humans
- "Polychondritis, Relapsing/drug therapy, complications"
- Male
- Female
- Iran/epidemiology
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Treatment Outcome
- Remission Induction
- Prednisolone/therapeutic use
- Aged
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Young Adult
- Follow-Up Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A multicenter study of long-term outcomes of relapsing polychondritis in Iran.
**Authors:** Jafarpour M, Saberivand M, Saemi M, Sahebari M, Seyedmardani S, Salesi M, Hosseinpoor S, Faezi T, Esalatmanesh K, Hajialilo M, Kolahi S, Myrfeizi Z, Khabbazi A
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-024-67530-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-67530-8)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Jul 17;14(1):16486. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-67530-8.

A multicenter study of long-term outcomes of relapsing polychondritis in Iran.

Jafarpour M(1), Saberivand M(1), Saemi M(1), Sahebari M(2), Seyedmardani S(3), 
Salesi M(4), Hosseinpoor S(4), Faezi T(5), Esalatmanesh K(6), Hajialilo M(1), 
Kolahi S(1), Myrfeizi Z(7), Khabbazi A(8).

Author information:
(1)Connective Tissue Diseases Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical 
Sciences, Golgasht St., Tabriz, Iran.
(2)Rheumatic Diseases Research Center, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, 
Mashhad, Iran.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Urmia University of Medical Sciences, Urmia, 
Iran.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, 
Isfahan, Iran.
(5)Rheumatology Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Iran.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Kashan University of Medical Sciences, 
Kashan, Iran.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Mashad University of Medical Sciences, 
Mashhad, Iran.
(8)Connective Tissue Diseases Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical 
Sciences, Golgasht St., Tabriz, Iran. dr_khabbazi@yahoo.com.

Relapsing polychondritis (RP) is a systemic immune mediated disease 
characterized by recurrent episodes of inflammation in various cartilage-rich 
areas. RP may cause extensive tissue destruction and is associated with 
significant morbidity and mortality. In this multicenter study, we considered 
the remission status and long-term outcomes of RP in patients who were 
followed-up in six referral rheumatology centers in Iran. Outcomes of disease 
was assessed by remission status and RP induced damage. A total of 29 patients 
with RP were examined for enrollment in the study, and 26 patients with a 
minimum follow-up period of 6 months were included in the RP outcome analysis. 
Median time to control of symptoms and sustained remission were 5 and 23 weeks, 
respectively. Prednisolone was discontinued in 8 (30.8%) patients and 
medication-free remission was achieved in 7 (23.1%) patients. Regarding the 
disease course, 34.6% of patients had a relapsing-remitting course, 42.3% had a 
monophasic course, and 23.1% had an always-active course. Despite extensive 
treatment with immunosuppressive medications, RP induced damage was developed in 
21 (80.8%) patients. Ear deformity and osteoporosis were the most common RP 
induced damage. Long-term remission and medications-free remission in RP is 
accessible. However, RP related damage occur in majority of patients.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-67530-8
PMCID: PMC11255289
PMID: 39020004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.