---
reference_id: "PMID:23504561"
title: "Attenuated adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency: a report of one case and a review of the literature."
authors:
- Jurecka A
- Zikanova M
- Jurkiewicz E
- Tylki-Szymańska A
journal: Neuropediatrics
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1337335
keywords:
- Adenylosuccinate Lyase/deficiency
- Autistic Disorder
- Child
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- "Purine-Pyrimidine Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Attenuated adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency: a report of one case and a review of the literature.
**Authors:** Jurecka A, Zikanova M, Jurkiewicz E, Tylki-Szymańska A
**Journal:** Neuropediatrics (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0033-1337335](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0033-1337335)

## Content

1. Neuropediatrics. 2014 Feb;45(1):50-5. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1337335. Epub 2013
Mar  16.

Attenuated adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency: a report of one case and a review
of the literature.

Jurecka A(1), Zikanova M(2), Jurkiewicz E(3), Tylki-Szymańska A(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, The Children's Memorial Health Institute,
Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine,
Charles University in Prague and General University Hospital in Prague, Prague,
Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Radiology, MR Unit, The Children's Memorial Health Institute,
Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Metabolic Diseases, The Children's Memorial Health Institute,
Warsaw, Poland.

We present a 9-year follow-up of a patient with an attenuated (type II)
adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency with no obvious signs of disease progression
and degradation. We also review the literature, focusing on attenuated
phenotype, and we report a positive effect of a ketogenic diet on seizure
control. The patient presented at the age of 5 months with a history of global
developmental delay. Screening of urinary purine metabolites revealed elevation
of succinyladenosine and succinylaminoimidazolecarboxamide riboside (a ratio of
2:1). Mutation analysis revealed a compound heterozygosity for missense
mutations: p.R426H and p.D268H. She began to walk independently at the age of 3
years. From the age of 4 years, her communication skills improved and she
presented fewer autistic features. Due to poor results in seizure control, the
ketogenic diet was introduced at the age of 7 years, resulting in reduction of
seizure frequency. Currently, at the age of 9 years, the girl is attending a
special kindergarten and is functioning very well in her preschool group. She
began to make statements that form a logical continuity and make progress in
simple manual operations. The patient participates in therapies such as pet
therapy, hippotherapy, speech therapy, physiotherapy, hydrotherapy, and music
therapy.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0033-1337335
PMID: 23504561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
