---
reference_id: "PMID:23065701"
title: "A novel loss-of-function mutation in Npr2 clarifies primary role in female reproduction and reveals a potential therapy for acromesomelic dysplasia, Maroteaux type."
authors:
- Geister KA
- Brinkmeier ML
- Hsieh M
- Faust SM
- Karolyi IJ
- Perosky JE
- Kozloff KM
- Conti M
- Camper SA
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds432
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Bone Density/genetics
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/drug therapy, genetics"
- Bone and Bones/metabolism
- Dwarfism/genetics
- Female
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Infertility, Female/genetics"
- MAP Kinase Signaling System/drug effects
- Male
- Mice
- Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase 1/metabolism
- Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase 3/metabolism
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Phosphorylation/drug effects
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/administration & dosage, pharmacology"
- "Receptors, Atrial Natriuretic Factor/genetics"
- Reproduction/genetics
- Atrial Natriuretic Factor Receptor B
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel loss-of-function mutation in Npr2 clarifies primary role in female reproduction and reveals a potential therapy for acromesomelic dysplasia, Maroteaux type.
**Authors:** Geister KA, Brinkmeier ML, Hsieh M, Faust SM, Karolyi IJ, Perosky JE, Kozloff KM, Conti M, Camper SA
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/dds432](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/dds432)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Jan 15;22(2):345-57. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds432. Epub 2012
Oct  12.

A novel loss-of-function mutation in Npr2 clarifies primary role in female 
reproduction and reveals a potential therapy for acromesomelic dysplasia, 
Maroteaux type.

Geister KA(1), Brinkmeier ML, Hsieh M, Faust SM, Karolyi IJ, Perosky JE, Kozloff 
KM, Conti M, Camper SA.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

We discovered a new spontaneous mutant allele of Npr2 named peewee (pwe) that 
exhibits severe disproportionate dwarfism and female infertility. The pwe 
phenotype is caused by a four base-pair deletion in exon 3 that generates a 
premature stop codon at codon 313 (L313X). The Npr2(pwe/pwe) mouse is a model 
for the human skeletal dysplasia acromesomelic dysplasia, Maroteaux type (AMDM). 
We conducted a thorough analysis of the female reproductive tract and report 
that the primary cause of Npr2(pwe/pwe) female infertility is premature oocyte 
meiotic resumption, while the pituitary and uterus appear to be normal. Npr2 is 
expressed in chondrocytes and osteoblasts. We determined that the loss of Npr2 
causes a reduction in the hypertrophic and proliferative zones of the growth 
plate, but mineralization of skeletal elements is normal. Mutant tibiae have 
increased levels of the activated form of ERK1/2, consistent with the idea that 
natriuretic peptide receptor type 2 (NPR2) signaling inhibits the activation of 
the MEK/ERK mitogen activated protein kinase pathway. Treatment of fetal tibiae 
explants with mitogen activated protein kinase 1 and 2 inhibitors U0126 and 
PD325901 rescues the Npr2(pwe/pwe) growth defect, providing a promising 
foundation for skeletal dysplasia therapeutics.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/dds432
PMCID: PMC4817088
PMID: 23065701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]