---
reference_id: "PMID:38289950"
title: Staphylococcus aureus proteases trigger eosinophil-mediated skin inflammation.
authors:
- Kline SN
- Orlando NA
- Lee AJ
- Wu MJ
- Zhang J
- Youn C
- Feller LE
- Pontaza C
- Dikeman D
- Limjunyawong N
- Williams KL
- Wang Y
- Cihakova D
- Jacobsen EA
- Durum SK
- Garza LA
- Dong X
- Archer NK
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2309243121
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Staphylococcus aureus proteases trigger eosinophil-mediated skin inflammation.
**Authors:** Kline SN, Orlando NA, Lee AJ, Wu MJ, Zhang J, Youn C, Feller LE, Pontaza C, Dikeman D, Limjunyawong N, Williams KL, Wang Y, Cihakova D, Jacobsen EA, Durum SK, Garza LA, Dong X, Archer NK
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.2309243121](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2309243121)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2024 Feb 6;121(6):e2309243121. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2309243121. Epub 2024 Jan 30.

Staphylococcus aureus proteases trigger eosinophil-mediated skin inflammation.

Kline SN(#)(1), Orlando NA(#)(1), Lee AJ(2), Wu MJ(1), Zhang J(1), Youn C(1), 
Feller LE(1), Pontaza C(1), Dikeman D(1), Limjunyawong N(3), Williams KL(1), 
Wang Y(1), Cihakova D(4), Jacobsen EA(5), Durum SK(6), Garza LA(1), Dong 
X(7)(8), Archer NK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 
21287.
(2)Department of Oncology, Bloomberg Kimmel Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, 
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205.
(3)Center of Research Excellence in Allergy and Immunology, Research Department, 
Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok 10700, 
Thailand.
(4)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 
21287.
(5)Division of Allergy, Asthma and Clinical Immunology, Mayo Clinic Arizona, 
Scottsdale, AZ 85259.
(6)Cancer Innovation Laboratory, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer 
Institute, NIH, Frederick, MD 21702.
(7)HHMI, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205.
(8)Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205.
(#)Contributed equally

Staphylococcus aureus skin colonization and eosinophil infiltration are 
associated with many inflammatory skin disorders, including atopic dermatitis, 
bullous pemphigoid, Netherton's syndrome, and prurigo nodularis. However, 
whether there is a relationship between S. aureus and eosinophils and how this 
interaction influences skin inflammation is largely undefined. We show in a 
preclinical mouse model that S. aureus epicutaneous exposure induced 
eosinophil-recruiting chemokines and eosinophil infiltration into the skin. 
Remarkably, we found that eosinophils had a comparable contribution to the skin 
inflammation as T cells, in a manner dependent on eosinophil-derived IL-17A and 
IL-17F production. Importantly, IL-36R signaling induced CCL7-mediated 
eosinophil recruitment to the inflamed skin. Last, S. aureus proteases induced 
IL-36α expression in keratinocytes, which promoted infiltration of 
IL-17-producing eosinophils. Collectively, we uncovered a mechanism for S. 
aureus proteases to trigger eosinophil-mediated skin inflammation, which has 
implications in the pathogenesis of inflammatory skin diseases.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2309243121
PMCID: PMC10861893
PMID: 38289950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests statement:N.K.A. has 
received previous grant support from Pfizer and Boehringer Ingelheim and was a 
paid consultant for Janssen Pharmaceuticals. The remaining authors state no 
conflict of interest.