---
reference_id: "PMID:33987133"
title: "Proteus Syndrome: A Rare Case in An Adult Ward."
authors:
- Duarte Santos C
- Lizardo Grácio R
- Costa Pires T
- Gonzalez Santos M
- Rodrigues RJ
- Magalhães M
- Mota Ponte A
journal: Eur J Case Rep Intern Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.12890/2021_002554
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Proteus Syndrome: A Rare Case in An Adult Ward.
**Authors:** Duarte Santos C, Lizardo Grácio R, Costa Pires T, Gonzalez Santos M, Rodrigues RJ, Magalhães M, Mota Ponte A
**Journal:** Eur J Case Rep Intern Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.12890/2021_002554](https://doi.org/10.12890/2021_002554)

## Content

1. Eur J Case Rep Intern Med. 2021 Apr 28;8(4):002554. doi: 10.12890/2021_002554.
 eCollection 2021.

Proteus Syndrome: A Rare Case in An Adult Ward.

Duarte Santos C(1), Lizardo Grácio R(1), Costa Pires T(1), Gonzalez Santos M(1), 
Rodrigues RJ(1), Magalhães M(1), Mota Ponte A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Centro Hospitalar de Leiria, Leiria, 
Portugal.

Proteus syndrome is an extremely rare disorder that manifests as an asymmetric, 
disproportionate overgrowth of any connective tissue, such as bone, fat or 
epidermal nevi, in a mosaic or patchy pattern. It has an estimated prevalence of 
less than 1/1,000,000 live births. The diagnosis can be difficult because the 
phenotypes of the patients are variable. Many individuals develop cutaneous 
capillary malformation and prominent varicosities (large and complex vascular 
malformations). Thus, Proteus syndrome patients are at risk of developing deep 
vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism. The authors present the case of a 
patient with Proteus syndrome who was admitted because of pulmonary 
thromboembolism and presented hypertrophy of the left arm and left hemithorax.
LEARNING POINTS: Proteus syndrome is an extremely rare disorder that manifests 
as an asymmetric, disproportionate overgrowth of any connective tissue.The 
diagnosis can be difficult because the phenotypes are variable.It is important 
to keep in mind the importance of anticoagulation because patients are at risk 
of developing deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism.

© EFIM 2021.

DOI: 10.12890/2021_002554
PMCID: PMC8112079
PMID: 33987133

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interests: All authors declare no 
competing interests.