---
reference_id: "PMID:20578892"
title: Shared genetic relationships underlying generalized vitiligo and autoimmune thyroid disease.
authors:
- Spritz RA
journal: Thyroid
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1089/thy.2010.1643
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Shared genetic relationships underlying generalized vitiligo and autoimmune thyroid disease.
**Authors:** Spritz RA
**Journal:** Thyroid (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1089/thy.2010.1643](https://doi.org/10.1089/thy.2010.1643)

## Content

1. Thyroid. 2010 Jul;20(7):745-54. doi: 10.1089/thy.2010.1643.

Shared genetic relationships underlying generalized vitiligo and autoimmune 
thyroid disease.

Spritz RA(1).

Author information:
(1)Human Medical Genetics Program, University of Colorado School of Medicine, 
Aurora, Colorado 80113, USA. richard.spritz@ucdenver.edu

BACKGROUND: Generalized vitiligo is an autoimmune disease of skin pigmentation 
that is associated with increased prevalence of other autoimmune diseases, 
particularly autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD; principally Hashimoto's disease 
and Graves' disease), both in vitiligo patients and their close relatives, 
suggesting a heritable predisposition involving, in part, shared susceptibility 
genes.
SUMMARY: This review summarizes current knowledge of vitiligo epidemiology and 
genetics, highlighting recent findings from genome-wide approaches to disease 
gene identification, emphasizing susceptibility loci shared with other 
autoimmune diseases, particularly AITD, as well as some important differences.
CONCLUSIONS: Inherited susceptibility to generalized vitiligo involves a number 
of specific genes, many of which are shared with other autoimmune diseases that 
are epidemiologically associated with vitiligo, including AITD, confirming a 
longstanding hypothesis about the genetic basis of these disorders. These genes 
provide potential therapeutic targets for novel approaches to treatment as well 
as for approaches to presymptomatic diagnosis and disease prevention in 
individuals with inherited susceptibility to this group of autoimmune diseases.

DOI: 10.1089/thy.2010.1643
PMCID: PMC2935342
PMID: 20578892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]