---
reference_id: "PMID:40969297"
title: "Clinical characteristics of Netherton syndrome and exploration of targeted biologic therapy: two case reports."
authors:
- Xiang W
- Lian C
- Lu J
- Zheng W
- Li Q
journal: Front Allergy
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3389/falgy.2025.1667357
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical characteristics of Netherton syndrome and exploration of targeted biologic therapy: two case reports.
**Authors:** Xiang W, Lian C, Lu J, Zheng W, Li Q
**Journal:** Front Allergy (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3389/falgy.2025.1667357](https://doi.org/10.3389/falgy.2025.1667357)

## Content

1. Front Allergy. 2025 Sep 3;6:1667357. doi: 10.3389/falgy.2025.1667357. 
eCollection 2025.

Clinical characteristics of Netherton syndrome and exploration of targeted 
biologic therapy: two case reports.

Xiang W(#)(1), Lian C(#)(1), Lu J(1), Zheng W(1), Li Q(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical 
University, Nanning, China.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Netherton syndrome (NS) is a rare, autosomal recessive disease 
resulting from a mutation in the pathogenic variants in the Kazal type 5 
(SPINK5) gene. In recent years, the targeted treatment of biological agents has 
increasingly emerged as a focal point of research.
CASE REPORTS: We reported a 4-month-old child and 19-year-old female, both 
presenting with symptoms including erythema, scaling, and recurring episodes. 
Subsequently, genetic testing identified a defective SPINK5 gene, leading to a 
diagnosis of NS. The child received treatment with dupilumab, while the 
19-year-old woman alternated between using dupilumab and secukinumab. Both 
patients had swift and enduring enhancement of skin lesions during the follow-up 
period.
CONCLUSION: NS is an uncommon and frequently misdiagnosed hereditary 
dermatological disease. The management strategies for this condition are 
diverse, and no consensus exists. We implemented various biologic regimens for 
distinct patients, all demonstrating favorable outcomes and satisfactory 
tolerance. Besides, monitoring and evaluating the long-term safety of biologics 
in combination is essential.

© 2025 Xiang, Lian, Lu, Zheng and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/falgy.2025.1667357
PMCID: PMC12441801
PMID: 40969297

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.