---
reference_id: "PMID:36376277"
title: Novel missense COL2A1 variant in a fetus with achondrogenesis type II.
authors:
- Kobayashi Y
- Ito Y
- Taniguchi K
- Harada K
- Yamamura M
- Sato T
- Takahashi K
- Kawame H
- Hata K
- Samura O
- Okamoto A
journal: Hum Genome Var
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41439-022-00218-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel missense COL2A1 variant in a fetus with achondrogenesis type II.
**Authors:** Kobayashi Y, Ito Y, Taniguchi K, Harada K, Yamamura M, Sato T, Takahashi K, Kawame H, Hata K, Samura O, Okamoto A
**Journal:** Hum Genome Var (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41439-022-00218-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41439-022-00218-5)

## Content

1. Hum Genome Var. 2022 Nov 15;9(1):40. doi: 10.1038/s41439-022-00218-5.

Novel missense COL2A1 variant in a fetus with achondrogenesis type II.

Kobayashi Y(1), Ito Y(2), Taniguchi K(3), Harada K(4), Yamamura M(3), Sato T(1),
Takahashi K(1), Kawame H(4), Hata K(3), Samura O(1), Okamoto A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Jikei University School of
Medicine, Minato Ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Jikei University School of
Medicine, Minato Ku, Tokyo, Japan. yitoh2012@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Maternal-Fetal Biology, National Research Institute for Child
Health and Development, Setagaya ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Clinical Genetics, The Jikei University School of Medicine,
Minato Ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Achondrogenesis type II (ACG2) is a lethal skeletal disorder caused by
pathogenic variants in COL2A1. We present a fetus with cystic hygroma and severe
shortening of the limbs at 14 weeks of gestation. We performed postnatal genetic
analysis of the parents and fetus to diagnose the disease. A novel missense
variant of COL2A1 [NM_001844.5: c.2987G>A, (p. Gly996Asp)] was identified, which
led to the ACG2 diagnosis.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41439-022-00218-5
PMCID: PMC9663423
PMID: 36376277

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
