---
reference_id: "PMID:28223176"
title: Prodromal fever indicates a high risk of liver failure in acute hepatitis B.
authors:
- Du WJ
- Liu L
- Sun C
- Yu JH
- Xiao D
- Li Q
journal: Int J Infect Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2017.02.009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prodromal fever indicates a high risk of liver failure in acute hepatitis B.
**Authors:** Du WJ, Liu L, Sun C, Yu JH, Xiao D, Li Q
**Journal:** Int J Infect Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijid.2017.02.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2017.02.009)

## Content

1. Int J Infect Dis. 2017 Apr;57:98-103. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2017.02.009. Epub
2017  Feb 20.

Prodromal fever indicates a high risk of liver failure in acute hepatitis B.

Du WJ(1), Liu L(2), Sun C(3), Yu JH(2), Xiao D(2), Li Q(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Digestive Diseases, Qianfoshan Hospital, Shandong University, 
Jinan, China.
(2)Division of Liver Diseases, Jinan Infectious Disease Hospital, Shandong 
University, 22029 Jingshi Road, Jinan 250021, China.
(3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Affiliated Hospital of Taishan Medical 
University, Tai'an, China.
(4)Division of Liver Diseases, Jinan Infectious Disease Hospital, Shandong 
University, 22029 Jingshi Road, Jinan 250021, China. Electronic address: 
doctorliqiang@aliyun.com.

OBJECTIVES: The role of prodromal fever in the clinical course of acute 
hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is still largely unclear. This study was 
conducted to investigate the factors associated with prodromal fever and its 
role in the development of acute liver failure (ALF) in patients with acute 
hepatitis B (AHB).
METHODS: Inpatients with AHB diagnosed between January 2006 and December 2010 
were evaluated and followed. Clinical manifestations, results of laboratory 
tests, and outcomes were compared between patients with and without prodromal 
fever. The diagnosis of AHB was based on the discrete onset of symptoms, 
jaundice, abnormal liver function tests, the detection of high-titer IgM 
antibody to hepatitis B core antigen (anti-HBc), and a compatible clinical 
history.
RESULTS: A total of 618 AHB inpatients were identified during the study period, 
of whom 102 (16.5%) had prodromal fever and 41 (6.6%) developed ALF. Prodromal 
fever indicated more severe liver injury and was independently associated with 
hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg) negativity. The occurrence of ALF was more common 
in febrile patients than in non-febrile patients (18.6% vs. 4.3%, p<0.001). 
Multivariate logistic regression showed prodromal fever and temperature >38.0°C 
to be independently associated with the risk of ALF, with an odds ratio (95% 
confidence interval) of 3.5 (1.4-8.6) and 7.1 (2.6-19.7), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: AHB patients with prodromal fever, which is associated with a lack 
of HBeAg due to HBV mutation, are at high risk of ALF. Febrile patients with AHB 
should be managed with particular care.

Copyright © 2017 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2017.02.009
PMID: 28223176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]