---
reference_id: "PMID:31884648"
title: "Bestrophin1: A Gene that Causes Many Diseases."
authors:
- Smith JJ
- Nommiste B
- Carr AF
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-27378-1_69
keywords:
- Bestrophins/genetics
- Chloride Channels
- Eye Proteins
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells
- Mutation
- Retinal Diseases/genetics
- Retinal Pigment Epithelium/cytology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bestrophin1: A Gene that Causes Many Diseases.
**Authors:** Smith JJ, Nommiste B, Carr AF
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-030-27378-1_69](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-27378-1_69)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2019;1185:419-423. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-27378-1_69.

Bestrophin1: A Gene that Causes Many Diseases.

Smith JJ(1), Nommiste B(1), Carr AF(2).

Author information:
(1)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, UK.
(2)UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, UK. a.carr@ucl.ac.uk.

Bestrophinopathies are a group of clinically distinct inherited retinal
dystrophies that lead to the gradual loss of vision in and around the macular
area. There are no treatments for patients suffering from bestrophinopathies,
and no measures can be taken to prevent visual deterioration in those who have
inherited disease-causing mutations. Bestrophinopathies are caused by mutations
in the Bestrophin1 gene (BEST1), a protein found exclusively in the retinal
pigment epithelial (RPE) cells of the eye. Mutations in BEST1 affect the
function of the RPE leading to the death of overlying retinal cells and
subsequent vision loss. The pathogenic mechanisms arising from BEST1 mutations
are still not fully understood, and it is not clear how mutations in BEST1 lead
to diseases with distinct clinical features. This chapter discusses BEST1, the
use of model systems to investigate the effects of mutations and the potential
to investigate individual bestrophinopathies using induced pluripotent stem
cells.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-27378-1_69
PMID: 31884648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
