---
reference_id: "PMID:20301435"
title: Childhood Ataxia with Central Nervous System Hypomyelination / Vanishing White Matter.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- van der Knaap MS
- Fogli A
- Boespflug-Tanguy O
- Abbink TEM
- Schiffmann R
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Childhood Ataxia with Central Nervous System Hypomyelination / Vanishing White Matter.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, van der Knaap MS, Fogli A, Boespflug-Tanguy O, Abbink TEM, Schiffmann R

## Content

1. Childhood Ataxia with Central Nervous System Hypomyelination / Vanishing White
 Matter.

van der Knaap MS(1), Fogli A(2), Boespflug-Tanguy O(3), Abbink TEM(1), 
Schiffmann R(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2003 Feb 20 [updated 2019 Apr 4].

Author information:
(1)Department of Child Neurology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands
(2)Genetics, Reproduction, and Development Unit, Faculty of Medicine, UMR INSERM 
1103 CNRS 6293, Clermont-Ferrand, France
(3)Reference Center for Leukodystrophies, Department of Child Neurology, Robert 
Debré University Hospital, University Paris Diderot - Sorbonne Cité, UMR INSERM 
676, Paris, France
(4)Institute of Metabolic Disease, Baylor Research Institute, Dallas, Texas

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Childhood ataxia with central nervous system 
hypomyelination / vanishing white matter (CACH/VWM) is characterized by ataxia, 
spasticity, and variable optic atrophy. The phenotypic range includes a 
prenatal/congenital form, a subacute infantile form (onset age <1 year), an 
early childhood-onset form (onset age 1 to <4 years), a late 
childhood-/juvenile-onset form (onset age 4 to <18 years), and an adult-onset 
form (onset ≥18 years). The prenatal/congenital form is characterized by severe 
encephalopathy. In the later-onset forms initial motor and intellectual 
development is normal or mildly delayed, followed by neurologic deterioration 
with a chronic progressive or subacute course. While in childhood-onset forms 
motor deterioration dominates, in adult-onset forms cognitive decline and 
personality changes dominate. Chronic progressive decline can be exacerbated by 
rapid deterioration during febrile illnesses or following head trauma or major 
surgical procedures, or by acute and extreme fright.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of CACH/VWM can be established in an individual 
with typical clinical findings, characteristic abnormalities on cranial MRI, and 
identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in one of five genes (EIF2B1, 
EIF2B2, EIF2B3, EIF2B4, EIF2B5), which encode the five subunits of the 
eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2B (eIF2B).
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Physical therapy and rehabilitation for 
motor dysfunction (mainly spasticity and ataxia); anti-seizure medication for 
seizures. Prevention of secondary complications: Prevention of infections and 
fever when possible through the use of vaccinations, low-dose maintenance 
antibiotics during winter, antibiotics for minor infections, and antipyretics 
for fever. For children, wearing a helmet when outside helps minimize the 
effects of head trauma. Surveillance: Close monitoring of neurologic status for 
several days during febrile infections and following head trauma or surgical 
procedures with anesthesia. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Contact sports, head 
trauma, infections, high body temperature and, if possible, major surgery.
GENETIC COUNSELING: CACH/VWM is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. At 
conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being 
affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of 
being unaffected and not a carrier. Prenatal diagnosis for pregnancies at 
increased risk is possible if the pathogenic variants in an affected relative 
have been identified.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301435