---
reference_id: "PMID:32915420"
title: A novel LRRFIP1-ALK fusion in inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor of hip and response to crizotinib.
authors:
- Liu W
- Duan Q
- Gong L
- Yang Y
- Huang Z
- Guo H
- Niu X
journal: Invest New Drugs
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s10637-020-00984-5
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- Crizotinib/therapeutic use
- Gene Fusion
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- Male
- "Neoplasms, Muscle Tissue/drug therapy, genetics"
- RNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel LRRFIP1-ALK fusion in inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor of hip and response to crizotinib.
**Authors:** Liu W, Duan Q, Gong L, Yang Y, Huang Z, Guo H, Niu X
**Journal:** Invest New Drugs (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10637-020-00984-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10637-020-00984-5)

## Content

1. Invest New Drugs. 2021 Feb;39(1):278-282. doi: 10.1007/s10637-020-00984-5.
Epub  2020 Sep 11.

A novel LRRFIP1-ALK fusion in inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor of hip and 
response to crizotinib.

Liu W(#)(1)(2), Duan Q(#)(3), Gong L(4), Yang Y(1), Huang Z(1), Guo H(3), Niu 
X(5).

Author information:
(1)Deptartment of Orthopaedic Oncology Surgery, Beijing Ji Shui Tan Hospital, 
Peking University, Beijing, 100035, People's Republic of China.
(2)Fourth Clinical College of Peking University, Beijing, People's Republic of 
China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Translational Medicine and Innovative Drug 
Development, Jiangsu Simcere Diagnostics Co., Ltd, Nanjing, People's Republic of 
China.
(4)Deptartment of pathology, Beijing Ji Shui Tan Hospital, Peking University, 
Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(5)Deptartment of Orthopaedic Oncology Surgery, Beijing Ji Shui Tan Hospital, 
Peking University, Beijing, 100035, People's Republic of China. 
niuxiaohui@263.net.
(#)Contributed equally

An inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor (IMT) is a rare invasive soft tissue mass 
with intramuscular penetration that is primarily treated via a surgical 
procedure. However, with unclear boundaries and a high rate of relapse, there is 
no standard treatment for recurrence or unresectable tumors. It is noteworthy 
that approximately half of IMTs harbor genetic rearrangements of the anaplastic 
lymphoma kinase (ALK). ALK inhibitors have been used successfully in the 
treatment of IMTs with a variety of ALK fusions. Here, we present a case of a 
15-year-old patient with IMT around the hip. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) 
revealed an LRRFIP1-ALK fusion, which has not yet been reported in the 
literature. Crizotinib, an ALK inhibitor, was effective in the treatment of this 
patient, indicating that ALK inhibitors may be effective for IMT with 
LRRFIP1-ALK fusions. This report expands the list of gene fusions in IMTs and 
highlights a new target for treatment.

DOI: 10.1007/s10637-020-00984-5
PMID: 32915420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]