---
reference_id: "PMID:20301730"
title: "Mucolipidosis III Alpha/Beta – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY."
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Leroy JG
- Cathey SS
- Friez MJ
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mucolipidosis III Alpha/Beta – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Leroy JG, Cathey SS, Friez MJ

## Content

1. Mucolipidosis III Alpha/Beta – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL REFERENCE ONLY.

Leroy JG(1)(2), Cathey SS(3), Friez MJ(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2008 Aug 26 [updated 2012 May 10].

Author information:
(1)Professor and Chairman Emeritus, Departments of Pediatrics and Medical
Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium
(2)Senior Scholar, Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, South Carolina
(3)Clinical Geneticist, Greenwood Genetic Center, Charleston, South Carolina
(4)Director, Diagnostic Laboratory, Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, South
Carolina

NOTE: THIS PUBLICATION HAS BEEN RETIRED. THIS ARCHIVAL VERSION IS FOR HISTORICAL
REFERENCE ONLY, AND THE INFORMATION MAY BE OUT OF DATE.
CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Mucolipidosis alpha/beta (ML III alpha/beta;
pseudo-Hurler polydystrophy), a slowly progressive disorder with clinical onset
at approximately age three years, is characterized by slow growth rate and
subnormal stature; radiographic evidence of mild to moderate dysostosis
multiplex; joint stiffness and pain initially in the shoulders, hips, and
fingers; gradual mild coarsening of facial features; and normal to mildly
impaired cognitive development. If present, organomegaly is mild. Pain from
osteoporosis that is clinically and radiologically apparent in childhood becomes
more severe from adolescence. Cardiorespiratory complications (restrictive lung
disease, thickening and insufficiency of the mitral and aortic valves, left
and/or right ventricular hypertrophy) are common causes of death, typically in
early to middle adulthood.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: In ML III alpha/beta the activity of nearly all lysosomal
hydrolases is up to tenfold higher in plasma and other body fluids than in
normal controls because of inadequate targeting to lysosomes. Urinary excretion
of oligosaccharides (OSs), a nonspecific finding, is often excessive.
Significant deficiency (1%-10% of normal) of the activity of the enzyme
UDP-N-acetylglucosamine: lysosomal hydrolase
N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphotransferase (GNPTA), encoded by GNPTAB, confirms
the diagnosis. Bidirectional sequencing of the entire GNPTAB coding region
detects two pathogenic variants in more than 95% of individuals with ML III
alpha/beta.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Low-impact physical therapy is usually
well tolerated. Myringotomy tube placement may be indicated in the treatment of
recurrent otitis media. Carpal tunnel signs may require tendon release. In late
childhood or early adolescence symptomatic relief of hip pain may be initially
accomplished with over-the-counter analgesics; in some older adolescents and
adults with milder phenotypic variants, bilateral hip replacement has been
successful. Later in the disease course management focuses on relief of general
bone pain associated with osteoporosis, which has responded in a few individuals
to scheduled intermittent IV administration of the bisphosphonate pamidronate.
Prevention of secondary complications: Because of concerns about airway
management, surgical intervention should be undertaken only in tertiary care
settings with pediatric anesthesiologists and intensivists. Surveillance:
Twice-yearly outpatient clinic visits for young children; annual routine
follow-up visits after age six years unless bone pain, deteriorating ambulation,
and/or cardiac and respiratory monitoring need more frequent attention.
GENETIC COUNSELING: ML III alpha/beta is inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner. At conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of
being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance
of being unaffected and not a carrier. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives and
prenatal diagnosis for pregnancies at increased risk are possible if the
pathogenic variants in the family are known.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301730
