---
reference_id: "PMID:10482337"
title: A controlled study of light therapy in women with late luteal phase dysphoric disorder.
authors:
- Lam RW
- Carter D
- Misri S
- Kuan AJ
- Yatham LN
- Zis AP
journal: Psychiatry Res
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1016/s0165-1781(99)00043-8
keywords:
- Adult
- Chronotherapy/methods
- Circadian Rhythm
- Cross-Over Studies
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Humans
- Luteal Phase
- Phototherapy/methods
- Premenstrual Syndrome/therapy
- Psychiatric Status Rating Scales
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A controlled study of light therapy in women with late luteal phase dysphoric disorder.
**Authors:** Lam RW, Carter D, Misri S, Kuan AJ, Yatham LN, Zis AP
**Journal:** Psychiatry Res (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0165-1781(99)00043-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0165-1781(99)00043-8)

## Content

1. Psychiatry Res. 1999 Jun 30;86(3):185-92. doi: 10.1016/s0165-1781(99)00043-8.

A controlled study of light therapy in women with late luteal phase dysphoric 
disorder.

Lam RW(1), Carter D, Misri S, Kuan AJ, Yatham LN, Zis AP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of British Columbia, Vancouver Hospital 
and Health Sciences Centre, Canada. rlam@interchange.ubc.ca

Previous studies suggest that light therapy, as used to treat seasonal affective 
disorder, may be beneficial for pre-menstrual depressive disorders. We conducted 
a six-menstrual cycle randomized, double-blind, counter-balanced, crossover 
study of dim vs. bright light therapy in women with late luteal phase dysphoric 
disorder (LLPDD). Fourteen women who met DSM-III-R criteria for LLPDD completed 
two menstrual cycles of prospective baseline monitoring of pre-menstrual 
symptoms, followed by two cycles of each treatment. During the 2-week luteal 
phase of each treatment cycle, patients were randomized to receive 30 min of 
evening light therapy using: (1) 10000 lx cool-white fluorescent light (active 
condition); or (2) 500 lx red fluorescent light (placebo condition), 
administered by a light box at their homes. After two menstrual cycles of 
treatment, patients were immediately crossed over to the other condition for 
another two cycles. Outcome measures were assessed at the mid-follicular and 
luteal phases of each cycle. Results showed that the active bright white light 
condition significantly reduced depression and pre-menstrual tension scores 
during the symptomatic luteal phase, compared to baseline, while the placebo dim 
red light condition did not. These results suggest that bright light therapy is 
an effective treatment for LLPDD.

DOI: 10.1016/s0165-1781(99)00043-8
PMID: 10482337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]