---
reference_id: "PMID:39826692"
title: Profiling Tel1 signaling reveals a non-canonical motif targeting DNA repair and telomere control machineries.
authors:
- Comstock WJ
- Bhattarai S
- Sanford EJ
- Navarro MVAS
- Smolka MB
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2025.108194
keywords:
- "Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- "Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/metabolism, genetics"
- DNA Repair
- "Saccharomyces cerevisiae/metabolism, genetics"
- "Telomere/metabolism, genetics"
- Phosphorylation
- Signal Transduction
- "Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- Amino Acid Motifs
- "DNA Breaks, Double-Stranded"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Profiling Tel1 signaling reveals a non-canonical motif targeting DNA repair and telomere control machineries.
**Authors:** Comstock WJ, Bhattarai S, Sanford EJ, Navarro MVAS, Smolka MB
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jbc.2025.108194](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbc.2025.108194)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2025 Mar;301(3):108194. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2025.108194. Epub 2025
 Jan 16.

Profiling Tel1 signaling reveals a non-canonical motif targeting DNA repair and
telomere control machineries.

Comstock WJ(1), Bhattarai S(1), Sanford EJ(1), Navarro MVAS(2), Smolka MB(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Weill Institute for Cell and
Molecular Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Weill Institute for Cell and
Molecular Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA; IFSC Institute of
Physics of São Carlos, University of São Paulo, São Carlos, São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Weill Institute for Cell and
Molecular Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA. Electronic
address: mbs266@cornell.edu.

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2024 Jul 05:2024.07.03.601872. doi: 10.1101/2024.07.03.601872.

The stability of the genome relies on phosphatidyl inositol 3-kinase-related
kinases (PIKKs) that sense DNA damage and trigger elaborate downstream signaling
responses. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the Tel1 kinase (ortholog of human ATM)
is activated at DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) and short telomeres. Despite the
well-established roles of Tel1 in the control of telomere maintenance,
suppression of chromosomal rearrangements, activation of cell cycle checkpoints,
and repair of DSBs, the substrates through which Tel1 controls these processes
remain incompletely understood. Here we performed an in-depth phosphoproteomic
screen for Tel1-dependent phosphorylation events. To achieve maximal coverage of
the phosphoproteome, we developed a scaled-up approach that accommodates large
amounts of protein extracts and chromatographic fractions. Compared to previous
reports, we expanded the number of detected Tel1-dependent phosphorylation
events by over 10-fold. Surprisingly, in addition to the identification of
phosphorylation sites featuring the canonical motif for Tel1 phosphorylation
(S/T-Q), the results revealed a novel motif (D/E-S/T) highly prevalent and
enriched in the set of Tel1-dependent events. This motif is unique to Tel1
signaling and not shared with the Mec1 kinase, providing clues to how Tel1 plays
specialized roles in DNA repair and telomere length control. Overall, these
findings define a Tel1-signaling network targeting numerous proteins involved in
DNA repair, chromatin regulation, and telomere maintenance that represents a
framework for dissecting the molecular mechanisms of Tel1 action.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2025.108194
PMCID: PMC11875207
PMID: 39826692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interest with the contents of this article.
