---
reference_id: "PMID:25292011"
title: "Thrombotic Primary Antiphospholipid Syndrome: the profile of antibody positivity in patients from North India."
authors:
- Ahluwalia J
- Sreedharanunni S
- Kumar N
- Masih J
- Bose SK
- Varma N
- Varma S
- Singh S
journal: Int J Rheum Dis
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1111/1756-185X.12479
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thrombotic Primary Antiphospholipid Syndrome: the profile of antibody positivity in patients from North India.
**Authors:** Ahluwalia J, Sreedharanunni S, Kumar N, Masih J, Bose SK, Varma N, Varma S, Singh S
**Journal:** Int J Rheum Dis (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1756-185X.12479](https://doi.org/10.1111/1756-185X.12479)

## Content

1. Int J Rheum Dis. 2016 Sep;19(9):903-12. doi: 10.1111/1756-185X.12479. Epub
2014  Oct 8.

Thrombotic Primary Antiphospholipid Syndrome: the profile of antibody positivity 
in patients from North India.

Ahluwalia J(1), Sreedharanunni S(2), Kumar N(2), Masih J(2), Bose SK(2), Varma 
N(2), Varma S(3), Singh S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education & 
Research, Chandigarh, India. japgi@live.com, jasminapgi@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Hematology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education & 
Research, Chandigarh, India.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education 
& Research, Chandigarh, India.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education & 
Research, Chandigarh, India.

AIM: We evaluated the frequency of antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (APS) in 
patients presenting with thrombosis of various vascular beds from North India 
and report the antibody profiles encountered.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A retrospective analysis was performed on the laboratory 
results of aCL (anticardiolipin), aβ2 Gp1 (anti-βeta-2 glycoprotein 1) antibody 
and LAC (lupus anticoagulant) of 1222 consecutive patients referred to the 
coagulation laboratory work-up for a hypercoagulable/thrombophilic state over a 
period of 4 years between 2009 and 2013. LAC was screened with dRVVT (diluted 
Russel Viper Venom Test) and KCT (Kaolin clotting time), and aCL and aβ2 Gp1 
antibodies with commercial enzyme-linked immunosorbent assy kits.
RESULTS: The current APS criteria was satisfied in 3.85% of all patients and 
4.2% of pediatric patients with thrombosis. The venous circulation was more 
frequently affected (59.6%). Cerebral arterial and intra-abdominal vein 
involvement was common. Transient antibody positivity was seen in 44 (3.6%) 
cases. aβ2 Gp1, aCL and LAC were positive in 95%, 54.5% and 23% of patients with 
APS, respectively, during the initial visit and 93.6%, 23% and 17%, 
respectively, during the follow-up visit. Persistent triple positivity was seen 
in only three cases. At initial testing, positivity for both aCL and aβ2 Gp1 was 
the most frequent pattern (38% of cases).
CONCLUSIONS: aβ2 Gp1 antibody was the commonest antibody that was persistently 
positive in patients with thrombosis. Triple positivity for all antibodies had 
the highest specificity and positive predictive value to diagnose APS in the 
first visit, whereas aβ2 Gp1 antibody had the highest sensitivity and negative 
predictive value.

© 2014 Asia Pacific League of Associations for Rheumatology and Wiley Publishing 
Asia Pty Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/1756-185X.12479
PMID: 25292011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]