---
reference_id: "PMID:29345235"
title: News on Climate Change, Air Pollution, and Allergic Triggers of Asthma.
authors:
- D Amato M
- Cecchi L
- Annesi-Maesano I
- D Amato G
journal: J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.18176/jiaci.0228
content_type: abstract_only
---

# News on Climate Change, Air Pollution, and Allergic Triggers of Asthma.
**Authors:** D Amato M, Cecchi L, Annesi-Maesano I, D Amato G
**Journal:** J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.18176/jiaci.0228](https://doi.org/10.18176/jiaci.0228)

## Content

1. J Investig Allergol Clin Immunol. 2018;28(2):91-97. doi: 10.18176/jiaci.0228. 
Epub 2018 Jan 17.

News on Climate Change, Air Pollution, and Allergic Triggers of Asthma.

D Amato M(1), Cecchi L(2), Annesi-Maesano I(3), D Amato G(4).

Author information:
(1)First Division of Pneumology, High Speciality Hospital "V. Monaldi" and 
University "Federico II" Medical School, Napoli, Italy.
(2)nterdepartmental Center of Bioclimatology, University of Florence, Italy.
(3)Epidemiology of Allergic and Respiratory Diseases Department, IPLESP, INSERM 
& UPMC Paris6, Sorbonnes Universités, Medical School Saint- Antoine, Paris, 
France.
(4)Division of Respiratory and Allergic Diseases, Department of Respiratory 
Diseases, High Specialty Hospital A.Cardarelli and University of Napoli Federico 
II, School of Specialization in Respiratory Diseases, Naples, Italy.

The rising frequency of obstructive respiratory diseases during recent years, in 
particular allergic asthma, can be partially explained by changes in the 
environment, with the increasing presence in the atmosphere of chemical triggers 
(particulate matter and gaseous components such as nitrogen dioxide and ozone) 
and biologic triggers (aeroallergens). In allergic individuals, aeroallergens 
stimulate airway sensitization and thus induce symptoms of bronchial asthma. 
Over the last 50 years, the earth's temperature has risen markedly, likely 
because of growing concentrations of anthropogenic greenhouse gas. Major 
atmospheric and climatic changes, including global warming induced by human 
activity, have a considerable impact on the biosphere and on the human 
environment. Urbanization and high levels of vehicle emissions induce symptoms 
of bronchial obstruction (in particular bronchial asthma), more so in people 
living in urban areas compared than in those who live in rural areas. Measures 
need to be taken to mitigate the future impact of climate change and global 
warming. However, while global emissions continue to rise, we must learn to 
adapt to climate variability.

DOI: 10.18176/jiaci.0228
PMID: 29345235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]