---
reference_id: "PMID:37054629"
title: "Klinefelter syndrome: The characterization of the clinical and sociological features of 51 patients."
authors:
- Mendonça F
- Souto S
- Dória S
- Carvalho D
journal: Rev Int Androl
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.androl.2023.100349
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Klinefelter syndrome: The characterization of the clinical and sociological features of 51 patients.
**Authors:** Mendonça F, Souto S, Dória S, Carvalho D
**Journal:** Rev Int Androl (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.androl.2023.100349](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.androl.2023.100349)

## Content

1. Rev Int Androl. 2023 Jul-Sep;21(3):100349. doi: 10.1016/j.androl.2023.100349. 
Epub 2023 Apr 11.

Klinefelter syndrome: The characterization of the clinical and sociological 
features of 51 patients.

Mendonça F(1), Souto S(2), Dória S(3), Carvalho D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Centro Hospitalar e 
Universitário de S. João, Faculty of Medicine, Instituto de Investigação e 
Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Portugal; i3s - Instituto de 
Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Portugal. Electronic 
address: fernandomiguel_92@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Centro Hospitalar e 
Universitário de S. João, Faculty of Medicine, Instituto de Investigação e 
Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Portugal; i3s - Instituto de 
Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, Portugal.
(3)i3s - Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, 
Portugal; Department of Genetics, Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade do 
Porto, Portugal.

INTRODUCTION: Klinefelter syndrome is the most frequently found aneuploidy among 
male patients. Its clinical presentation is very heterogeneous, and thus poses a 
challenge for a timely diagnosis.
METHODS: A retrospective study was carried out with 51 consecutively selected 
patients diagnosed with Klinefelter Syndrome from Jan/2010 to Dec/2019. The 
karyotypes were identified using high resolution GTL banding at the Genetics 
Department. Multiple clinical and sociological parameters were studied by 
collecting data from the clinical records.
RESULTS: 44 (86%) of the 51 patients presented a classical karyotype (47,XXY) 
and 7 (14%) showed evidence of mosaicism. The mean age at diagnosis was 
30.2±14.3 years old. Regarding the level of education (N=44), 26 patients 
(59.1%) had no secondary education, with 5 (11.4%) patients having concluded 
university studies. Almost two thirds of the sample revealed learning 
difficulties (25/38) and some degree of intellectual disability was present in 
13.6% (6/44). Half of the patients were either non-qualified workers (19.6%) or 
workers in industry, construction, and trades (30.4%), which are jobs that 
characteristically require a low level of education. The proportion of 
unemployed patients was 6.5%. The main complaints were infertility (54.2%), 
followed by hypogonadism-related issues (18.7%) and gynecomastia (8.3%). 10 
patients (23.8%, N=42) were biological parents. With regards the question of 
fertility, assisted reproductive techniques were used in 39.6% of the studied 
subjects (N=48), with a success rate (a take home baby) of 57.9% (11/19), 2 with 
donor sperm and 9 with the patients' own gametes. Only 41% of the patients 
(17/41) were treated with testosterone.
CONCLUSION: This study identifies the most important clinical and sociological 
findings of Klinefelter syndrome patients that should be considered when 
deciding workout and disease management.

Copyright © 2023 Asociación Española de Andrología, Medicina Sexual y 
Reproductiva. Publicado por Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.androl.2023.100349
PMID: 37054629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]