---
reference_id: "PMID:38580055"
title: Effect of WQ-3334 on Campylobacter jejuni carrying a DNA gyrase with dominant amino acid substitutions conferring quinolone resistance.
authors:
- Miura-Ajima N
- Suwanthada P
- Kongsoi S
- Kim H
- Pachanon R
- Koide K
- Mori S
- Thapa J
- Nakajima C
- Suzuki Y
journal: J Infect Chemother
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jiac.2024.04.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of WQ-3334 on Campylobacter jejuni carrying a DNA gyrase with dominant amino acid substitutions conferring quinolone resistance.
**Authors:** Miura-Ajima N, Suwanthada P, Kongsoi S, Kim H, Pachanon R, Koide K, Mori S, Thapa J, Nakajima C, Suzuki Y
**Journal:** J Infect Chemother (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jiac.2024.04.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiac.2024.04.002)

## Content

1. J Infect Chemother. 2024 Oct;30(10):1028-1034. doi:
10.1016/j.jiac.2024.04.002.  Epub 2024 Apr 4.

Effect of WQ-3334 on Campylobacter jejuni carrying a DNA gyrase with dominant 
amino acid substitutions conferring quinolone resistance.

Miura-Ajima N(1), Suwanthada P(1), Kongsoi S(2), Kim H(3), Pachanon R(1), Koide 
K(3), Mori S(3), Thapa J(1), Nakajima C(4), Suzuki Y(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Bioresources, Hokkaido University International Institute for 
Zoonosis Control, Sapporo, 001-0020, Japan.
(2)Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Kasetsart University, Thailand.
(3)Department of Bacteriology II, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, 
Musashi-Murayama, Tokyo, 208-0011, Japan.
(4)Division of Bioresources, Hokkaido University International Institute for 
Zoonosis Control, Sapporo, 001-0020, Japan; International Collaboration Unit, 
Hokkaido University International Institute for Zoonosis Control, Sapporo, 
001-0020, Japan; Hokkaido University Institute for Vaccine Research and 
Development, Sapporo, 001-0020, Japan.
(5)Division of Bioresources, Hokkaido University International Institute for 
Zoonosis Control, Sapporo, 001-0020, Japan; International Collaboration Unit, 
Hokkaido University International Institute for Zoonosis Control, Sapporo, 
001-0020, Japan; Hokkaido University Institute for Vaccine Research and 
Development, Sapporo, 001-0020, Japan. Electronic address: 
suzuki@czc.hokudai.ac.jp.

INTRODUCTION: Campylobacteriosis stands as one of the most frequent bacterial 
gastroenteritis worldwide necessitating antibiotic treatment in severe cases and 
the rise of quinolones-resistant Campylobacter jejuni poses a significant 
challenge. The predominant mechanism of quinolones-resistance in this bacterium 
involves point mutations in the gyrA, resulting in amino acid substitution from 
threonine to isoleucine at 86th position, representing more than 90% of mutant 
DNA gyrase, and aspartic acid to asparagine at 90th position. WQ-3334, a novel 
quinolone, has demonstrated strong inhibitory activity against various bacteria. 
This study aims to investigate the effectiveness of WQ-3334, and its analogues, 
WQ-4064 and WQ-4065, with a unique modification in R1 against 
quinolones-resistant C. jejuni.
METHODS: The structure-activity relationship of the examined drugs was 
investigated by measuring IC50 and their antimicrobial activities were accessed 
by MIC against C. jejuni strains. Additionally, in silico docking simulations 
were carried out using the crystal structure of the Escherichia coli DNA gyrase.
RESULT: WQ-3334 exhibited the lowest IC50 against WT (0.188 ± 0.039 mg/L), T86I 
(11.0 ± 0.7 mg/L) and D90 N (1.60 ± 0.28 mg/L). Notably, DNA gyrases with T86I 
substitutions displayed the highest IC50 values among the examined WQ compounds. 
Moreover, WQ-3334 demonstrated the lowest MICs against wild-type and mutant 
strains. The docking simulations further confirmed the interactions between 
WQ-3334 and DNA gyrases.
CONCLUSION: WQ-3334 with 6-amino-3,5-difluoropyridine-2-yl at R1 severed as a 
remarkable candidate for the treatment of foodborne diseases caused by 
quinolones-resistant C. jejuni as shown by the high inhibitory activity against 
both wild-type and the predominant quinolones-resistant strains.

Copyright © 2024 Japanese Society of Chemotherapy, Japanese Association for 
Infectious Diseases, and Japanese Society for Infection Prevention and Control. 
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jiac.2024.04.002
PMID: 38580055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest There is no 
conflict of interest.