---
reference_id: "PMID:22342647"
title: Control of konzo in DRC using the wetting method on cassava flour.
authors:
- Banea JP
- Nahimana G
- Mandombi C
- Bradbury JH
- Denton IC
- Kuwa N
journal: Food Chem Toxicol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2012.02.001
keywords:
- Child
- Environmental Exposure
- Female
- Flour
- Humans
- Male
- Manihot
- "Motor Neuron Disease/etiology, prevention & control"
- Thiocyanates/urine
- Wettability
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Control of konzo in DRC using the wetting method on cassava flour.
**Authors:** Banea JP, Nahimana G, Mandombi C, Bradbury JH, Denton IC, Kuwa N
**Journal:** Food Chem Toxicol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.fct.2012.02.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fct.2012.02.001)

## Content

1. Food Chem Toxicol. 2012 May;50(5):1517-23. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2012.02.001.
Epub  2012 Feb 10.

Control of konzo in DRC using the wetting method on cassava flour.

Banea JP(1), Nahimana G, Mandombi C, Bradbury JH, Denton IC, Kuwa N.

Author information:
(1)Programme National de Nutrition, Kinshasa, DRC, Democratic Republic of Congo.

Comment in
    Food Chem Toxicol. 2012 Nov;50(11):4232-3; author reply 4234-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.fct.2012.06.040.

Fifty konzo cases were identified in four villages in Popokabaka Health Zone, 
DRC. One third of people had only one meal per day, mainly of cassava flour 
consumed as a thick porridge (fufu) and pounded, boiled cassava leaves. 
Retention of cyanogens in flour resulted from short soaking of cassava roots. A 
1.5 years intervention was made in the largest village Kay Kalenge, where the 
wetting method was taught to all women of the village, who accepted it 
willingly. The total cyanide content of cassava flour was reduced to below 10 
ppm. Fufu from treated flour tasted and stored better than fufu from untreated 
flour. The mean urinary thiocyanate content of 100 school children reduced from 
332 to 130 μmole/L and the number of samples exceeding 350 μmole/L decreased 
from 26 to 0 during the intervention. No new konzo cases occurred, which 
included two dry seasons when konzo peaks. Konzo was first identified by Dr. 
Trolli in 1938 in Popokabaka Health Zone and it has now been prevented for the 
first time in the same area. The methodology is now in use in Boko Health Zone 
and we believe it is the most effective way to control konzo in tropical Africa.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fct.2012.02.001
PMID: 22342647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]