---
reference_id: "PMID:39708578"
title: "Prevalence, incidence and trends of keratinocyte carcinoma in Denmark 2007-2021: A population-based register study."
authors:
- Holdam ASK
- Koudahl V
- Frostberg E
- Rønlund K
- Rahr HB
journal: Cancer Epidemiol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.canep.2024.102732
keywords:
- Humans
- Denmark/epidemiology
- Incidence
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/epidemiology, pathology"
- Female
- Male
- "Skin Neoplasms/epidemiology, pathology"
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/epidemiology, pathology"
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- "Registries/statistics & numerical data"
- Adult
- Prevalence
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Keratinocytes/pathology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence, incidence and trends of keratinocyte carcinoma in Denmark 2007-2021: A population-based register study.
**Authors:** Holdam ASK, Koudahl V, Frostberg E, Rønlund K, Rahr HB
**Journal:** Cancer Epidemiol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.canep.2024.102732](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.canep.2024.102732)

## Content

1. Cancer Epidemiol. 2025 Feb;94:102732. doi: 10.1016/j.canep.2024.102732. Epub
2024 Dec 20.

Prevalence, incidence and trends of keratinocyte carcinoma in Denmark 2007-2021:
A population-based register study.

Holdam ASK(1), Koudahl V(2), Frostberg E(3), Rønlund K(4), Rahr HB(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Plastic Surgery division, University Hospital of
Southern Denmark, Vejle Hospital, Denmark; Institute of Regional Health
Research, University of Southern Denmark, Denmark. Electronic address:
anne.sofie.krogh.holdam@rsyd.dk.
(2)Department of Plastic Surgery, Odense University Hospital, Denmark.
(3)Department of Surgery, University Hospital of Southern Denmark, Vejle
Hospital, Denmark.
(4)Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital of Southern Denmark,
Vejle Hospital, Denmark.
(5)Institute of Regional Health Research, University of Southern
Denmark, Denmark; Department of Surgery, University Hospital of Southern
Denmark, Vejle Hospital, Denmark.

INTRODUCTION: The incidence of keratinocyte carcinoma (KC), i.e., basal cell
carcinoma (BCC) and squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), is increasing worldwide,
placing a significant burden on healthcare resources. This is especially the
case for tumors requiring surgical intervention. It remains unclear whether this
increase is a result of the population aging or a genuine increase in risk of
skin cancer. Understanding age-adjusted incidence trends of KC is crucial for
improving future management of the disease. We studied these trends in a large
nationwide cohort, focusing on large, invasive, and surgically challenging
tumors.
METHODS: Information on all incident cases of BCC and SCC in Denmark was
extracted from population-based databases in the calendar years 2007-2021.
Age-adjusted incidence rates were calculated, standardized to the 2013 European
Standard Population. Average annual percentage changes were estimated using
Joinpoint regression models. Incidence trends for larger, more invasive tumors
(tumor (T) category of ≥T2), and of those in the head and neck area, were
elucidated with descriptive statistics.
RESULTS: We found 183,338 patients with a first-time incidence of BCC and 42,233
patients with a first-time incidence of SCC in the period 2007-2021. The
incidence rate, adjusted for age, increased from 252 to 338 per 100,000 for BCC
and from 49 to 104 per 100,000 for SCC. For SCC, the increase was particularly
pronounced in the last two years of the study period. Tumors ≥T2, and those in
the head and neck area, increased markedly.
CONCLUSION: KC is the most common type of cancer worldwide, and the age-adjusted
incidence rates of BCC and SCC increased significantly from 2007 to 2021, as did
tumors with a higher T category and those located in anatomically sensitive
areas. Since the primary treatment for many of these tumors is surgical, this
raises concern about the strain on future healthcare resources.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canep.2024.102732
PMID: 39708578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
report no conflicts of interest in this work.
