---
reference_id: "PMID:12642598"
title: The pore region of the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor is a primary locus for excitation-contraction uncoupling in central core disease.
authors:
- Avila G
- "O'Connell KM"
- Dirksen RT
journal: J Gen Physiol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1085/jgp.200308791
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Calcium/metabolism
- Calcium Signaling
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Humans
- Ion Channel Gating
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Muscle Contraction
- "Muscle Fibers, Skeletal/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Mutagenesis, Site-Directed"
- "Myopathy, Central Core/genetics, metabolism"
- Porosity
- Rabbits
- "Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Structure-Activity Relationship
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The pore region of the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor is a primary locus for excitation-contraction uncoupling in central core disease.
**Authors:** Avila G, O'Connell KM, Dirksen RT
**Journal:** J Gen Physiol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1085/jgp.200308791](https://doi.org/10.1085/jgp.200308791)

## Content

1. J Gen Physiol. 2003 Apr;121(4):277-86. doi: 10.1085/jgp.200308791. Epub 2003
Mar  17.

The pore region of the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor is a primary locus for 
excitation-contraction uncoupling in central core disease.

Avila G(1), O'Connell KM, Dirksen RT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, CINVESTAV-I.P.N., Zacatenco 07360, Mexico City, 
Mexico.

Human central core disease (CCD) is caused by mutations/deletions in the gene 
that encodes the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RyR1). Previous studies 
have shown that CCD mutations in the NH2-terminal region of RyR1 lead to the 
formation of leaky SR Ca2+ release channels when expressed in myotubes derived 
from RyR1-knockout (dyspedic) mice, whereas a COOH-terminal mutant (I4897T) 
results in channels that are not leaky to Ca2+ but lack depolarization-induced 
Ca2+ release (termed excitation-contraction [EC] uncoupling). We show here that 
store depletion resulting from NH2-terminal (Y523S) and COOH-terminal (Y4795C) 
leaky CCD mutant release channels is eliminated after incorporation of the 
I4897T mutation into the channel (Y523S/I4897T and Y4795C/I4897T). In spite of 
normal SR Ca2+ content, myotubes expressing the double mutants lacked 
voltage-gated Ca2+ release and thus exhibited an EC uncoupling phenotype similar 
to that of I4897T-expressing myotubes. We also show that dyspedic myotubes 
expressing each of seven recently identified CCD mutations located in exon 102 
of the RyR1 gene (G4890R, R4892W, I4897T, G4898E, G4898R, A4905V, R4913G) behave 
as EC-uncoupled release channels. Interestingly, voltage-gated Ca2+ release was 
nearly abolished (reduced approximately 90%) while caffeine-induced Ca2+ release 
was only marginally reduced in R4892W-expressing myotubes, indicating that this 
mutation preferentially disrupts voltage-sensor activation of release. These 
data demonstrate that CCD mutations in exon 102 disrupt release channel 
permeation to Ca2+ during EC coupling and that this region represents a primary 
molecular locus for EC uncoupling in CCD.

DOI: 10.1085/jgp.200308791
PMCID: PMC2217374
PMID: 12642598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]