---
reference_id: "PMID:38960901"
title: "Use of a new vertical traction device for early traction-assisted staged closure of congenital abdominal wall defects: a prospective series of 16 patients."
authors:
- Ziegler AM
- Svoboda D
- Lüken-Darius B
- Heydweiller A
- Kahl F
- Falk SC
- Rolle U
- Theilen TM
journal: Pediatr Surg Int
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00383-024-05745-6
keywords:
- Humans
- "Hernia, Umbilical/surgery"
- Gastroschisis/surgery
- Male
- Prospective Studies
- "Traction/methods, instrumentation"
- Female
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Abdominal Wall/surgery
- Abdominal Wound Closure Techniques/instrumentation
- Infant
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Use of a new vertical traction device for early traction-assisted staged closure of congenital abdominal wall defects: a prospective series of 16 patients.
**Authors:** Ziegler AM, Svoboda D, Lüken-Darius B, Heydweiller A, Kahl F, Falk SC, Rolle U, Theilen TM
**Journal:** Pediatr Surg Int (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00383-024-05745-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00383-024-05745-6)

## Content

1. Pediatr Surg Int. 2024 Jul 3;40(1):172. doi: 10.1007/s00383-024-05745-6.

Use of a new vertical traction device for early traction-assisted staged closure 
of congenital abdominal wall defects: a prospective series of 16 patients.

Ziegler AM(#)(1), Svoboda D(#)(2), Lüken-Darius B(1), Heydweiller A(1), Kahl 
F(3), Falk SC(3), Rolle U(4), Theilen TM(5).

Author information:
(1)Department for Pediatric Surgery, University Medical Center, Bonn, Germany.
(2)Department for Pediatric Surgery, University Medical Center, Mannheim, 
Germany.
(3)Department for Pediatric Surgery, University Medical Center, Göttingen, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Pediatric Surgery and Pediatric Urology, University Hospital 
Frankfurt, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590, Frankfurt/M., Germany.
(5)Department of Pediatric Surgery and Pediatric Urology, University Hospital 
Frankfurt, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590, Frankfurt/M., Germany. 
tillmartin.theilen@ukffm.de.
(#)Contributed equally

PURPOSE: Abdominal wall closure in patients with giant omphalocele (GOC) and 
complicated gastroschisis (GS) remains to be a surgical challenge. To facilitate 
an early complete abdominal wall closure, we investigated the combination of a 
staged closure technique with continuous traction to the abdominal wall using a 
newly designed vertical traction device for newborns.
METHODS: Four tertiary pediatric surgery departments participated in the study 
between 04/2022 and 11/2023. In case primary organ reduction and abdominal wall 
closure were not amenable, patients underwent a traction-assisted abdominal wall 
closure applying fasciotens®Pediatric. Outcome parameters were time to closure, 
surgical complications, infections, and hernia formation.
RESULTS: Ten patients with GOC and 6 patients with GS were included. Complete 
fascial closure was achieved after a median time of 7 days (range 4-22) in GOC 
and 5 days (range 4-11) in GS. There were two cases of tear-outs of traction 
sutures and one skin suture line dehiscence after fascial closure. No surgical 
site infection or signs of abdominal compartment syndrome were seen. No ventral 
or umbilical hernia occurred after a median follow-up of 12 months (range 4-22).
CONCLUSION: Traction-assisted staged closure using fasciotens®Pediatric enabled 
an early tension-less fascial closure in GOC and GS in the newborn period.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00383-024-05745-6
PMCID: PMC11222185
PMID: 38960901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no relevant financial or 
non-financial interests to disclose.