---
reference_id: "PMID:39596972"
title: "Elevated Mortality Risk in the First Year Post-Diagnosis of Sarcoidosis: A Comprehensive Population-Based Cohort Study."
authors:
- Patt YS
- Sharif K
- David P
- Hen O
- Gendelman O
- Elizur Y
- Ahmaro B
- Weinstein O
- Watad A
- Amital H
- Ben-Shabat N
journal: Medicina (Kaunas)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/medicina60111787
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- "Sarcoidosis/mortality, complications, diagnosis"
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- Retrospective Studies
- Aged
- Cohort Studies
- Proportional Hazards Models
- Risk Factors
- Lithuania/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Elevated Mortality Risk in the First Year Post-Diagnosis of Sarcoidosis: A Comprehensive Population-Based Cohort Study.
**Authors:** Patt YS, Sharif K, David P, Hen O, Gendelman O, Elizur Y, Ahmaro B, Weinstein O, Watad A, Amital H, Ben-Shabat N
**Journal:** Medicina (Kaunas) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/medicina60111787](https://doi.org/10.3390/medicina60111787)

## Content

1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2024 Nov 1;60(11):1787. doi: 10.3390/medicina60111787.

Elevated Mortality Risk in the First Year Post-Diagnosis of Sarcoidosis: A 
Comprehensive Population-Based Cohort Study.

Patt YS(1)(2), Sharif K(1)(2)(3), David P(1)(2), Hen O(2)(4), Gendelman O(1)(2), 
Elizur Y(1)(2), Ahmaro B(1), Weinstein O(5)(6), Watad A(1)(2)(7), Amital 
H(1)(2), Ben-Shabat N(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine B, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Ramat 
Gan 52621, Israel.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv 69978, Israel.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Ramat Gan 
52621, Israel.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine C, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Ramat 
Gan 52621, Israel.
(5)Hospital Division, Clalit Health Services, Tel Aviv 67754, Israel.
(6)Department of Health Systems Management, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, 
Beer Sheva 84105, Israel.
(7)NIHR Leeds Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit, Chapel Allerton, Leeds 
Teaching Hospital Trust, Leeds LS1 3EX, UK.

Background and Objectives: Sarcoidosis, marked by chronic inflammation and 
granuloma formation, shows a variable clinical course. While many patients have 
benign outcomes, others face chronic, life-threatening complications. Mortality 
studies in sarcoidosis show mixed results due to age, ethnicity, sex, and 
geography, highlighting the need for a comprehensive mortality risk analysis. 
This study compares mortality risks between sarcoidosis patients and controls, 
considering demographic and clinical factors, and performs subgroup analyses 
across different age groups and post-diagnosis periods. Materials and Methods: 
This is a retrospective cohort study that used Clalit Health Services' 
electronic database, including patients first diagnosed with sarcoidosis from 
2000 to 2016 and age- and sex-matched controls at a 1:5 ratio. Hazard ratios 
(HR) for all-cause mortality were obtained using the Cox proportional hazard 
model, adjusted for sociodemographic and clinical variables. Results: 
Sarcoidosis patients showed higher mortality rates (17.7%) than controls 
(10.6%), with an adjusted HR of 1.79 (95% CI: 1.64-1.96, p < 0.001). Subgroup 
analysis revealed the HR for mortality decreased with age: HR for patients under 
50 was 3.04 (95% CI: 2.20-4.21), and for those over 70, it was 1.8 (95% CI: 
1.69-2.11). The HR was highest in the first year post-diagnosis. Key mortality 
predictors included age at diagnosis, male gender, and higher Charlson 
comorbidity index score. Conclusions: Sarcoidosis patients, particularly younger 
ones and those with higher comorbidity burdens, have elevated mortality risks 
compared to controls, with the highest HR in the first year post-diagnosis. 
These findings highlight the most vulnerable period of the disease.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina60111787
PMCID: PMC11596794
PMID: 39596972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare they have no conflicts of 
interest.