---
reference_id: "PMID:37573343"
title: "Metastasising ameloblastoma or ameloblastic carcinoma? A case report with mutation analyses."
authors:
- Hurník P
- Putnová BM
- Ševčíková T
- Hrubá E
- Putnová I
- Škarda J
- Havel M
- Res O
- Cvek J
- Buchtová M
- Štembírek J
journal: BMC Oral Health
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12903-023-03259-6
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- "Ameloblastoma/genetics, diagnosis"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- "Odontogenic Tumors/diagnosis, genetics"
- Mutation
- Carcinoma/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Metastasising ameloblastoma or ameloblastic carcinoma? A case report with mutation analyses.
**Authors:** Hurník P, Putnová BM, Ševčíková T, Hrubá E, Putnová I, Škarda J, Havel M, Res O, Cvek J, Buchtová M, Štembírek J
**Journal:** BMC Oral Health (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12903-023-03259-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12903-023-03259-6)

## Content

1. BMC Oral Health. 2023 Aug 12;23(1):563. doi: 10.1186/s12903-023-03259-6.

Metastasising ameloblastoma or ameloblastic carcinoma? A case report with 
mutation analyses.

Hurník P(1)(2)(3), Putnová BM(1)(4), Ševčíková T(5)(6), Hrubá E(1), Putnová 
I(1)(7), Škarda J(2)(8), Havel M(9), Res O(10), Cvek J(11), Buchtová M(12), 
Štembírek J(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Morphogenesis, Institute of Animal Physiology and 
Genetics, Czech Academy of Sciences, Brno, Czech Republic.
(2)Institute of Clinical and Molecular Pathology and Medical Genetics, Faculty 
Hospital and Medical Faculty Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic.
(3)Department of Histology and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk 
University, Brno, Czech Republic.
(4)Department of Pathological Morphology and Parasitology, University of 
Veterinary Sciences, Brno, Czech Republic.
(5)Department of Hematooncology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ostrava, 
Ostrava, Czech Republic.
(6)Department of Hematooncology, University Hospital Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech 
Republic.
(7)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, University of Veterinary 
Sciences, Brno, Czech Republic.
(8)Department of Clinical and Molecular Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and 
Dentistry, Palacky University and University Hospital in Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech 
Republic.
(9)Department of Nuclear Medicine, University Hospital Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech 
Republic.
(10)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, University Hospital Ostrava, 
Ostrava, Czech Republic.
(11)Department of Oncology, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Ostrava, 
Ostrava, Czech Republic.
(12)Laboratory of Molecular Morphogenesis, Institute of Animal Physiology and 
Genetics, Czech Academy of Sciences, Brno, Czech Republic. buchtova@iach.cz.
(13)Laboratory of Molecular Morphogenesis, Institute of Animal Physiology and 
Genetics, Czech Academy of Sciences, Brno, Czech Republic. stembirek@iach.cz.
(14)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, University Hospital Ostrava, 
Ostrava, Czech Republic. stembirek@iach.cz.

BACKGROUND: Ameloblastic carcinoma and metastasising ameloblastoma are rare 
epithelial odontogenic tumours with aggressive features. Distinguishing between 
these two lesions is often clinically difficult but necessary to predict tumour 
behaviour or to plan future therapy. Here, we provide a brief review of the 
literature available on these two types of lesions and present a new case report 
of a young man with an ameloblastoma displaying metastatic features. We also use 
this case to illustrate the similarities and differences between these two types 
of tumours and the difficulties of their differential diagnosis.
CASE PRESENTATION: Our histopathological analyses uncovered a metastasising 
tumour with features of ameloblastic carcinoma, which developed from the 
ameloblastoma. We profiled the gene expression of Wnt pathway members in 
ameloblastoma sample of this patient, because multiple molecules of this pathway 
are involved in the establishing of cell polarity, cell migration or for 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition during tumour metastasis to evaluate features 
of tumor behaviour. Indeed, we found upregulation of several cell 
migration-related genes in our patient. Moreover, we uncovered somatic mutation 
BRAF p.V600E with known pathological role in cancerogenesis and germline 
heterozygous FANCA p.S858R mutation, whose interpretation in this context has 
not been discussed yet.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, we have uncovered a unique case of ameloblastic 
carcinoma associated with an alteration of Wnt signalling and the presence of 
BRAF mutation. Development of harmful state of our patient might be also 
supported by the germline mutation in one FANCA allele, however this has to be 
confirmed by further analyses.

© 2023. BioMed Central Ltd., part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1186/s12903-023-03259-6
PMCID: PMC10423427
PMID: 37573343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The authors declare that they 
have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could 
have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.