---
reference_id: "PMID:12616451"
title: Hepatitis B in children.
authors:
- Broderick AL
- Jonas MM
journal: Semin Liver Dis
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1055/s-2003-37585
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis B in children.
**Authors:** Broderick AL, Jonas MM
**Journal:** Semin Liver Dis (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-2003-37585](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-2003-37585)

## Content

1. Semin Liver Dis. 2003 Feb;23(1):59-68. doi: 10.1055/s-2003-37585.

Hepatitis B in children.

Broderick AL(1), Jonas MM.

Author information:
(1)Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Division of Gastroenterology, Department of 
Medicine, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Childhood hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection presents both medical and public 
health challenges. Infants who acquire HBV perinatally have up to 90% risk of 
developing chronic HBV infection. Many HBV-infected children have normal alanine 
aminotransferase values and minimal chronic hepatitis. Children with chronic HBV 
infection are usually asymptomatic but may develop chronic liver disease or 
hepatocellular carcinoma. Both interferon-alfa and lamivudine are available for 
the treatment of chronic hepatitis B in children, but the optimal treatment of 
children with chronic HBV infection is evolving as the indications, timing, 
efficacy, and side effects of the treatments are better understood. Universal 
infant vaccination has been shown to decrease the frequency of HBV infection and 
its sequelae. This article addresses aspects of HBV infection that are either 
unique to or different in children.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2003-37585
PMID: 12616451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]