---
reference_id: "PMID:29135426"
title: "Integrated Supported Employment for People With Schizophrenia in Mainland China: A Randomized Controlled Trial."
authors:
- Zhang GF
- Tsui CM
- Lu AJB
- Yu LB
- Tsang HWH
- Li D
journal: Am J Occup Ther
year: '2017'
doi: 10.5014/ajot.2017.024802
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Integrated Supported Employment for People With Schizophrenia in Mainland China: A Randomized Controlled Trial.
**Authors:** Zhang GF, Tsui CM, Lu AJB, Yu LB, Tsang HWH, Li D
**Journal:** Am J Occup Ther (2017)
**DOI:** [10.5014/ajot.2017.024802](https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.2017.024802)

## Content

1. Am J Occup Ther. 2017 Nov/Dec;71(6):7106165020p1-7106165020p8. doi: 
10.5014/ajot.2017.024802.

Integrated Supported Employment for People With Schizophrenia in Mainland China: 
A Randomized Controlled Trial.

Zhang GF(1), Tsui CM(2), Lu AJB(3), Yu LB(4), Tsang HWH(5), Li D(6).

Author information:
(1)Guo Fu Zhang, MMSc, is Psychiatrist, Wuxi Mental Health Center, Wuxi Tongren 
International Rehabilitation Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 
China.
(2)Chi Man Tsui, MMedSc, is Occupational Therapist, Department of Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China.
(3)Aisia Jiang Bo Lu, BN, is Nurse, Wuxi Mental Health Center, Wuxi Tongren 
International Rehabilitation Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 
China.
(4)Li Bo Yu, BN, is Nurse, Wuxi Mental Health Center, Wuxi Tongren International 
Rehabilitation Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(5)Hector Wing Hong Tsang, PhD, is Professor and Head, Department of 
Rehabilitation Sciences, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China.
(6)Da Li, MD, is Psychiatrist, Wuxi Mental Health Center, Wuxi Tongren 
International Rehabilitation Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 
China; 13358119052@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: In this randomized controlled trial, we investigated the 
effectiveness of integrated supported employment (ISE) compared with individual 
placement and support (IPS) and traditional vocational rehabilitation (TVR) for 
people with schizophrenia in mainland China.
METHOD: One hundred and sixty-two participants with schizophrenia were randomly 
assigned to ISE (n = 54), IPS (n = 54), or TVR (n = 54). Blinded assessments of 
employment status, job tenure, and psychological outcomes were conducted at 
admission; completion of the 3-mo program; and follow-up at 7, 11, and 15 mo.
RESULTS: Significantly higher employment rate and longer job tenure were found 
in the ISE group (63.0%, 29.56 wk) compared with the IPS group (50.0%, 25.47 wk) 
and TVR group (33.3%, 9.91 wk). The ISE group also attained the most positive 
psychological outcomes.
CONCLUSION: Work-related social skills training embedded in ISE with 
generalization strategies can enhance vocational and nonvocational outcomes for 
people with schizophrenia in mainland China.

Copyright © 2017 by the American Occupational Therapy Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.5014/ajot.2017.024802
PMID: 29135426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]