---
reference_id: "PMID:33200725"
title: Dengue Infections and the Surgical Patient.
authors:
- Jayarajah U
- Lahiru M
- De Zoysa I
- Seneviratne SL
journal: Am J Trop Med Hyg
year: '2021'
doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.20-0983
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue Infections and the Surgical Patient.
**Authors:** Jayarajah U, Lahiru M, De Zoysa I, Seneviratne SL
**Journal:** Am J Trop Med Hyg (2021)
**DOI:** [10.4269/ajtmh.20-0983](https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.20-0983)

## Content

1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2021 Jan;104(1):52-59. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.20-0983.

Dengue Infections and the Surgical Patient.

Jayarajah U(1), Lahiru M(2), De Zoysa I(1), Seneviratne SL(1).

Author information:
(1)1Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, University of Colombo, Colombo, 
Sri Lanka.
(2)2Faculty of Medicine, University of Colombo, Colombo, Sri Lanka.

Dengue infections are increasing globally and account for significant morbidity 
and mortality. Severe dengue results in microvascular changes and coagulopathy 
that may make surgical intervention risky and the overall surgical management 
challenging. We outline the potential surgical manifestations and complications 
following dengue infections and describe the clinical, pathogenetic, diagnostic, 
and treatment aspects of dengue and surgical patients. The main surgical 
presentations were acute cholecystitis, acute pancreatitis, acute appendicitis, 
splenic rupture, bowel perforation, gastrointestinal bleeding, and hematomas. 
Dengue may also mimic an acute abdomen without any true surgical complications. 
A majority were treated nonoperatively. Misdiagnosis and unnecessary surgical 
intervention resulted in poor outcomes. Better knowledge of the potential 
surgical complications would help in early diagnosis, treatment, and referral to 
specialized centers and thus improve outcomes. A high degree of suspicion of 
dengue fever is necessary when patients in a dengue-epidemic area present with 
acute abdomen or bleeding manifestations. In endemic areas, early dengue antigen 
testing and abdominal imaging before surgical intervention may help in the 
diagnoses. Multidisciplinary team involvement with case-by-case decision-making 
is needed for optimal care.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.20-0983
PMCID: PMC7790109
PMID: 33200725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]