---
reference_id: "PMID:37353203"
title: Different Mutational Landscapes in Human Papillomavirus-Induced and Human Papillomavirus-Independent Invasive Penile Squamous Cell Cancers.
authors:
- Ermakov MS
- Kashofer K
- Regauer S
journal: Mod Pathol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.modpat.2023.100250
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- "Penile Neoplasms/genetics, virology, pathology"
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/genetics, virology, pathology"
- "Papillomavirus Infections/complications, genetics, virology"
- Mutation
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- Adult
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- F-Box-WD Repeat-Containing Protein 7/genetics
- Class I Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/genetics
- Papillomaviridae
- Human Papillomavirus Viruses
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Different Mutational Landscapes in Human Papillomavirus-Induced and Human Papillomavirus-Independent Invasive Penile Squamous Cell Cancers.
**Authors:** Ermakov MS, Kashofer K, Regauer S
**Journal:** Mod Pathol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.modpat.2023.100250](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.modpat.2023.100250)

## Content

1. Mod Pathol. 2023 Oct;36(10):100250. doi: 10.1016/j.modpat.2023.100250. Epub
2023  Jun 21.

Different Mutational Landscapes in Human Papillomavirus-Induced and Human 
Papillomavirus-Independent Invasive Penile Squamous Cell Cancers.

Ermakov MS(1), Kashofer K(2), Regauer S(3).

Author information:
(1)Diagnostic and Research Institute of Pathology, Medical University Graz, 
MedCampus Graz, Graz, Austria.
(2)Diagnostic and Research Institute of Pathology, Medical University Graz, 
MedCampus Graz, Graz, Austria. Electronic address: karl.kashofer@medunigraz.at.
(3)Diagnostic and Research Institute of Pathology, Medical University Graz, 
MedCampus Graz, Graz, Austria. Electronic address: sigrid.regauer@medunigraz.at.

Penile squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) are rare cancers that arise after 
transforming human papillomavirus (HPV) infections or independent of HPV in the 
background of chronic dermatoses. Limited knowledge about genetic alterations 
driving penile carcinogenesis comes from studies of mainly small cohorts of 
typically mixed etiology. In this comparative genetic study of HPV-induced and 
HPV-independent invasive penile SCC of 156 patients from a single institution in 
a low-incidence country, hotspots of 50 cancer-relevant genes were analyzed with 
targeted next-generation sequencing. Seventy-nine of 156 SCC were classified as 
HPV induced, and 77 of 156 SCC arose independent of HPV. Only 28 (35%) of 79 
HPV-induced penile SCC, but 69 (90%) of 77 HPV-independent SCC carried somatic 
gene mutations. PIK3CA, FGFR3, and FBXW7 mutations occurred in both groups in 
similar numbers as seen in other human cancers. In contrast, mutations in TP53 
(44/77; 57%), CDKN2A (35/77; 45%), and HRAS (13/77; 17%) genes occurred with one 
exception of a HIV positive patient exclusively in HPV-independent SCC with a 
frequent co-occurrence of TP53 and CDKN2A mutations (28/77; 42%). Mutations in 
multiple genes occurred in 9 (11%) of 79 HPV-induced SCC versus 47 (62%) of 77 
HPV-independent SCC (χ2; P < .001). More than one mutation per gene (multi hits) 
was characteristic for HPV-independent SCC in 14 (18%) of 77 compared with only 
3 (4%) of 79 HPV-induced SCC (χ2; P < .001). The total number of mutations in 
HPV-induced penile SCC (47 mutations) was significantly lower than that in 
HPV-independent SCC (143 mutations; Welsh test; P < .001). The presence of 
somatic driver gene mutations did not correlate with the age of patients, 
histology, or tumor stage of the primary SCC in either etiologic group, 
suggesting that acquisition of driver gene mutations is an early event after 
invasion. This large cohort analysis identified characteristic differences in 
mutational landscapes for the 2 etiologies. While genetic mutations in tumor 
suppressor genes drive HPV-independent penile carcinogenesis, oncogenic action 
of E6 and E7 substitute for mutations in HPV-induced SCC. A subgroup of patients 
with advanced SCC may be candidates for targeted therapy and clinical trials, 
although the majority of advanced penile SCC remain a therapeutic challenge.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.modpat.2023.100250
PMID: 37353203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]