---
reference_id: "PMID:30394532"
title: Locus and allelic heterogeneity and phenotypic variability in Waardenburg syndrome.
authors:
- Somashekar PH
- Girisha KM
- Nampoothiri S
- Gowrishankar K
- Devi RR
- Gupta N
- Narayanan DL
- Kaur A
- Bajaj S
- Jagadeesh S
- Lewis LES
- Shailaja S
- Shukla A
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/cge.13468
keywords:
- Alleles
- "Biological Variation, Population"
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- Female
- Gene Frequency
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Humans
- Male
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Quantitative Trait Loci
- "Waardenburg Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Locus and allelic heterogeneity and phenotypic variability in Waardenburg syndrome.
**Authors:** Somashekar PH, Girisha KM, Nampoothiri S, Gowrishankar K, Devi RR, Gupta N, Narayanan DL, Kaur A, Bajaj S, Jagadeesh S, Lewis LES, Shailaja S, Shukla A
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.13468](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.13468)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2019 Mar;95(3):398-402. doi: 10.1111/cge.13468. Epub 2018 Nov 27.

Locus and allelic heterogeneity and phenotypic variability in Waardenburg
syndrome.

Somashekar PH(1), Girisha KM(1), Nampoothiri S(2), Gowrishankar K(3), Devi
RR(4), Gupta N(5), Narayanan DL(6), Kaur A(7), Bajaj S(8), Jagadeesh S(9), Lewis
LES(10), Shailaja S(11), Shukla A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal Academy of
Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka, India.
(2)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and
Research Centre, Cochin, India.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Apollo Children's Hospitals, Chennai, India.
(4)Rainbow Children Hospital and Sandor Life Sciences Pvt. Ltd., Hyderabad,
India.
(5)Genetics Unit, Department of Pediatrics, All India Institute of Medical
Sciences, New Delhi, India.
(6)Department of Medical Genetics, Nizam's Institute of Medical Sciences,
Hyderabad, India.
(7)Genetics Metabolic Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Advanced Pediatrics
Center, PGIMER, Chandigarh, India.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Seth GS Medical College and KEM Hospital, Mumbai,
India.
(9)Department of Genetics, Mediscan Systems, Chennai, India.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal Academy of
Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka, India.
(11)Department of Ophthalmology, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal Academy of
Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka, India.

Waardenburg syndrome (WS) is a disorder of neural crest cell migration
characterized by auditory and pigmentary abnormalities. We investigated a cohort
of 14 families (16 subjects) either by targeted sequencing or whole-exome
sequencing. Thirteen of these families were clinically diagnosed with WS and one
family with isolated non-syndromic hearing loss (NSHL). Intra-familial
phenotypic variability and non-penetrance were observed in families diagnosed
with WS1, WS2 and WS4 with pathogenic variants in PAX3, MITF and EDNRB,
respectively. We observed gonosomal mosaicism for a variant in PAX3 in an
asymptomatic father of two affected siblings. For the first time, we report a
biallelic pathogenic variant in MITF in a subject with WS2 and a biallelic
variant in EDNRB was noted in a subject with WS2. An individual with isolated
NSHL carried a pathogenic variant in MITF. Blended phenotype of NSHL and
albinism was observed in a subject clinically diagnosed to have WS2. A phenocopy
of WS1 was observed in a subject with a reported pathogenic variant in GJB2,
known to cause isolated NSHL. These novel and infrequently reported observations
exemplify the allelic and genetic heterogeneity and show phenotypic diversity of
WS.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.13468
PMID: 30394532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
