---
reference_id: "PMID:37575761"
title: Autoantibody Positivity in Two Bahraini Siblings With a Novel Alpha-Methylacyl-CoA Racemase Mutation.
authors:
- Isa HM
- Khudair AD
- Marshall RA
- Khudair AD
- Al-Rawahia TH
- Busehail MY
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.41720
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoantibody Positivity in Two Bahraini Siblings With a Novel Alpha-Methylacyl-CoA Racemase Mutation.
**Authors:** Isa HM, Khudair AD, Marshall RA, Khudair AD, Al-Rawahia TH, Busehail MY
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.41720](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.41720)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Jul 11;15(7):e41720. doi: 10.7759/cureus.41720. eCollection 2023 
Jul.

Autoantibody Positivity in Two Bahraini Siblings With a Novel 
Alpha-Methylacyl-CoA Racemase Mutation.

Isa HM(1)(2), Khudair AD(3), Marshall RA(3), Khudair AD(3), Al-Rawahia TH(3), 
Busehail MY(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Arabian Gulf University, Manama, BHR.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Salmaniya Medical Complex, Manama, BHR.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland - Bahrain, 
Muharraq, BHR.

Bile acid synthesis disorders (BASD) are a group of rare autosomal recessive 
disorders. Of the nine different versions, BASD type 4 is characterized by a 
gene mutation in alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase (AMACR), which is located on 
chromosome 5p13. These disorders generally present with a normal gamma-glutamyl 
transferase with cholestasis, absence of pruritis, and malabsorption of fat, 
which can lead to fat-soluble vitamin deficiencies. In adulthood, patients 
usually develop neurological sequelae. Initial testing can be done through the 
measurement of urine metabolites; however, confirmation of the diagnosis is 
achieved through whole exome sequencing. Treatment involves supplementation of 
oral cholic acid and modification of diet. Only 23 patients with this disease 
have been described. Here, we report two cases of siblings from a family in 
Bahrain with a novel AMACR mutation and a unique association with autoimmune 
antibodies alongside a literature review.

Copyright © 2023, Isa et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.41720
PMCID: PMC10414798
PMID: 37575761

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.