---
reference_id: "PMID:35628451"
title: Clinical and Genetic Characterization of Patients with Bartter and Gitelman Syndrome.
authors:
- Palazzo V
- Raglianti V
- Landini S
- Cirillo L
- Errichiello C
- Buti E
- Artuso R
- Tiberi L
- Vergani D
- Dirupo E
- Romagnani P
- Mazzinghi B
- Becherucci F
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms23105641
keywords:
- "Bartter Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- Female
- "Gitelman Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Premature Birth
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and Genetic Characterization of Patients with Bartter and Gitelman Syndrome.
**Authors:** Palazzo V, Raglianti V, Landini S, Cirillo L, Errichiello C, Buti E, Artuso R, Tiberi L, Vergani D, Dirupo E, Romagnani P, Mazzinghi B, Becherucci F
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms23105641](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23105641)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 May 18;23(10):5641. doi: 10.3390/ijms23105641.

Clinical and Genetic Characterization of Patients with Bartter and Gitelman
Syndrome.

Palazzo V(1), Raglianti V(2)(3), Landini S(1), Cirillo L(2)(3), Errichiello
C(3), Buti E(3), Artuso R(1), Tiberi L(1), Vergani D(1), Dirupo E(1), Romagnani
P(2)(3), Mazzinghi B(3), Becherucci F(3).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Unit, Meyer Children's Hospital, 50139 Florence, Italy.
(2)Department of Biomedic, Experimental and Clinical Sciences "Mario Serio",
University of Florence, 50139 Florence, Italy.
(3)Nephrology and Dialysis Unit, Meyer Children's Hospital, 50139 Florence,
Italy.

Bartter (BS) and Gitelman (GS) syndrome are autosomal recessive inherited
tubulopathies, whose clinical diagnosis can be challenging, due to rarity and
phenotypic overlap. Genotype-phenotype correlations have important implications
in defining kidney and global outcomes. The aim of our study was to assess the
diagnostic rate of whole-exome sequencing (WES) coupled with a bioinformatic
analysis of copy number variations in a population of 63 patients with BS and GS
from a single institution, and to explore genotype-phenotype correlations. We
obtained a diagnostic yield of 86% (54/63 patients), allowing disease
reclassification in about 14% of patients. Although some clinical and laboratory
features were more commonly reported in patients with BS or GS, a significant
overlap does exist, and age at onset, preterm birth, gestational age and
nephro-calcinosis are frequently misleading. Finally, chronic kidney disease
(CKD) occurs in about 30% of patients with BS or GS, suggesting that the
long-term prognosis can be unfavorable. In our cohort the features associated
with CKD were lower gestational age at birth and a molecular diagnosis of BS,
especially BS type 1. The results of our study demonstrate that WES is useful in
dealing with the phenotypic heterogeneity of these disorders, improving
differential diagnosis and genotype-phenotype correlation.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23105641
PMCID: PMC9144947
PMID: 35628451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
