---
reference_id: "PMID:16186124"
title: Structure of human phytanoyl-CoA 2-hydroxylase identifies molecular mechanisms of Refsum disease.
authors:
- McDonough MA
- Kavanagh KL
- Butler D
- Searls T
- Oppermann U
- Schofield CJ
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M507528200
keywords:
- Aspartic Acid/metabolism
- Binding Sites/genetics
- Coenzyme A/metabolism
- Crystallization
- "Crystallography, X-Ray"
- Cysteine/metabolism
- Escherichia coli/genetics
- Ferrous Compounds/metabolism
- Histidine/metabolism
- Humans
- Ketoglutaric Acids/metabolism
- "Mixed Function Oxygenases/chemistry, genetics"
- "Models, Molecular"
- Mutation
- Peroxisomes/enzymology
- "Phytanic Acid/analogs & derivatives, metabolism"
- Protein Binding
- "Protein Structure, Secondary"
- Recombinant Proteins
- "Refsum Disease/drug therapy, enzymology"
- Structure-Activity Relationship
- Transfection
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Structure of human phytanoyl-CoA 2-hydroxylase identifies molecular mechanisms of Refsum disease.
**Authors:** McDonough MA, Kavanagh KL, Butler D, Searls T, Oppermann U, Schofield CJ
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M507528200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M507528200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Dec 9;280(49):41101-10. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M507528200. Epub
2005  Sep 25.

Structure of human phytanoyl-CoA 2-hydroxylase identifies molecular mechanisms
of Refsum disease.

McDonough MA(1), Kavanagh KL, Butler D, Searls T, Oppermann U, Schofield CJ.

Author information:
(1)Oxford Centre for Molecular Sciences and Department of Chemistry, University
of Oxford, Mansfield Road, Oxford OX1 3TA, United Kingdom.

Refsum disease (RD), a neurological syndrome characterized by adult onset
retinitis pigmentosa, anosmia, sensory neuropathy, and phytanic acidaemia, is
caused by elevated levels of phytanic acid. Many cases of RD are associated with
mutations in phytanoyl-CoA 2-hydroxylase (PAHX), an Fe(II) and 2-oxoglutarate
(2OG)-dependent oxygenase that catalyzes the initial alpha-oxidation step in the
degradation of phytenic acid in peroxisomes. We describe the x-ray
crystallographic structure of PAHX to 2.5 A resolution complexed with Fe(II) and
2OG and predict the molecular consequences of mutations causing RD. Like other
2OG oxygenases, PAHX possesses a double-stranded beta-helix core, which supports
three iron binding ligands (His(175), Asp(177), and His(264)); the 2-oxoacid
group of 2OG binds to the Fe(II) in a bidentate manner. The manner in which PAHX
binds to Fe(II) and 2OG together with the presence of a cysteine residue
(Cys(191)) 6.7 A from the Fe(II) and two further histidine residues (His(155)
and His(281)) at its active site distinguishes it from that of the other human
2OG oxygenase for which structures are available, factor inhibiting
hypoxia-inducible factor. Of the 15 PAHX residues observed to be mutated in RD
patients, 11 cluster in two distinct groups around the Fe(II) (Pro(173),
His(175), Gln(176), Asp(177), and His(220)) and 2OG binding sites (Trp(193),
Glu(197), Ile(199), Gly(204), Asn(269), and Arg(275)). PAHX may be the first of
a new subfamily of coenzyme A-binding 2OG oxygenases.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M507528200
PMID: 16186124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
