---
reference_id: "PMID:17691934"
title: New insights on the perturbations of T cell cycle during HIV infection.
authors:
- Galati D
- Bocchino M
journal: Curr Med Chem
year: '2007'
doi: 10.2174/092986707781368559
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New insights on the perturbations of T cell cycle during HIV infection.
**Authors:** Galati D, Bocchino M
**Journal:** Curr Med Chem (2007)
**DOI:** [10.2174/092986707781368559](https://doi.org/10.2174/092986707781368559)

## Content

1. Curr Med Chem. 2007;14(18):1920-4. doi: 10.2174/092986707781368559.

New insights on the perturbations of T cell cycle during HIV infection.

Galati D(1), Bocchino M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy. 
dgalati@tiscali.it

The role of the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) in the pathogenesis of the 
Acquired Immune-Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) is changed. Direct HIV-mediated 
killing of CD4(+) T cells is not the only mechanism leading to lymphocyte 
depletion. There is increasing evidence that, during the chronic phases of 
infection, T cell activation, accelerated cell turnover, and cytokines imbalance 
induce the so-called cell cycle dysregulation (CCD). CCD is a recently 
discovered immune-pathogenic mechanism that mainly induces the depletion of both 
CD4(+) and CD8(+) uninfected T cells. It is due to a significant perturbation of 
protein metabolism as ubiquitin pathway defects of protein degradation are 
associated with an increased and unscheduled expression of cyclin B and p34 cdc 
kinase. Moreover, significant changes in the nucleolar structure and 
post-translational regulation of nucleolin have also been described. As 
modulation of CCD by anti-retroviral and immune-therapies has been suggested to 
predict a good immunological response in HIV-infected patients, a better 
understanding of such a mechanism is needed in order to further clarify its role 
in the pathogenesis and progression of HIV infection.

DOI: 10.2174/092986707781368559
PMID: 17691934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]