---
reference_id: "PMID:34280554"
title: "Pregnancy outcome predictors in antiphospholipid syndrome: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Walter IJ
- Klein Haneveld MJ
- Lely AT
- Bloemenkamp KWM
- Limper M
- Kooiman J
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2021.102901
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pregnancy outcome predictors in antiphospholipid syndrome: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Walter IJ, Klein Haneveld MJ, Lely AT, Bloemenkamp KWM, Limper M, Kooiman J
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2021.102901](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2021.102901)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2021 Oct;20(10):102901. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2021.102901. Epub
 2021 Jul 16.

Pregnancy outcome predictors in antiphospholipid syndrome: A systematic review 
and meta-analysis.

Walter IJ(1), Klein Haneveld MJ(1), Lely AT(1), Bloemenkamp KWM(1), Limper M(2), 
Kooiman J(3).

Author information:
(1)University Medical Center Utrecht, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, Department 
of Obstetrics, Lundlaan 6, 3584 EA Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(2)University Medical Center Utrecht, Department of Rheumatology and Clinical 
Immunology, Heidelberglaan 100, 3584 CX Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(3)University Medical Center Utrecht, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, Department 
of Obstetrics, Lundlaan 6, 3584 EA Utrecht, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
j.kooiman@umcutrecht.nl.

OBJECTIVE: To identify and assess the magnitude of effect of pregnancy outcome 
predictors in women with antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) by means of systematic 
review and meta-analysis.
METHODS: PubMed and Embase were searched (13th June 2020) for studies reporting 
on pre-pregnancy risk factors of pregnancy outcomes in APS patients. Literature 
screening and data extraction were conducted by two reviewers independently, in 
a blinded standardized manner. Pooled univariate odds ratios (OR) were computed 
using a random effects model. Heterogeneity was assessed by I2%.
RESULTS: The search yielded 3013 unique results; 27 records were included in 
this meta-analysis. Previous thrombosis was associated with a decreased live 
birth risk (OR 0.60, p < 0.01, I2 = 40%), increased neonatal mortality (OR 
15.19, p < 0.01, I2 = 0%), an increased risk of antenatal or postpartum 
thrombosis (OR 6.26, p < 0.01, I2 = 0%) and an increased risk of delivering a 
small for gestational age neonate (SGA) (OR 2.60, p = 0.01, I2 = 0%). Patients 
with an APS laboratory category I (double or triple positivity) profile had a 
decreased live birth risk (OR 0.66, p < 0.01, I2 = 0%), an increased risk of SGA 
(OR 1.86, p = 0.01, I2 = 43%) and preterm birth (OR 1.35, p < 0.01, I2 = 49%). 
Triple positivity was associated with a decreased live birth risk (OR 0.33, 
p < 0.01, I2 = 68%), an increased risk of preeclampsia (OR 2.43, p = 0.02, 
I2 = 35%) and SGA (OR 2.47, p = 0.04, I2 = 61%). Patients with lupus 
anticoagulant positivity had an increased risk of preeclampsia (OR 2.10, 
p = 0.02, I2 = 48%), SGA (OR 1.78, p < 0.01, I2 = 0%) and preterm birth (OR 
3.56, p = 0.01, I2 = 48%). Risk of bias assessment suggested considerable bias 
on study participation and statistical methods.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this meta-analysis identified previous thrombosis, 
laboratory category I, triple positivity and lupus anticoagulant positivity as 
the most important predictors of adverse pregnancy outcomes. This up-to-date 
knowledge, can be used in preconception counseling and tailoring of obstetric 
care.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2021.102901
PMID: 34280554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]