---
reference_id: "PMID:22047557"
title: A CFTR potentiator in patients with cystic fibrosis and the G551D mutation.
authors:
- Ramsey BW
- Davies J
- McElvaney NG
- Tullis E
- Bell SC
- Dřevínek P
- Griese M
- McKone EF
- Wainwright CE
- Konstan MW
- Moss R
- Ratjen F
- Sermet-Gaudelus I
- Rowe SM
- Dong Q
- Rodriguez S
- Yen K
- Ordoñez C
- Elborn JS
- VX08-770-102 Study Group
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1105185
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A CFTR potentiator in patients with cystic fibrosis and the G551D mutation.
**Authors:** Ramsey BW, Davies J, McElvaney NG, Tullis E, Bell SC, Dřevínek P, Griese M, McKone EF, Wainwright CE, Konstan MW, Moss R, Ratjen F, Sermet-Gaudelus I, Rowe SM, Dong Q, Rodriguez S, Yen K, Ordoñez C, Elborn JS, VX08-770-102 Study Group
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1105185](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1105185)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2011 Nov 3;365(18):1663-72. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1105185.

A CFTR potentiator in patients with cystic fibrosis and the G551D mutation.

Ramsey BW(1), Davies J, McElvaney NG, Tullis E, Bell SC, Dřevínek P, Griese M, 
McKone EF, Wainwright CE, Konstan MW, Moss R, Ratjen F, Sermet-Gaudelus I, Rowe 
SM, Dong Q, Rodriguez S, Yen K, Ordoñez C, Elborn JS; VX08-770-102 Study Group.

Collaborators: Ahrens R, Aitken M, Allada G, Amin R, Anbar R, Bell S, Billings 
J, Black P, Borowitz D, Boyle M, Canny G, Clements B, Cohen R, Cooper P, Davies 
J, Donaldson S, Drevinek P, Elborn JS, Fajac I, Faro A, Froh D, Gibson R, 
Greally P, Griese M, Hebestreit H, Konstan M, Lands L, Lapey A, Liou T, Mainz J, 
McColley S, McCoy K, McElvaney G, McKone E, Michael R, Miller A, Moffett K, Moss 
R, Mulrennan S, Murphy P, Nasr S, Pian M, Pilewski J, Plant B, Ratjen F, Rault 
G, Robinson P, Rogers J, Rowe S, Rubenstein R, Sannuti A, Schechter M, Serisier 
D, Sermet-Gaudelus I, Shay G, Taylor-Cousar J, Thompson H, Tullis E, Uluer A, 
Vauthy P, Vender R, Wainwright C, Zanni R, Zimmerman T, Mullins G, Kent L, 
Martin S, Gueganton L, Agnes M, Correia C, Hogge E, Horn A, Powers C, Moore M, 
O'Connell O, Rogers S, Peabody J, Kitch D, Toro MJ, Barca K, Jensen R, Hempfling 
A, Felling E, Lee J, Yawa I, Eismann C, Wann LC, Stevens E, King A, Martin M, 
Grover P, Marra B, Skurat N, Alarie N, Schien C, Pickard C, Johnson T, Guzik A, 
Hennessy R, Gangell C, Dale A, Holland S, Ksenich B, Scott S, McCann L, Jackson 
M, Robinson A, Clarke N, Genatossio A, Durham D, Slutsky M, McEvoy C, Davies Z, 
Dunn C, Linder D, McKay K, Schmoll C, Leen G, Wood M, Robinette M, Houser K, 
Scharschinger A, Lucious T, Caci N, Teresi M, Kruse D, Heimes D, Barlow C, 
Packer K, Jensen J, Moss P, Wolfstone A, Boyle M, Clark T.

Author information:
(1)Seattle Children's Hospital and University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle WA 98105-0371, USA. bonnie.ramsey@seattlechildrens.org

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2011 Nov 3;365(18):1734-5. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1110323.
    Ann Intern Med. 2012 Apr 17;156(8):JC4-10. doi: 
10.7326/0003-4819-156-8-201204170-02010.

BACKGROUND: Increasing the activity of defective cystic fibrosis transmembrane 
conductance regulator (CFTR) protein is a potential treatment for cystic 
fibrosis.
METHODS: We conducted a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial to 
evaluate ivacaftor (VX-770), a CFTR potentiator, in subjects 12 years of age or 
older with cystic fibrosis and at least one G551D-CFTR mutation. Subjects were 
randomly assigned to receive 150 mg of ivacaftor every 12 hours (84 subjects, of 
whom 83 received at least one dose) or placebo (83, of whom 78 received at least 
one dose) for 48 weeks. The primary end point was the estimated mean change from 
baseline through week 24 in the percent of predicted forced expiratory volume in 
1 second (FEV(1)).
RESULTS: The change from baseline through week 24 in the percent of predicted 
FEV(1) was greater by 10.6 percentage points in the ivacaftor group than in the 
placebo group (P<0.001). Effects on pulmonary function were noted by 2 weeks, 
and a significant treatment effect was maintained through week 48. Subjects 
receiving ivacaftor were 55% less likely to have a pulmonary exacerbation than 
were patients receiving placebo, through week 48 (P<0.001). In addition, through 
week 48, subjects in the ivacaftor group scored 8.6 points higher than did 
subjects in the placebo group on the respiratory-symptoms domain of the Cystic 
Fibrosis Questionnaire-revised instrument (a 100-point scale, with higher 
numbers indicating a lower effect of symptoms on the patient's quality of life) 
(P<0.001). By 48 weeks, patients treated with ivacaftor had gained, on average, 
2.7 kg more weight than had patients receiving placebo (P<0.001). The change 
from baseline through week 48 in the concentration of sweat chloride, a measure 
of CFTR activity, with ivacaftor as compared with placebo was -48.1 mmol per 
liter (P<0.001). The incidence of adverse events was similar with ivacaftor and 
placebo, with a lower proportion of serious adverse events with ivacaftor than 
with placebo (24% vs. 42%).
CONCLUSIONS: Ivacaftor was associated with improvements in lung function at 2 
weeks that were sustained through 48 weeks. Substantial improvements were also 
observed in the risk of pulmonary exacerbations, patient-reported respiratory 
symptoms, weight, and concentration of sweat chloride. (Funded by Vertex 
Pharmaceuticals and others; VX08-770-102 ClinicalTrials.gov number, 
NCT00909532.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1105185
PMCID: PMC3230303
PMID: 22047557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]