---
reference_id: "PMID:29709504"
title: The pleiotropic transcriptional regulator COUP-TFI plays multiple roles in neural development and disease.
authors:
- Bertacchi M
- Parisot J
- Studer M
journal: Brain Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2018.04.024
keywords:
- Animals
- "COUP Transcription Factor I/metabolism, physiology"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental/genetics"
- Hippocampus/metabolism
- Humans
- Neocortex/metabolism
- "Neurodegenerative Diseases/genetics, metabolism"
- Neurogenesis/physiology
- Neurons/metabolism
- "Receptors, Cytoplasmic and Nuclear/metabolism"
- Transcription Factors/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The pleiotropic transcriptional regulator COUP-TFI plays multiple roles in neural development and disease.
**Authors:** Bertacchi M, Parisot J, Studer M
**Journal:** Brain Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.brainres.2018.04.024](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2018.04.024)

## Content

1. Brain Res. 2019 Feb 15;1705:75-94. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2018.04.024. Epub 
2018 Apr 27.

The pleiotropic transcriptional regulator COUP-TFI plays multiple roles in 
neural development and disease.

Bertacchi M(1), Parisot J(2), Studer M(3).

Author information:
(1)Université Côte d'Azur, CNRS, Inserm, iBV - Institut de Biologie Valrose, 
06108 Nice, France. Electronic address: Michele.bertacchi@unice.fr.
(2)Université Côte d'Azur, CNRS, Inserm, iBV - Institut de Biologie Valrose, 
06108 Nice, France.
(3)Université Côte d'Azur, CNRS, Inserm, iBV - Institut de Biologie Valrose, 
06108 Nice, France. Electronic address: Michele.studer@unice.fr.

Transcription factors are expressed in a dynamic fashion both in time and space 
during brain development, and exert their roles by activating a cascade of 
multiple target genes. This implies that understanding the precise function of a 
transcription factor becomes a challenging task. In this review, we will focus 
on COUP-TFI (or NR2F1), a nuclear receptor belonging to the superfamily of the 
steroid/thyroid hormone receptors, and considered to be one of the major 
transcriptional regulators orchestrating cortical arealization, cell-type 
specification and maturation. Recent data have unraveled the multi-faceted 
functions of COUP-TFI in the development of several mouse brain structures, 
including the neocortex, hippocampus and ganglionic eminences. Despite NR2F1 
mutations and deletions in humans have been linked to a complex 
neurodevelopmental disease mainly associated to optic atrophy and intellectual 
disability, its role during the formation of the retina and optic nerve remains 
unclear. In light of its major influence in cortical development, we predict 
that its haploinsufficiency might be the cause of other cognitive diseases, not 
identified so far. Mouse models offer a unique opportunity of dissecting 
COUP-TFI function in different regions during brain assembly; hence, the 
importance of comparing and discussing common points linking mouse models to 
human patients' symptoms.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2018.04.024
PMID: 29709504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]