---
reference_id: "PMID:39377512"
title: Development and Acceptability of Provider Training to Increase Treatment Engagement of Parents in Their Children's Behavioral Health Care Need.
authors:
- Oruche UM
- Holladay CM
- Chacko A
- Nakash O
- Draucker CB
journal: J Am Psychiatr Nurses Assoc
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1177/10783903241284014
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Development and Acceptability of Provider Training to Increase Treatment Engagement of Parents in Their Children's Behavioral Health Care Need.
**Authors:** Oruche UM, Holladay CM, Chacko A, Nakash O, Draucker CB
**Journal:** J Am Psychiatr Nurses Assoc (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1177/10783903241284014](https://doi.org/10.1177/10783903241284014)

## Content

1. J Am Psychiatr Nurses Assoc. 2024 Nov-Dec;30(6):927-939. doi: 
10.1177/10783903241284014. Epub 2024 Oct 8.

Development and Acceptability of Provider Training to Increase Treatment 
Engagement of Parents in Their Children's Behavioral Health Care Need.

Oruche UM(1), Holladay CM(2), Chacko A(3), Nakash O(4), Draucker CB(5).

Author information:
(1)Ukamaka M. Oruche, PhD, RN, PMHCNS-BC, FAAN, University of South Florida 
Health College of Nursing, Tampa, FL, USA.
(2)Cynthia M. Holladay, MPA, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(3)Anil Chacko, PhD, New York University, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Ora Nakash, PhD, Smith College, Northampton, MA, USA.
(5)Claire B. Draucker, PhD, RN, FAAN, Indiana University School of Nursing, 
Indianapolis, IN, USA.

BACKGROUND: Disruptive, Impulse-Control, and Conduct disorders (DIC) affect 5 
million children in the United States and often require comprehensive and 
long-term behavioral health care for which sustained parental involvement is 
essential. Our research team is developing an intervention to improve parental 
engagement in the behavioral health care of their children with DIC. The 
intervention, which will be a modification of an evidence-based shared 
decision-making intervention called DECIDE, will include a parent component and 
a provider component. AIM: To determine the acceptability of the provider 
component of the modified DECIDE intervention. METHODS: The provider 
intervention is an asynchronous self-paced online training program made up of 
five modules: introduction, shared decision-making, perspective-taking, 
attributional errors, and being a responsive provider. The training was piloted 
with 41 providers in two public child and adolescent treatment programs. 
Following completion of the training, semi-structured interviews were conducted 
with the providers to assess the acceptability of the training. The interviews 
were analyzed with conventional content analysis. RESULTS: The provider training 
was well received by providers, and many had made practice changes based on what 
they had learned. Several offered recommendations for improvement, most notably 
the need to tailor the training based on provider role, discipline, and level of 
expertise. CONCLUSIONS: The feedback given by providers will be used to refine 
future iterations of the provider training component of the modified DECIDE 
intervention. Psychiatric nurses and other clinicians may draw from strategies 
incorporated in the training program to improve parent engagement in the 
treatment of children with DIC.

DOI: 10.1177/10783903241284014
PMID: 39377512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting InterestsThe 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.