---
reference_id: "PMID:8247416"
title: Evidence that lead acts as a calcium substitute in second messenger metabolism.
authors:
- Goldstein GW
journal: Neurotoxicology
year: '1993'
keywords:
- Animals
- Calcium/pharmacology
- Humans
- Lead/toxicity
- Protein Kinase C/drug effects
- Second Messenger Systems/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evidence that lead acts as a calcium substitute in second messenger metabolism.
**Authors:** Goldstein GW
**Journal:** Neurotoxicology (1993)

## Content

1. Neurotoxicology. 1993 Summer-Fall;14(2-3):97-101.

Evidence that lead acts as a calcium substitute in second messenger metabolism.

Goldstein GW(1).

Author information:
(1)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205.

Our investigations of the ability of lead to substitute for calcium in several 
intracellular regulatory events are reviewed in the context of the neurotoxicity 
produced by this heavy metal. We found that lead activates calmodulin dependent 
phosphodiesterase, calmodulin inhibitor sensitive potassium channels, and 
calmodulin independent protein kinase C (PKC). Because of sensitivity in the 
picomolar range, the activation of PKC by lead may be more biologically relevant 
than its activation of calmodulin which requires high nanomolar levels of the 
toxicant. We also found that inhibition of capillary-like structure formation in 
co-cultures of neural endothelial cells with astrocytes by lead was similar to 
that produced by phorbol esters, known stimulators of PKC. This functional event 
supports the hypothesis that PKC activation underlies some aspects of lead 
neurotoxicity. Taken together these studies implicate second messenger 
metabolism and protein kinase activation as potential sites for the disruptive 
action of lead upon nervous system function. These reactions could contribute to 
the subtle defects in brain function associated with low level poisoning.

PMID: 8247416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]