---
reference_id: "PMID:23930978"
title: "Microglia, neuroinflammation, and beta-amyloid protein in Alzheimer's disease."
authors:
- Cai Z
- Hussain MD
- Yan LJ
journal: Int J Neurosci
year: '2014'
doi: 10.3109/00207454.2013.833510
keywords:
- "Alzheimer Disease/drug therapy, metabolism, pathology"
- Amyloid beta-Peptides/metabolism
- Humans
- "Inflammation/metabolism, pathology"
- "Microglia/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Microglia, neuroinflammation, and beta-amyloid protein in Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Cai Z, Hussain MD, Yan LJ
**Journal:** Int J Neurosci (2014)
**DOI:** [10.3109/00207454.2013.833510](https://doi.org/10.3109/00207454.2013.833510)

## Content

1. Int J Neurosci. 2014 May;124(5):307-21. doi: 10.3109/00207454.2013.833510.
Epub  2013 Sep 12.

Microglia, neuroinflammation, and beta-amyloid protein in Alzheimer's disease.

Cai Z(1), Hussain MD, Yan LJ.

Author information:
(1)1Department of Neurology, The Lu'an Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical 
University , Lu'an People's Hospital, Lu'an, Anhui Province , China.

Compelling evidence from basic molecular biology has demonstrated the dual roles 
of microglia in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). On one hand, 
microglia are involved in AD pathogenesis by releasing inflammatory mediators 
such as inflammatory cytokines, complement components, chemokines, and free 
radicals that are all known to contribute to beta-amyloid (Aβ) production and 
accumulation. On the other hand, microglia are also known to play a beneficial 
role in generating anti-Aβ antibodies and stimulating clearance of amyloid 
plaques. Aβ itself, an inducer of microglia activation and neuroinflammation, 
has been considered as an underlying and unifying factor in the development of 
AD. A vicious cycle of inflammation has been formed between Aβ accumulation, 
activated microglia, and microglial inflammatory mediators, which enhance Aβ 
deposition and neuroinflammation. Thus, inhibiting the vicious cycle seems to be 
a promising treatment to restrain further development of AD. With increasing 
research efforts on microglia in AD, intervention of microglia activation and 
neuroinflammation in AD may provide a potential target for AD therapy in spite 
of the provisional failure of nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs in clinical 
trials.

DOI: 10.3109/00207454.2013.833510
PMID: 23930978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]