---
reference_id: "PMID:33971155"
title: "Efficacy and safety of voclosporin versus placebo for lupus nephritis (AURORA 1): a double-blind, randomised, multicentre, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial."
authors:
- Rovin BH
- Teng YKO
- Ginzler EM
- Arriens C
- Caster DJ
- Romero-Diaz J
- Gibson K
- Kaplan J
- Lisk L
- Navarra S
- Parikh SV
- Randhawa S
- Solomons N
- Huizinga RB
journal: Lancet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)00578-X
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Calcineurin Inhibitors/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Creatinine/urine
- "Cyclosporine/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Glomerular Filtration Rate/drug effects
- "Glucocorticoids/administration & dosage"
- Humans
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic"
- Lupus Nephritis/drug therapy
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mycophenolic Acid/therapeutic use
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of voclosporin versus placebo for lupus nephritis (AURORA 1): a double-blind, randomised, multicentre, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial.
**Authors:** Rovin BH, Teng YKO, Ginzler EM, Arriens C, Caster DJ, Romero-Diaz J, Gibson K, Kaplan J, Lisk L, Navarra S, Parikh SV, Randhawa S, Solomons N, Huizinga RB
**Journal:** Lancet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(21)00578-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(21)00578-X)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2021 May 29;397(10289):2070-2080. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)00578-X.
Epub 2021 May 7.

Efficacy and safety of voclosporin versus placebo for lupus nephritis (AURORA
1): a double-blind, randomised, multicentre, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial.

Rovin BH(1), Teng YKO(2), Ginzler EM(3), Arriens C(4), Caster DJ(5), Romero-Diaz
J(6), Gibson K(7), Kaplan J(8), Lisk L(9), Navarra S(10), Parikh SV(1), Randhawa
S(9), Solomons N(9), Huizinga RB(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center,
Columbus, OH, USA.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Medicine, SUNY Downstate Health Sciences University, Brooklyn,
NY, USA.
(4)Department of Arthritis & Clinical Immunology, Rheumatology, Oklahoma Medical
Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, University
of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, KY, USA.
(6)Department of Immunology and Rheumatology, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias
Medicas y Nutricion Salvador Zubiran, Mexico City, Mexico.
(7)Department of Medicine, UNC Kidney Center, Chapel Hill, NC, United States.
(8)Department of Medicine, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ, USA.
(9)Clinical Development, Aurinia Pharmaceuticals, Victoria, BC, Canada.
(10)University of Santo Tomas, Manila and St Luke's Medical Center, Quezon City,
Philippines.
(11)Research, Aurinia Pharmaceuticals, Victoria, BC, Canada. Electronic address:
rhuizinga@auriniapharma.com.

Erratum in
    Lancet. 2021 May 29;397(10289):2048. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)01160-0.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2021 May 29;397(10289):2027-2029. doi:
10.1016/S0140-6736(21)00663-2.
    Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2021 Jul;17(7):378. doi: 10.1038/s41584-021-00638-7.

BACKGROUND: Voclosporin, a novel calcineurin inhibitor approved for the
treatment of adults with lupus nephritis, improved complete renal response rates
in patients with lupus nephritis in a phase 2 trial. This study aimed to
evaluate the efficacy and safety of voclosporin for the treatment of lupus
nephritis.
METHODS: This multicentre, double-blind, randomised phase 3 trial was done in
142 hospitals and clinics across 27 countries. Patients with a diagnosis of
systemic lupus erythematosus with lupus nephritis according to the American
College of Rheumatology criteria, and a kidney biopsy within 2 years that showed
class III, IV, or V (alone or in combination with class III or IV) were
eligible. Patients were randomly assigned (1:1) to oral voclosporin (23·7 mg
twice daily) or placebo, on a background of mycophenolate mofetil (1 g twice
daily) and rapidly tapered low-dose oral steroids, by use of an interactive web
response system. The primary endpoint was complete renal response at 52 weeks
defined as a composite of urine protein creatinine ratio of 0·5 mg/mg or less,
stable renal function (defined as estimated glomerular filtration rate [eGFR]
≥60 mL/min/1·73 m2 or no confirmed decrease from baseline in eGFR of >20%), no
administration of rescue medication, and no more than 10 mg prednisone
equivalent per day for 3 or more consecutive days or for 7 or more days during
weeks 44 through 52, just before the primary endpoint assessment. Safety was
also assessed. Efficacy analysis was by intention-to-treat and safety analysis
by randomised patients receiving at least one dose of study treatment. The trial
is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03021499.
FINDINGS: Between April 13, 2017, and Oct 10, 2019, 179 patients were assigned
to the voclosporin group and 178 to the placebo group. The primary endpoint of
complete renal response at week 52 was achieved in significantly more patients
in the voclosporin group than in the placebo group (73 [41%] of 179 patients vs
40 [23%] of 178 patients; odds ratio 2·65; 95% CI 1·64-4·27; p<0·0001). The
adverse event profile was balanced between the two groups; serious adverse
events occurred in 37 (21%) of 178 in the voclosporin group and 38 (21%) of 178
patients in the placebo group. The most frequent serious adverse event involving
infection was pneumonia, occurring in 7 (4%) patients in the voclosporin group
and in 8 (4%) patients in the placebo group. A total of six patients died during
the study or study follow-up period (one [<1%] patient in the voclosporin group
and five [3%] patients in the placebo group). None of the events leading to
death were considered by the investigators to be related to the study
treatments.
INTERPRETATION: Voclosporin in combination with MMF and low-dose steroids led to
a clinically and statistically superior complete renal response rate versus MMF
and low-dose steroids alone, with a comparable safety profile. This finding is
an important advancement in the treatment of patients with active lupus
nephritis.
FUNDING: Aurinia Pharmaceuticals.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(21)00578-X
PMID: 33971155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests BHR reports personal
fees from Aurinia, Callidatis, ChemoCentryx, Retrophin, Novartis, Morphosys, EMD
Serono, Bristol Myers Squibb, Janssen, Omeros, and AstraZeneca; non-financial
support from Lupus Foundation of America; and grants from National Institutes of
Health (NIH), outside the submitted work. YKOT reports consultancy fees from
Aurinia, during the conduct of the study. EMG was a site primary investigator
for clinical trials funded by Aurinia. CA reports personal fees from Aurinia,
during the conduct of the study; grants and personal fees from Bristol Myers
Squibb and GlaxoSmithKline; and grants from Exagen, outside the submitted work.
DJC reports grants from NIH; and personal fees from Aurinia, Calliditas,
GlaxoSmithKline, and Retrophin, outside the submitted work. JR-D participated in
Aurinia clinical trials. KG reports grants and personal fees from Aurinia, and
Retrophin; grants from Bristol Meyer Squibb; and personal fees from Reata,
outside the submitted work. JK reports personal fees from and is a stakeholder
of Aurinia Pharmaceuticals, outside the submitted work. SN was a consultant or
participated in speaker bureau for Astellas, Pfizer, Novartis, Boehringer
Ingelheim, and Johnson and Johnson; received educational and research grants
from Astellas and Aurinia; and participated in Aurinia clinical trials. SVP was
a consultant for Aurinia, GlaxoSmithKline, Bristol Myers Squibb; received
research funding from National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases, EMD Serono, Aurinia, and Mallinckrodt; and participated in clinical
trials of Aurinia. NS is an employee and stockholder of Aurinia and has an
issued patent (number 10286036, on a voclosporin dosing protocol). LL, SR, and
RBH are employees and stockholders of Aurinia.
