---
reference_id: "PMID:40538939"
title: "Somatic NLRP3 mosaicism in patients with \"mutation-negative\" CAPS: insights from a single centre UK cohort."
authors:
- Melo Gomes S
- Arostegui JI
- Mensa-Vilaro A
- Omoyinmi E
- Hong Y
- McCreary D
- Rowczenio D
- Hawkins P
- Brogan P
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2025.1598748
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Somatic NLRP3 mosaicism in patients with "mutation-negative" CAPS: insights from a single centre UK cohort.
**Authors:** Melo Gomes S, Arostegui JI, Mensa-Vilaro A, Omoyinmi E, Hong Y, McCreary D, Rowczenio D, Hawkins P, Brogan P
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2025.1598748](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2025.1598748)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2025 Jun 5;13:1598748. doi: 10.3389/fped.2025.1598748. 
eCollection 2025.

Somatic NLRP3 mosaicism in patients with "mutation-negative" CAPS: insights from 
a single centre UK cohort.

Melo Gomes S(1), Arostegui JI(2), Mensa-Vilaro A(2), Omoyinmi E(3)(4), Hong 
Y(3), McCreary D(3), Rowczenio D(4), Hawkins P(4), Brogan P(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Department of Immunology, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Department of Infection, Immunity and Inflammation, UCL GOS Institute of 
Child Health, London, United Kingdom.
(4)National Amyloidosis Centre, Royal Free Hospital, London, United Kingdom.

INTRODUCTION: Knowledge about mosaicism in cryopyrin-associated periodic 
syndromes (CAPS) has expanded significantly with the use of next generation 
sequencing technologies. The aim of this study was to assess the contribution of 
mosaicism in a paediatric cohort of patients with a clinical diagnosis of CAPS 
and no NLRP3 mutations identified through conventional DNA sequencing.
METHODS: Mosaicism was assessed by amplicon-based deep sequencing (ADS) on DNA 
extracted from different tissues overtime. Targeted gene panels (TGPs) and 
whole-exome sequencing (WES) were used for comparison of detection methods.
RESULTS: In 40% (4/10) of the cohort a post-zygotic NLRP3 mutation leading to 
somatic mosaicism was found by ADS. Three of the detected NLRP3 mutations had 
been previously described only in somatic form and one both as germline and 
somatic. Mean mutant allelic frequencies (MAF) at diagnosis varied between 
3.1-14.5% in whole blood, with all mutations being present in other tissues 
tested. In 3 patients, mosaicism was evaluated over time in whole blood, with 
results confirming mosaicism stability in 2 patients, and a MAF increase in 1 
patient (from 1.9% to 5%). TGPs identified 4/4 cases of mosaicism whilst WES 
detected only 1/3.
DISCUSSION: Somatic NLRP3 mosaicism was present in 40% of this paediatric 
cohort, confirming the key role of this phenomenon in disease pathogenesis and 
in genetic confirmation of CAPS diagnosis. MAFs can be extremely low, which 
warrants caution regarding lower detection limits of the sequencing techniques 
utilized. Mosaicism level may vary over time in some patients, with diagnostic 
and potential therapeutic implications.

© 2025 Melo Gomes, Arostegui, Mensa-Vilaro, Omoyinmi, Hong, McCreary, Rowczenio, 
Hawkins and Brogan.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2025.1598748
PMCID: PMC12176735
PMID: 40538939

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.