---
reference_id: "PMID:19141377"
title: "Histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis (Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease): lesional cells exhibit an immature dendritic cell phenotype."
authors:
- Pilichowska ME
- Pinkus JL
- Pinkus GS
journal: Am J Clin Pathol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1309/AJCP7V1QHJLOTKKJ
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Antigens, CD/metabolism"
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- Cryoultramicrotomy
- "Dendritic Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- "Fluorescent Antibody Technique, Direct"
- GTP-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- "Histiocytic Necrotizing Lymphadenitis/diagnosis, metabolism"
- Humans
- Immunoenzyme Techniques
- Lymphatic Diseases
- Male
- Myxovirus Resistance Proteins
- Phenotype
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis (Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease): lesional cells exhibit an immature dendritic cell phenotype.
**Authors:** Pilichowska ME, Pinkus JL, Pinkus GS
**Journal:** Am J Clin Pathol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1309/AJCP7V1QHJLOTKKJ](https://doi.org/10.1309/AJCP7V1QHJLOTKKJ)

## Content

1. Am J Clin Pathol. 2009 Feb;131(2):174-82. doi: 10.1309/AJCP7V1QHJLOTKKJ.

Histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis (Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease): lesional cells 
exhibit an immature dendritic cell phenotype.

Pilichowska ME(1), Pinkus JL, Pinkus GS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis (HNL) is a rare benign disorder 
characterized histologically by nodal lesions composed of histiocytes, lymphoid 
cells, and so-called plasmacytoid T cells/plasmacytoid monocytes, with 
associated karyorrhexis. It has been proposed that plasmacytoid monocytes 
represent immature myeloid and lymphoid (plasmacytoid) early-committed dendritic 
cells (DCs). Monoclonal antibodies are now available for the detection of 
myeloid (CD1c [BDCA-1]+) and plasmacytoid (CD303 [BDCA-2]+) dendritic cells. 
With an extensive panel of antibodies to immature and mature DCs and 
interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha), cryostat section studies of 6 cases of HNL 
revealed that the morphologically distinctive mononuclear cells in lesional 
areas consisted of 2 populations of immature DCs: myeloid DCs immunoreactive for 
CD1c with coexpression of myeloid antigens CD13 and CD33 and plasmacytoid DCs 
immunoreactive for CD303 and CD123. These cells were CD68+, strongly expressed 
the IFN-alpha inducible protein MxA, and were nonreactive for fascin, a mature 
DC marker.

DOI: 10.1309/AJCP7V1QHJLOTKKJ
PMID: 19141377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]