---
reference_id: "PMID:40385454"
title: Androgens mediate sexual dimorphism in Pilarowski-Bjornsson Syndrome.
authors:
- Anderson KJ
- Thorolfsdottir ET
- Nodelman IM
- Halldorsdottir ST
- Benonisdottir S
- Alghamdi M
- Almontashiri N
- Barry BJ
- Begemann M
- Britton JF
- Burke S
- Cogne B
- Cohen ASA
- de Diego Boguñá C
- Eichler EE
- Engle EC
- Fahrner JA
- Faivre L
- Fradin M
- Fuhrmann N
- Gao CW
- Garg G
- Grečmalová D
- Grippa M
- Harris JR
- Hoekzema K
- Hershkovitz T
- Hubbard S
- Janssens K
- Jurgens JA
- Kmoch S
- Knopp C
- Koptagel MA
- Ladha FA
- Lapunzina P
- Lindau T
- Meuwissen M
- Minicucci A
- Neuhaus E
- Nizon M
- Nosková L
- Park K
- Patel C
- Pfundt R
- Prasun P
- Rahner N
- Robin NH
- Ronspies C
- Roohi J
- Rosenfeld J
- Saenz M
- Saunders C
- Stark Z
- Thiffault I
- Thull S
- Velasco D
- Velmans C
- Verseput J
- Vitobello A
- Wang T
- Weiss K
- Wentzensen IM
- Pilarowski G
- Eysteinsson T
- Gillentine M
- Stefánsson K
- Helgason A
- Bowman GD
- Bjornsson HT
journal: medRxiv
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1101/2025.05.06.25326635
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Androgens mediate sexual dimorphism in Pilarowski-Bjornsson Syndrome.
**Authors:** Anderson KJ, Thorolfsdottir ET, Nodelman IM, Halldorsdottir ST, Benonisdottir S, Alghamdi M, Almontashiri N, Barry BJ, Begemann M, Britton JF, Burke S, Cogne B, Cohen ASA, de Diego Boguñá C, Eichler EE, Engle EC, Fahrner JA, Faivre L, Fradin M, Fuhrmann N, Gao CW, Garg G, Grečmalová D, Grippa M, Harris JR, Hoekzema K, Hershkovitz T, Hubbard S, Janssens K, Jurgens JA, Kmoch S, Knopp C, Koptagel MA, Ladha FA, Lapunzina P, Lindau T, Meuwissen M, Minicucci A, Neuhaus E, Nizon M, Nosková L, Park K, Patel C, Pfundt R, Prasun P, Rahner N, Robin NH, Ronspies C, Roohi J, Rosenfeld J, Saenz M, Saunders C, Stark Z, Thiffault I, Thull S, Velasco D, Velmans C, Verseput J, Vitobello A, Wang T, Weiss K, Wentzensen IM, Pilarowski G, Eysteinsson T, Gillentine M, Stefánsson K, Helgason A, Bowman GD, Bjornsson HT
**Journal:** medRxiv (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1101/2025.05.06.25326635](https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.05.06.25326635)

## Content

1. medRxiv [Preprint]. 2025 May 7:2025.05.06.25326635. doi:
10.1101/2025.05.06.25326635.

Androgens mediate sexual dimorphism in Pilarowski-Bjornsson Syndrome.

Anderson KJ(1), Thorolfsdottir ET(1), Nodelman IM(2), Halldorsdottir ST(3),
Benonisdottir S(4)(5), Alghamdi M(6), Almontashiri N(7)(8), Barry BJ(9)(10)(11),
Begemann M(12), Britton JF(13), Burke S(14), Cogne B(15)(16), Cohen ASA(17)(18),
de Diego Boguñá C(19), Eichler EE(20)(21), Engle EC(9)(10)(11)(22)(23)(24)(25),
Fahrner JA(13)(26), Faivre L(27)(28), Fradin M(29), Fuhrmann N(30), Gao
CW(13)(31), Garg G(32)(33)(34), Grečmalová D(35), Grippa M(36), Harris
JR(13)(37), Hoekzema K(21), Hershkovitz T(38), Hubbard S(14), Janssens K(39),
Jurgens JA(9)(10)(22)(23), Kmoch S(40), Knopp C(12), Koptagel MA(12), Ladha
FA(41), Lapunzina P(42), Lindau T(43), Meuwissen M(39), Minicucci A(44), Neuhaus
E(45), Nizon M(46), Nosková L(40), Park K(47), Patel C(48), Pfundt R(49), Prasun
P(50), Rahner N(51), Robin NH(52), Ronspies C(53), Roohi J(54), Rosenfeld
J(55)(41), Saenz M(47), Saunders C(17)(18), Stark Z(56), Thiffault I(17)(18),
Thull S(30), Velasco D(53), Velmans C(30), Verseput J(57), Vitobello A(27), Wang
T(58)(59)(60), Weiss K(61), Wentzensen IM(62), Pilarowski G(63), Eysteinsson
T(64)(65), Gillentine M(66), Stefánsson K(67)(68), Helgason A(67)(69), Bowman
GD(2), Bjornsson HT(1)(3)(13)(26).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Landspitali University
Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(2)T.C. Jenkins Department of Biophysics, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
MD, USA.
(3)The Louma G. Laboratory of Epigenetic Research, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(4)Institute of Physical Sciences, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(5)Leverhulme Centre for Demographic Science, Nuffield Department of Population
Health, University of Oxford and Nuffield College, Oxford, UK.
(6)Medical Genetics Division, Pediatric Department, College of Medicine, King
Saud University Medical City, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(7)College of Applied Medical Sciences and Center for Genetics and Inherited
Diseases, Taibah University, Madinah, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
(8)Research Department, King Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia.
(9)F.M. Kirby Neurobiology Center, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(10)Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(11)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD, USA.
(12)Institute for Human Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Medical Faculty, RWTH
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
(13)McKusick-Nathans Department of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(14)Munroe-Meyer Institute for Genetics and Rehabilitation, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.
(15)Nantes Université, CHU de Nantes, CNRS, INSERM, l'institut du thorax,
F-44000 Nantes, France.
(16)Nantes Université, CHU de Nantes, Service de Génétique médicale, F-44000
Nantes, France.
(17)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Genomic Medicine Center,
Children's Mercy-Kansas City, Kansas City, MO, USA.
(18)The University of Missouri-Kansas City, School of Medicine, Kansas City, MO,
USA.
(19)Servicio de Genética, Hospital Universitario de Toledo, Toledo, Spain.
(20)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(21)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, WA, USA.
(22)Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(23)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(24)Department of Ophthalmology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(25)Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(26)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(27)INSERM UMR1231, GAD team, Univeristé de Bourgogne Europe, Dijon, France.
(28)Centre de Génétique et Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement et
Syndromes Malformatifs, de l'Interrégion Est, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire
Dijon, 21079 Dijon, France.
(29)Service de Genetique Medicale, Centre Labellisé Anomalies du Développement
de l'Ouest, CHU Rennes, Rennes, France.
(30)Institute of Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital
Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(31)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(32)Department of Clinical Genetics, Liverpool Hospital, Sydney, New South
Wales, Australia.
(33)Hunter Genetics, Waratah, New South Wales, Australia.
(34)School of Women's and Children's Health, University of New South Wales,
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(35)Institute of Molecular and Clinical Pathology and Medical Genetics,
University Hospital Ostrava, Czech Republic.
(36)SSD Medical Genetics, Maternal and Child Department, AOU Policlinico Modena,
Modena, Italy.
(37)Kennedy Krieger Institute, Department of Neurology, Baltimore, Maryland,
USA.
(38)The Genetics Institute, Galilee Mefical Center, Nahriya, Israel.
(39)Center of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp and Antwerp University
Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium.
(40)Research Unit for Rare Diseases, Department of Pediatrics and Inherited
Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague,
Czech Republic.
(41)Baylor College of Medicine, Department of Molecular and Human Genetics,
Houston, TX, USA.
(42)INGEMM-Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics, IdiPAZ- CIBERER-
Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain and ERNITHACA, Madrid, Spain.
(43)Department of Pediatrics, Gemeinschaftsklinikum Mittelrhein Kemperhof,
Koblenzer Straße 115-155, 56073 Koblenz, Germany.
(44)IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, U.O. Genetica Medica,
40138 Bologna, Italy.
(45)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington, USA.
(46)Service de Génétique Médicale, Unité de Génétique Clinique, Nantes, France.
(47)Departments of Pediatrics and Neurology, University of Colorado School of
Medicine and Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA.
(48)Genetic Health Queensland, Royal Brisbane & Women's Hospital Campus,
Herston, Brisbane, Australia.
(49)Department of Human Genetics, Donders Institute, Radboud University Medical
Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(50)Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics West Virginia School of
Medicine, Morgantown, USA.
(51)MVZ Institute for Clinical Genetics and Tumor Genetics, Bonn, Germany.
(52)Department of Genetics, UAB Heersink School of Medicine, Birmingham AL, USA.
(53)Department of Pediatrics, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE,
USA.
(54)Department of Genetics, Mid-Atlantic Permanente Medical Group, Washington,
DC, USA.
(55)Baylor Genetics, Houston, TX, USA.
(56)Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children's Research Institute,
Flemington Road, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(57)Human Genetics Department, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the
Netherlands.
(58)Department of Medical Genetics, Center for Medical Genetics, School of Basic
Medical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100191, China.
(59)Neuroscience Research Institute, Peking University; Key Laboratory for
Neuroscience, Ministry of Education of China & National Health Commission of
China, Beijing 100191, China.
(60)Autism Research Center, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing
100191, China.
(61)The Genetics Institute Rambam Health Care Campus Haifa Israel.
(62)GeneDx, LLC, Gaithersburg MD 20877 USA.
(63)Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(64)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland.
(65)Department of Ophthalmology, Landspitali University Hospital, Reykjavik,
Iceland.
(66)Independent Scientist.
(67)deCODE Genetics/Amgen Inc., Reykjavik, Iceland.
(68)Faculty of Medicine, School of Health Sciences, University of Iceland,
Reykjavik, Iceland.
(69)Department of Anthropology, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland.

Sex-specific penetrance in autosomal dominant Mendelian conditions is largely
understudied. The neurodevelopmental disorder Pilarowski-Bjornsson syndrome
(PILBOS) was initially described in females. Here, we describe the clinical and
genetic characteristics of the largest PILBOS cohort to date, showing that both
sexes can exhibit PILBOS features, although males are overrepresented. A mouse
model carrying a human-derived Chd1 missense variant (Chd1 R616Q/+) displays
female-restricted phenotypes, including growth deficiency, anxiety and
hypotonia. Orchiectomy unmasks a growth deficiency phenotype in male Chd1
R616Q/+ mice, while testosterone rescues the phenotype in females, implicating
androgens in phenotype modulation. In the gnomAD and UK Biobank databases, rare
missense variants in CHD1 are overrepresented in males, supporting a male
protective effect. We identify 33 additional highly constrained autosomal genes
with missense variant overrepresentation in males. Our results support
androgen-regulated sexual dimorphism in PILBOS and open novel avenues to
understand the mechanistic basis of sexual dimorphism in other autosomal
Mendelian disorders.

DOI: 10.1101/2025.05.06.25326635
PMCID: PMC12083630
PMID: 40385454

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests Dr. Bjornsson is Founder of
KALDUR therapeutics and a consultant for Mahzi therapeutics. S.B. is a part of a
working group called Alzheimer diagnostics that has received a grant from the
Icelandic Technology Development Fund. I.M.W. is an employee of and may own
stock in GeneDx. E.E.E. is a scientific advisory board (SAB) member of Variant
Bio, Inc. K.S. and A.H. are employees of deCODE genetics, a subsidiary of Amgen.
The Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics at Baylor College of Medicine
receives revenue from clinical genetic testing completed at Baylor Genetics
Laboratories.
