---
reference_id: "PMID:30723942"
title: "Argininosuccinic aciduria: Recent pathophysiological insights and therapeutic prospects."
authors:
- Baruteau J
- Diez-Fernandez C
- Lerner S
- Ranucci G
- Gissen P
- Dionisi-Vici C
- Nagamani S
- Erez A
- Häberle J
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12047
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Argininosuccinic aciduria: Recent pathophysiological insights and therapeutic prospects.
**Authors:** Baruteau J, Diez-Fernandez C, Lerner S, Ranucci G, Gissen P, Dionisi-Vici C, Nagamani S, Erez A, Häberle J
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12047](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12047)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2019 Nov;42(6):1147-1161. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12047. Epub 
2019 Feb 5.

Argininosuccinic aciduria: Recent pathophysiological insights and therapeutic 
prospects.

Baruteau J(1)(2), Diez-Fernandez C(3), Lerner S(4), Ranucci G(5), Gissen 
P(1)(2), Dionisi-Vici C(5), Nagamani S(6), Erez A(4), Häberle J(3)(7).

Author information:
(1)UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, NIHR Great Ormond Street 
Hospital Biomedical Research Centre, London, UK.
(2)Metabolic Department, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(3)Division of Metabolism and Children Research Centre (CRC), University 
Children's Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Biological Regulation, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israël.
(5)Division of Metabolism, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(6)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas.
(7)Zurich Center for Integrative Human Physiology (ZIHP) and Neuroscience Center 
Zurich (ZNZ), Zurich, Switzerland.

The first patients affected by argininosuccinic aciduria (ASA) were reported 
60 years ago. The clinical presentation was initially described as similar to 
other urea cycle defects, but increasing evidence has shown overtime an atypical 
systemic phenotype with a paradoxical observation, that is, a higher rate of 
neurological complications contrasting with a lower rate of hyperammonaemic 
episodes. The disappointing long-term clinical outcomes of many of the patients 
have challenged the current standard of care and therapeutic strategy, which 
aims to normalize plasma ammonia and arginine levels. Interrogations have raised 
about the benefit of newborn screening or liver transplantation on the 
neurological phenotype. Over the last decade, novel discoveries enabled by the 
generation of new transgenic argininosuccinate lyase (ASL)-deficient mouse 
models have been achieved, such as, a better understanding of ASL and its close 
interaction with nitric oxide metabolism, ASL physiological role outside the 
liver, and the pathophysiological role of oxidative/nitrosative stress or 
excessive arginine treatment. Here, we present a collaborative review, which 
highlights these recent discoveries and novel emerging concepts about ASL role 
in human physiology, ASA clinical phenotype and geographic prevalence, limits of 
current standard of care and newborn screening, pathophysiology of the disease, 
and emerging novel therapies. We propose recommendations for monitoring of ASA 
patients. Ongoing research aims to better understand the underlying pathogenic 
mechanisms of the systemic disease to design novel therapies.

© 2019 SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12047
PMID: 30723942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]