---
reference_id: "PMID:36473345"
title: "Performance evaluation of the Viasure PCR assay for the diagnosis of monkeypox: A multicentre study."
authors:
- Tan NK
- Madona CP
- Taylor JF
- Fourali LH
- Sehmi JK
- Stone MJ
- Pond MJ
- Cliff PR
- Pope CF
journal: J Clin Virol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2022.105350
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Performance evaluation of the Viasure PCR assay for the diagnosis of monkeypox: A multicentre study.
**Authors:** Tan NK, Madona CP, Taylor JF, Fourali LH, Sehmi JK, Stone MJ, Pond MJ, Cliff PR, Pope CF
**Journal:** J Clin Virol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jcv.2022.105350](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcv.2022.105350)

## Content

1. J Clin Virol. 2023 Jan;158:105350. doi: 10.1016/j.jcv.2022.105350. Epub 2022
Dec  1.

Performance evaluation of the Viasure PCR assay for the diagnosis of monkeypox: 
A multicentre study.

Tan NK(1), Madona CP(2), Taylor JF(3), Fourali LH(4), Sehmi JK(4), Stone MJ(3), 
Pond MJ(2), Cliff PR(4), Pope CF(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Infection and Immunity, South West London 
Pathology, St George's University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, London, SW17 
0QT, United Kingdom. Electronic address: ngeekeong.tan@stgeorges.nhs.uk.
(2)Department of Virology, Infection and Immunity, North West London Pathology, 
Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, W6 8RF, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Medical Microbiology, Infection and Immunity, South West London 
Pathology, St George's University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, London, SW17 
0QT, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Infection Sciences, Synnovis, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, SE1 7EH, United Kingdom.
(5)Infection Care Group, St George's University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, 
London, SW17 0QT, United Kingdom; Institute for Infection and Immunity, St 
George's, University of London, London, SW17 0RE, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Monkeypox virus (MPXV) is the causative agent of the 2022 monkeypox 
global outbreak. Rapid detection of MPXV infection is essential to inform 
patient management and public health response. Currently, there is a lack of 
established real-time PCR assays to support a rapid diagnosis of monkeypox.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the performance characteristics of the Viasure MPXV PCR 
assay in three London teaching hospitals.
STUDY DESIGN: Prospectively collected paired patient swabs from matched or 
unmatched anatomical sites were evaluated by the reference laboratory and 
Viasure MPXV PCR assays. A subset of samples were also tested for HSV, VZV, 
and/or Treponema pallidum DNA.
RESULTS: 217 paired samples were evaluated. 91.2% of the paired swabs generated 
concordant results whilst 8.8% generated discordant results. The accuracy, 
diagnostic sensitivity, diagnostic specificity, positive predictive value, 
negative predictive value, likelihood ratio positive, and likelihood ratio 
negative of the Viasure PCR assay across the hospitals were 93.2 - 96.3%, 90.0 - 
100%, 88.2 - 100%, 94.9 - 100%, 87.9 - 100%, 8.50 - 14.41, and 0.00 - 0.10 
respectively. MPXV co-infections with HSV were detected in two patients. Five 
patients were negative for monkeypox but positive for herpes or chickenpox.
CONCLUSIONS: The Viasure MPXV PCR assay demonstrated excellent performance 
characteristics, was easy to use, and is fit for routine diagnostic purpose. 
Where implemented, the assay would allow rapid and accurate laboratory diagnosis 
of MPXV infections and support a timely management of monkeypox. To reduce the 
risk of false negative detections, vesicular lesions from any anatomical site 
should be preferentially and optimally sampled.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcv.2022.105350
PMCID: PMC9711911
PMID: 36473345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: JFT received conference 
registration expense from Pro-Lab Diagnostics to attend the 2022 Federation of 
Infection Societies Conference. All other authors have no relevant financial or 
non-financial competing interests to declare.