---
reference_id: "PMID:36573576"
title: "Notional Spread of Cholera in Haiti Following a Natural Disaster: Considerations for Military and Disaster Relief Personnel."
authors:
- Hadeed SJ
- Broadway KM
- Schwartz-Watjen KT
- Tigabu B
- Woodards AJ
- Swiatecka AL
- Owens AN
- Wu A
journal: Mil Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/milmed/usac415
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Notional Spread of Cholera in Haiti Following a Natural Disaster: Considerations for Military and Disaster Relief Personnel.
**Authors:** Hadeed SJ, Broadway KM, Schwartz-Watjen KT, Tigabu B, Woodards AJ, Swiatecka AL, Owens AN, Wu A
**Journal:** Mil Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/milmed/usac415](https://doi.org/10.1093/milmed/usac415)

## Content

1. Mil Med. 2023 Jul 22;188(7-8):e2074-e2081. doi: 10.1093/milmed/usac415.

Notional Spread of Cholera in Haiti Following a Natural Disaster: Considerations 
for Military and Disaster Relief Personnel.

Hadeed SJ(1), Broadway KM(2), Schwartz-Watjen KT(3), Tigabu B(4), Woodards 
AJ(1), Swiatecka AL(5), Owens AN(6), Wu A(6).

Author information:
(1)Battelle Memorial Institute, Support to DTRA Technical Reachback, Columbus, 
OH 43201, USA.
(2)Defense Sciences, Inc. (DSI), Support to DTRA Technical Reachback, San 
Antonio, TX 78230, USA.
(3)Applied Research Associates (ARA), Support to DTRA Technical Reachback, 
Albuquerque, NM 87110, USA.
(4)Global Systems Engineering (GSE), Support to DTRA Technical Reachback, 
Alexandria, VA 22312, USA.
(5)Noblis, Inc., Support to DTRA Technical Reachback, Reston, VA 20191, USA.
(6)Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA), Fort Belvoir, VA 22060, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Cholera remains a significant public health threat for many 
countries, and the severity largely varies by the population and local 
conditions that drive disease spread, especially in endemic areas prone to 
natural disasters and flooding. Epidemiological models can provide useful 
information to military planners for understanding disease spread within 
populations and the effectiveness of response options for preventing the 
transmission among deployed and stationed personnel. This study demonstrates the 
use of epidemiological modeling to understand the dynamics of cholera 
transmission to inform emergency planning and military preparedness in areas 
with highly communicable diseases.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Areas with higher probability for a potential cholera 
outbreak in Haiti followed by a natural disaster were identified. The hotspots 
were then used to seed an extended compartmental model, EpiGrid, to simulate 
notional spread scenarios of cholera originating in three distinct areas in 
Haiti. Disease parameters were derived from the 2010 cholera outbreak in Haiti, 
and disease spread was simulated over a 12-week period under uncontrolled and 
controlled spread.
RESULTS: For each model location, scenarios of mitigated (intervention with 30% 
transmission reduction via international aid) and unmitigated (without 
intervention) are simulated. The results depict the geographical spread and 
estimate the cumulative cholera infection for each notional scenario over the 
course of 3 months. Disease transmission differs considerably across origin site 
with an outbreak originating in the department of Nippes spanning the largest 
geographic area and resulting in the largest number of cumulative cases after 
12 weeks under unmitigated (79,518 cases) and mitigated (35,667 cases) spread 
scenarios.
CONCLUSIONS: We modeled the notional re-emergence and spread of cholera 
following the August 2021 earthquake in Haiti while in the midst of the global 
COVID-19 pandemic. This information can help guide military and emergency 
response decision-making during an infectious disease outbreak and 
considerations for protecting military personnel in the midst of a humanitarian 
response. Military planners should consider the use of epidemiological models to 
assess the health risk posed to deployed and stationed personnel in high-risk 
areas.

Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Association of Military 
Surgeons of the United States 2022. This work is written by (a) US Government 
employee(s) and is in the public domain in the US.

DOI: 10.1093/milmed/usac415
PMID: 36573576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]