---
reference_id: "PMID:5279523"
title: "Mutation and cancer: statistical study of retinoblastoma."
authors:
- Knudson AG Jr
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1971'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.68.4.820
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation and cancer: statistical study of retinoblastoma.
**Authors:** Knudson AG Jr
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1971)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.68.4.820](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.68.4.820)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1971 Apr;68(4):820-3. doi: 10.1073/pnas.68.4.820.

Mutation and cancer: statistical study of retinoblastoma.

Knudson AG Jr.

Based upon observations on 48 cases of retinoblastoma and published reports, the 
hypothesis is developed that retinoblastoma is a cancer caused by two mutational 
events. In the dominantly inherited form, one mutation is inherited via the 
germinal cells and the second occurs in somatic cells. In the nonhereditary 
form, both mutations occur in somatic cells. The second mutation produces an 
average of three retinoblastomas per individual inheriting the first mutation. 
Using Poisson statistics, one can calculate that this number (three) can explain 
the occasional gene carrier who gets no tumor, those who develop only unilateral 
tumors, and those who develop bilateral tumors, as well as explaining instances 
of multiple tumors in one eye. This value for the mean number of tumors 
occurring in genetic carriers may be used to estimate the mutation rate for each 
mutation. The germinal and somatic rates for the first, and the somatic rate for 
the second, mutation, are approximately equal. The germinal mutation may arise 
in some instances from a delayed mutation.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.68.4.820
PMCID: PMC389051
PMID: 5279523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]