---
reference_id: "PMID:3130424"
title: Meningococcal carriage, meningococcal disease and vaccination.
authors:
- Hassan-King MK
- Wall RA
- Greenwood BM
journal: J Infect
year: '1988'
doi: 10.1016/s0163-4453(88)96117-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Meningococcal carriage, meningococcal disease and vaccination.
**Authors:** Hassan-King MK, Wall RA, Greenwood BM
**Journal:** J Infect (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0163-4453(88)96117-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0163-4453(88)96117-8)

## Content

1. J Infect. 1988 Jan;16(1):55-9. doi: 10.1016/s0163-4453(88)96117-8.

Meningococcal carriage, meningococcal disease and vaccination.

Hassan-King MK(1), Wall RA, Greenwood BM.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Laboratories, Fajara, Banjul, The Gambia.

Group A meningococcal carriage rates were determined 6 months before and 6 and 
18 months after a mass vaccination campaign with a combined group A and group C 
meningococcal polysaccharide vaccine in a rural area of The Gambia. During the 
first pre-vaccination survey, performed during an outbreak of meningococcal 
disease, the carriage rate was high (16%). The carriage rate remained high 
during a second survey made 6 months after a vaccination campaign that covered 
approximately 90% of the study population. A year later very few group A 
meningococcal carriers were found. Membrane protein patterns of isolates 
obtained before and after vaccination were similar. We conclude that vaccination 
had little influence on the carriage rate of group A meningococci but that this 
was influenced by changes in herd immunity or by other unidentified factors.

DOI: 10.1016/s0163-4453(88)96117-8
PMID: 3130424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]