---
reference_id: "PMID:37373569"
title: "Beyond the Gut: A Systematic Review of Oral Manifestations in Celiac Disease."
authors:
- Lucchese A
- Di Stasio D
- De Stefano S
- Nardone M
- Carinci F
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/jcm12123874
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Beyond the Gut: A Systematic Review of Oral Manifestations in Celiac Disease.
**Authors:** Lucchese A, Di Stasio D, De Stefano S, Nardone M, Carinci F
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm12123874](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm12123874)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2023 Jun 6;12(12):3874. doi: 10.3390/jcm12123874.

Beyond the Gut: A Systematic Review of Oral Manifestations in Celiac Disease.

Lucchese A(1), Di Stasio D(1), De Stefano S(2), Nardone M(3), Carinci F(4).

Author information:
(1)Multidisciplinary Department of Medical-Surgical and Dental Specialties, 
University of Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli", 80138 Naples, Italy.
(2)Ministry of Public Health, 00144 Rome, Italy.
(3)Asst Melegnano Martesana, Regione Lombardia, Adda District, 20077 Vizzolo 
Predabissi, Italy.
(4)Department of Translational Medicine, University of Ferrara, 44121 Ferrara, 
Italy.

BACKGROUND: Celiac disease (CD) is a chronic immune-mediated gluten-sensitive 
enteropathy, affecting about 1% of the population. The most common symptoms 
include diarrhea, abdominal pain, weight loss, and malabsorption. 
Extra-intestinal symptoms include oral manifestations. This systematic review 
aims to catalog and characterize oral manifestations in patients with CD.
METHODS: a systematic literature review among different search engines using 
PICOS criteria has been performed. The studies included used the following 
criteria: tissues and anatomical structures of the oral cavity in humans, 
published in English and available in full text. Review articles and papers 
published before 1990 were excluded.
RESULTS: 209 articles were identified in the initial search. In the end, 33 
articles met the selection criteria. The information extracted from the articles 
was classified based on the type of oral manifestation. Recurrent aphthous 
stomatitis (34.6%), atrophic glossitis and geographic tongue (15.26%), enamel 
defects (42.47%), delayed dental eruption (47.34%), xerostomia (38.05%), 
glossodynia (14.38%), and other manifestations including cheilitis, fissured 
tongue, periodontal diseases, and oral lichen planus were found in the celiac 
subjects of the studies analyzed. The quality of articles on the topic should be 
improved; however, oral manifestations in CD patients are widely described in 
the literature and could help diagnose celiac disease.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm12123874
PMCID: PMC10299058
PMID: 37373569

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.