---
reference_id: "PMID:38090446"
title: "Congenital Dyserythropoietic Anemia Type I: A Rare Case Report."
authors:
- Nagar V
- Patil NJ
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.48594
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital Dyserythropoietic Anemia Type I: A Rare Case Report.
**Authors:** Nagar V, Patil NJ
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.48594](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.48594)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Nov 10;15(11):e48594. doi: 10.7759/cureus.48594. eCollection 2023
 Nov.

Congenital Dyserythropoietic Anemia Type I: A Rare Case Report.

Nagar V(1), Patil NJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Pathology, Gujarat Medical Education and Research Society (GMERS) Medical 
College and Hospital, Valsad, IND.
(2)Pathology, Krishna Vishwa Vidyapeeth (Deemed to Be University), Karad, IND.

Congenital dyserythropoietic anemias are a group of rare hereditary conditions 
affecting erythropoiesis. These disorders are characterized by anemia, primarily 
caused by inefficient erythropoiesis, as well as distinctive morphological 
abnormalities observed in most erythroblasts in the bone marrow. congenital 
dyserythropoietic anemia type I (CDA-I) is a hereditary condition characterized 
by inefficient production of red blood cells and excessive accumulation of iron. 
It follows an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. There have been 
approximately 300 recorded cases of CDA-I documented on a global scale. CDA-I is 
a rarely documented condition in the Indian subcontinent. Therefore, we will be 
examining a case of CDA-I in the present article. A male infant, aged four 
months, who had signs of vomiting, weight loss, and failure to thrive, was 
diagnosed with CDA-I following a bone marrow aspiration. Our experience provides 
further evidence supporting the notion that the accurate diagnosis of CDA-I can 
be achieved by doing a comprehensive assessment of bone marrow aspiration.

Copyright © 2023, Nagar et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.48594
PMCID: PMC10711332
PMID: 38090446

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.