---
reference_id: "PMID:10412983"
title: Vesicular tubular clusters between the ER and Golgi mediate concentration of soluble secretory proteins by exclusion from COPI-coated vesicles.
authors:
- Martínez-Menárguez JA
- Geuze HJ
- Slot JW
- Klumperman J
journal: Cell
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80608-X
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vesicular tubular clusters between the ER and Golgi mediate concentration of soluble secretory proteins by exclusion from COPI-coated vesicles.
**Authors:** Martínez-Menárguez JA, Geuze HJ, Slot JW, Klumperman J
**Journal:** Cell (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80608-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80608-X)

## Content

1. Cell. 1999 Jul 9;98(1):81-90. doi: 10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80608-X.

Vesicular tubular clusters between the ER and Golgi mediate concentration of 
soluble secretory proteins by exclusion from COPI-coated vesicles.

Martínez-Menárguez JA(1), Geuze HJ, Slot JW, Klumperman J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University Medical Center and Institute of 
Biomembranes, Utrecht University, The Netherlands.

We have determined the concentrations of the secretory proteins amylase and 
chymotrypsinogen and the membrane proteins KDELr and rBet1 in COPII- and 
COPI-coated pre-Golgi compartments of pancreatic cells by quantitative 
immunoelectron microscopy. COPII was confined to ER membrane buds and adjacent 
vesicles. COPI occurred on vesicular tubular clusters (VTCs), Golgi cisternae, 
the trans-Golgi network, and immature secretory granules. Both secretory 
proteins exhibited a first, significant concentration step in noncoated segments 
of VTC tubules and were excluded from COPI-coated tips. By contrast, KDELr and 
rBet1 showed a first, significant concentration in COPII-coated ER buds and 
vesicles and were prominently present in COPI-coated tips of VTC tubules. These 
data suggest an important role of VTCs in soluble cargo concentration by 
exclusion from COPI-coated domains.

DOI: 10.1016/S0092-8674(00)80608-X
PMID: 10412983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]