---
reference_id: "PMID:31630146"
title: Single-Cell Sequencing Reveals the Relationship between Phenotypes and Genotypes of Klinefelter Syndrome.
authors:
- Liu X
- Tang D
- Zheng F
- Xu Y
- Guo H
- Zhou J
- Lin L
- Xie J
- Ou M
- Dai Y
journal: Cytogenet Genome Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1159/000503737
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single-Cell Sequencing Reveals the Relationship between Phenotypes and Genotypes of Klinefelter Syndrome.
**Authors:** Liu X, Tang D, Zheng F, Xu Y, Guo H, Zhou J, Lin L, Xie J, Ou M, Dai Y
**Journal:** Cytogenet Genome Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000503737](https://doi.org/10.1159/000503737)

## Content

1. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2019;159(2):55-65. doi: 10.1159/000503737. Epub 2019 Oct
 19.

Single-Cell Sequencing Reveals the Relationship between Phenotypes and Genotypes 
of Klinefelter Syndrome.

Liu X, Tang D, Zheng F, Xu Y, Guo H, Zhou J, Lin L, Xie J, Ou M, Dai Y.

Klinefelter syndrome (KS) is one of the most common congenital disorders of male 
infertility. Given its high heterogeneity in clinical and genetic presentation, 
the relationship between transcriptome, clinical phenotype, and associated 
co-morbidities seen in KS has not been fully clarified. Here, we report a 47,XXY 
Chinese male with infertility and analyzed the differences in gene expression 
patterns of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) with regard to a Chinese 
male and a female control with normal karyotype by single-cell sequencing. A 
total of 24,439 cells were analyzed and divided into 5 immune cell types 
(including B cells, T cells, macrophage cells, dendritic cells, and natural 
killer cells) according to marker genes. Using unsupervised dimensionality 
reduction and clustering algorithms, we identified molecularly distinct 
subpopulations of cells between the KS patient and both controls. Gene ontology 
enrichment analyses yielded terms associated with well-known comorbidities seen 
in KS as well as an affected immune system and type I diabetes mellitus. Based 
on our data, we identified several candidate genes which may be implicated in 
regulating the phenotype of KS. Overall, this analysis provides a comprehensive 
map of the cell types of PBMCs in a KS patient at the single-cell level, which 
will contribute to the prevention of comorbidity and improvement of the life 
quality of KS patients.

© 2019 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000503737
PMID: 31630146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]