---
reference_id: "PMID:25878489"
title: Bestrophin-1 influences transepithelial electrical properties and Ca2+ signaling in human retinal pigment epithelium.
authors:
- Marmorstein AD
- Kinnick TR
- Stanton JB
- Johnson AA
- Lynch RM
- Marmorstein LY
journal: Mol Vis
year: '2015'
keywords:
- Adenosine Triphosphate/pharmacology
- "Adenoviruses, Human/genetics"
- Bestrophins
- Calcium/metabolism
- Calcium Signaling
- "Cell Membrane/drug effects, metabolism"
- "Chloride Channels/genetics, metabolism"
- "Epithelial Cells/cytology, drug effects, metabolism"
- "Eye Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Fetus
- Gene Expression
- Genetic Vectors
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Ion Transport/drug effects
- Ionomycin/pharmacology
- Membrane Potentials/drug effects
- Mutation
- Niflumic Acid/pharmacology
- Patch-Clamp Techniques
- Primary Cell Culture
- "Retinal Pigment Epithelium/cytology, drug effects, metabolism"
- Transfection
- "Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bestrophin-1 influences transepithelial electrical properties and Ca2+ signaling in human retinal pigment epithelium.
**Authors:** Marmorstein AD, Kinnick TR, Stanton JB, Johnson AA, Lynch RM, Marmorstein LY
**Journal:** Mol Vis (2015)

## Content

1. Mol Vis. 2015 Apr 1;21:347-59. eCollection 2015.

Bestrophin-1 influences transepithelial electrical properties and Ca2+ signaling
in human retinal pigment epithelium.

Marmorstein AD(1), Kinnick TR(2), Stanton JB(2), Johnson AA(1), Lynch RM(2),
Marmorstein LY(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(2)Department of Physiology, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ.

PURPOSE: Mutations in BEST1, encoding Bestrophin-1 (Best1), cause Best
vitelliform macular dystrophy (BVMD) and other inherited retinal degenerative
diseases. Best1 is an integral membrane protein localized to the basolateral
plasma membrane of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). Data from numerous in
vitro and in vivo models have demonstrated that Best1 regulates intracellular
Ca2+ levels. Although it is known from in vitro and crystal structure data that
Best1 is also a calcium-activated anion channel, evidence for Best1 functioning
as a channel in human RPE is lacking. To assess Best1-associated channel
activity in the RPE, we examined the transepithelial electrical properties of
fetal human RPE (fhRPE) cells, which express endogenous Best1.
METHODS: Using adenovirus-mediated gene transfer, we overexpressed Best1 and the
BVMD mutant Best1W93C in fhRPE cells and assessed resting transepithelial
potential (TEP), transepithelial resistance, short circuit current (Isc), and
intracellular Ca2+ levels. Cl- currents were directly measured in transfected
HEK293 cells using whole-cell patch clamp.
RESULTS: Best1W93C showed ablated Cl- currents and, when co-expressed,
suppressed the channel activity of Best1 in HEK293 cells. In fhRPE,
overexpression of Best1 increased TEP and Isc, while Best1W93C diminished TEP
and Isc. Substitution of Cl- in the bath media resulted in a significant
reduction of Isc in monolayers overexpressing Best1, but no significant Isc
change in monolayers expressing Best1W93C. We removed Ca2+ as a limit on
transepithelial electrical properties by treating cells with ionomycin, and
found that changes in Isc and TEP for monolayers expressing Best1 were absent in
monolayers expressing Best1W93C. Similarly, inhibition of calcium-activated
anion channels with niflumic acid reduced both Isc and TEP of control and Best1
monolayers, but did not notably affect Best1W93C monolayers. Stimulation with
extracellular ATP induced an increase in TEP in control monolayers that was
greater than that observed in those expressing Best1(W93C). Examination of
[Ca2+]i following ATP stimulation demonstrated that the expression of Best1W93C
impaired intracellular Ca2+ signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that Best1 activity strongly influences
electrophysiology and Ca2+ signaling in RPE cells, and that a common BVMD
mutation disrupts both of these parameters. Our findings support the hypothesis
that Best1 functions as an anion channel in human RPE.

PMCID: PMC4390793
PMID: 25878489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
