---
reference_id: "PMID:21472892"
title: Mutation update for the PORCN gene.
authors:
- Lombardi MP
- Bulk S
- Celli J
- Lampe A
- Gabbett MT
- Ousager LB
- van der Smagt JJ
- Soller M
- Stattin EL
- Mannens MA
- Smigiel R
- Hennekam RC
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/humu.21505
keywords:
- Acyltransferases
- "Databases, Genetic"
- "Focal Dermal Hypoplasia/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics"
- Humans
- Internet
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Pentalogy of Cantrell/genetics
- Point Mutation/genetics
- Sequence Deletion/genetics
- "Skin Diseases, Vascular/congenital, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation update for the PORCN gene.
**Authors:** Lombardi MP, Bulk S, Celli J, Lampe A, Gabbett MT, Ousager LB, van der Smagt JJ, Soller M, Stattin EL, Mannens MA, Smigiel R, Hennekam RC
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.21505](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.21505)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2011 Jul;32(7):723-8. doi: 10.1002/humu.21505. Epub 2011 Jun 21.

Mutation update for the PORCN gene.

Lombardi MP(1), Bulk S, Celli J, Lampe A, Gabbett MT, Ousager LB, van der Smagt 
JJ, Soller M, Stattin EL, Mannens MA, Smigiel R, Hennekam RC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center, University of 
Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Mutations in the PORCN gene were first identified in Goltz-Gorlin syndrome 
patients in 2007. Since then, several reports have been published describing a 
large variety of genetic defects resulting in the Goltz-Gorlin syndrome, and 
mutations or deletions were also reported in angioma serpiginosum, the pentalogy 
of Cantrell and Limb-Body Wall Complex. Here we present a review of the 
published mutations in the PORCN gene to date and report on seven new mutations 
together with the corresponding clinical data. Based on the review we have 
created a Web-based locus-specific database that lists all identified variants 
and allows the inclusion of future reports. The database is based on the Leiden 
Open (source) Variation Database (LOVD) software, and is accessible online at 
http://www.lovd.nl/porcn. At present, the database contains 106 variants, 
representing 68 different mutations, scattered along the whole coding sequence 
of the PORCN gene, and 12 large gene rearrangements, which brings up to 80 the 
number of unique mutations identified in Goltz-Gorlin syndrome patients.

© 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.21505
PMID: 21472892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]