---
reference_id: "PMID:22904352"
title: Autoantibodies targeting galactose-deficient IgA1 associate with progression of IgA nephropathy.
authors:
- Berthoux F
- Suzuki H
- Thibaudin L
- Yanagawa H
- Maillard N
- Mariat C
- Tomino Y
- Julian BA
- Novak J
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2012010053
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoantibodies targeting galactose-deficient IgA1 associate with progression of IgA nephropathy.
**Authors:** Berthoux F, Suzuki H, Thibaudin L, Yanagawa H, Maillard N, Mariat C, Tomino Y, Julian BA, Novak J
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2012010053](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2012010053)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2012 Sep;23(9):1579-87. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2012010053. Epub
2012  Aug 16.

Autoantibodies targeting galactose-deficient IgA1 associate with progression of 
IgA nephropathy.

Berthoux F(1), Suzuki H, Thibaudin L, Yanagawa H, Maillard N, Mariat C, Tomino 
Y, Julian BA, Novak J.

Author information:
(1)Nephrology, Dialysis, and Renal Transplantation Department, University North 
Hospital, 42055 Saint-Etienne Cedex 2, France. francois.berthoux@wanadoo.fr

Mesangial and circulating IgA1 with aberrantly glycosylated hinge region 
O-glycans characterize IgA nephropathy (IgAN). Unlike healthy individuals, some 
IgA1 is galactose deficient in patients with IgAN, leaving terminal 
N-acetylgalactosamine residues in the hinge region exposed. Circulating 
autoantibodies that recognize such galactose-deficient IgA1 as an autoantigen, 
or the levels of the autoantigen itself, may allow prediction of disease 
progression. Here, we analyzed serum samples obtained at diagnosis for 
autoantigen and autoantibodies from 97 patients with IgAN selected from our 
prospective cohort according to their absolute renal risk for progression to 
dialysis or death (0, very low; 1, low; 2, high; 3, very high). We also analyzed 
samples from controls comprising 30 healthy volunteers and 30 patients with 
non-IgAN disease. The mean follow-up was 13.8 years. We found that mean serum 
levels of total autoantigen, normalized IgG autoantibody, and total IgA 
autoantibody were significantly higher in patients than in the combined controls 
(all P≤0.01). Furthermore, increasing levels correlated with worse clinical 
outcomes. In Cox regression and Kaplan-Meier analyses, IgG autoantibody levels 
≥1.33 predicted dialysis or death (both P≤0.01). In conclusion, these data 
suggest that serum levels of IgG and IgA autoantibodies strongly associate with 
the progression of IgAN nephropathy.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2012010053
PMCID: PMC3431415
PMID: 22904352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]