---
reference_id: "PMID:28390760"
title: "Restricted Mandibular Movement Attributed to Ossification of Mandibular Depressors and Medial Pterygoid Muscles in Patients With Fibrodysplasia Ossificans Progressiva: A Report of 3 Cases."
authors:
- Okuno T
- Suzuki H
- Inoue A
- Kusukawa J
journal: J Oral Maxillofac Surg
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.joms.2017.03.005
keywords:
- Adult
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Humans
- "Imaging, Three-Dimensional"
- Male
- "Mandibular Diseases/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- Middle Aged
- "Myositis Ossificans/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- "Pterygoid Muscles/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- "Trismus/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Restricted Mandibular Movement Attributed to Ossification of Mandibular Depressors and Medial Pterygoid Muscles in Patients With Fibrodysplasia Ossificans Progressiva: A Report of 3 Cases.
**Authors:** Okuno T, Suzuki H, Inoue A, Kusukawa J
**Journal:** J Oral Maxillofac Surg (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.joms.2017.03.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joms.2017.03.005)

## Content

1. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2017 Sep;75(9):1891-1898. doi:
10.1016/j.joms.2017.03.005. Epub 2017 Mar 16.

Restricted Mandibular Movement Attributed to Ossification of Mandibular
Depressors and Medial Pterygoid Muscles in Patients With Fibrodysplasia
Ossificans Progressiva: A Report of 3 Cases.

Okuno T(1), Suzuki H(2), Inoue A(3), Kusukawa J(4).

Author information:
(1)Special Advisor, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Yanagawa Rehabilitation
Hospital, Yanagawa, Japan. Electronic address: okuno@kouhoukai.org.
(2)Assistant Professor, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, School of Medicine,
University of Occupational and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, Japan.
(3)Honorary Director, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Yanagawa Rehabilitation
Hospital, Yanagawa, Japan.
(4)Professor, Dental and Oral Medical Center, Kurume University School of
Medicine, Kurume, Japan.

Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP) is an extremely rare genetic
condition characterized by congenital malformation and progressive heterotopic
ossification (HO) caused by a recurrent single nucleotide substitution at
position 617 in the ACVR1 gene. As the condition progresses, HO leads to joint
ankylosis, breathing difficulties, and mouth-opening restriction, and it can
shorten the patient's lifespan. This report describes 3 cases of FOP confirmed
by genetic testing in patients with restricted mouth opening. Each patient
presented a different onset and degree of jaw movement restriction. The anatomic
ossification site of the mandibular joint was examined in each patient using
reconstructed computed tomographic (CT) images and 3-dimensional reconstructed
CT (3D-CT) images. A 29-year-old woman complained of jaw movement restriction
since 13 years of age. 3D-CT image of the mandibular joint showed an osseous
bridge, formed by the mandibular depressors that open the mouth, between the
hyoid bone and the mentum of the mandible. A 39-year-old man presented with jaw
movement restriction that developed at 3 years of age after a mouth injury.
3D-CT image of the jaw showed ankylosis of the jaw from ossification of the
mandibular depressors that was worse than in patient 1. CT images showed no HO
findings of the masticatory muscles. To the authors' knowledge, these are the
first 2 case descriptions of the anatomic site of ankylosis involving HO of the
mandibular depressors in the jaw resulting from FOP. In contrast, a 62-year-old
bedridden woman with an interincisal distance longer than 10 mm (onset, 39 years
of age) had no HO of the mandibular depressors and slight HO of the medial
pterygoid muscle on the right and left sides. These findings suggest that
restricted mouth opening varies according to the presence or absence of HO of
the mandibular depressors.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.joms.2017.03.005
PMID: 28390760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
