---
reference_id: "PMID:35869842"
title: Latent Tuberculosis Infection Care.
authors:
- Gaskell KM
- Pillay TD
- Brown J
- Belton M
- Mepham SO
- Moore DAJ
- Lipman M
journal: Clin Infect Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/cid/ciac582
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Latent Tuberculosis Infection Care.
**Authors:** Gaskell KM, Pillay TD, Brown J, Belton M, Mepham SO, Moore DAJ, Lipman M
**Journal:** Clin Infect Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cid/ciac582](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciac582)

## Content

1. Clin Infect Dis. 2022 Nov 14;75(10):1864. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciac582.

Latent Tuberculosis Infection Care.

Gaskell KM(1), Pillay TD(2), Brown J(3), Belton M(4), Mepham SO(5), Moore 
DAJ(1)(6), Lipman M(3)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Research, London School of Hygiene and Tropical 
Medicine, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Imperial College London, The Francis Crick 
Institute, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Respiratory Medicine Department, Royal Free Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Respiratory Medicine Department, The Whittington Hospital, London, United 
Kingdom.
(5)Microbiology and Infectious Diseases Department, Royal Free Hospital, London, 
United Kingdom.
(6)The Hospital for Tropical Diseases, University College Hospital London, 
London, United Kingdom.
(7)UCL-TB Research Group, University College London, London, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Clin Infect Dis. 2022 Nov 14;75(10):1864. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciac583.

Comment on
    Clin Infect Dis. 2022 Nov 14;75(10):1792-1799. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciac248.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciac582
PMID: 35869842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential conflicts of interest. The authors: No 
reported conflicts of interest. All authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for 
Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest. Conflicts that the editors 
consider relevant to the content of the manuscript have been disclosed.