---
reference_id: "PMID:11050023"
title: Motor cortex excitability in stiff-person syndrome.
authors:
- Sandbrink F
- Syed NA
- Fujii MD
- Dalakas MC
- Floeter MK
journal: Brain
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1093/brain/123.11.2231
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Motor cortex excitability in stiff-person syndrome.
**Authors:** Sandbrink F, Syed NA, Fujii MD, Dalakas MC, Floeter MK
**Journal:** Brain (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/123.11.2231](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/123.11.2231)

## Content

1. Brain. 2000 Nov;123 ( Pt 11):2231-9. doi: 10.1093/brain/123.11.2231.

Motor cortex excitability in stiff-person syndrome.

Sandbrink F(1), Syed NA, Fujii MD, Dalakas MC, Floeter MK.

Author information:
(1)Electromyography Section and Neuromuscular Diseases Section, National 
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Muscle stiffness in stiff-person syndrome (SPS) is produced by continuous, 
involuntary firing of motor units that is thought to be caused by an autoimmune 
mediated dysfunction of GABA-ergic inhibitory neurones. We have postulated that 
the loss of GABA-ergic inputs from spinal interneurones alone is insufficient to 
produce tonic firing of motor neurones and that excessive supraspinal excitation 
could also play a role. To determine whether SPS is associated with dysfunction 
in supraspinal GABA-ergic neurones, we assessed the excitability of the motor 
cortex with transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) in seven SPS patients and 
seven age-matched healthy volunteers. SPS patients had normal central motor 
conduction times, normal thresholds for motor evoked potentials (MEPs) in leg 
muscles, and a normal MEP stimulus versus response recruitment curve with 
increasing TMS intensities in resting hand and leg muscles. Cortical silent 
periods were shortened in leg muscles. Intracortical inhibition and excitation 
were assessed while recording from the abductor pollicis brevis, using a paired 
pulse TMS paradigm with subthreshold conditioning stimuli. Patients had 
decreased inhibition and markedly increased facilitation at short intervals. 
Using paired suprathreshold TMS, patients exhibited increased facilitation at 
20- and 40-ms intervals. These results point to a hyperexcitability of the motor 
cortex in SPS, which could be explained by impairment of supraspinal GABA-ergic 
neurones, leading to an impaired balance between inhibitory and excitatory 
intracortical circuitry.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/123.11.2231
PMID: 11050023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]