---
reference_id: "PMID:23437153"
title: "Multiple consequences of a single amino acid pathogenic RTK mutation: the A391E mutation in FGFR3."
authors:
- Chen F
- Sarabipour S
- Hristova K
journal: PLoS One
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056521
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiple consequences of a single amino acid pathogenic RTK mutation: the A391E mutation in FGFR3.
**Authors:** Chen F, Sarabipour S, Hristova K
**Journal:** PLoS One (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0056521](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0056521)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56521. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056521. Epub 2013 Feb
20.

Multiple consequences of a single amino acid pathogenic RTK mutation: the A391E 
mutation in FGFR3.

Chen F(1), Sarabipour S, Hristova K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

The A391E mutation in fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) is the genetic 
cause for Crouzon syndrome with Acanthosis Nigricans. Here we investigate the 
effect of this mutation on FGFR3 activation in HEK 293 T cells over a wide range 
of fibroblast growth factor 1 concentrations using a physical-chemical approach 
that deconvolutes the effects of the mutation on dimerization, ligand binding, 
and efficiency of phosphorylation. It is believed that the mutation increases 
FGFR3 dimerization, and our results verify this. However, our results also 
demonstrate that the increase in dimerization is not the sole effect of the 
mutation, as the mutation also facilitates the phosphorylation of critical 
tyrosines in the activation loop of FGFR3. The activation of mutant FGFR3 is 
substantially increased due to a combination of these two effects. The low 
expression of the mutant, however, attenuates its signaling and may explain the 
mild phenotype in Crouzon syndrome with Acanthosis Nigricans. The results 
presented here provide new knowledge about the physical basis behind growth 
disorders and highlight the fact that a single RTK mutation may affect multiple 
steps in RTK activation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056521
PMCID: PMC3577887
PMID: 23437153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.