---
reference_id: "PMID:22794682"
title: "Chapter 9: Asthma classification."
authors:
- Koterba AP
- Saltoun CA
journal: Allergy Asthma Proc
year: '2012'
doi: 10.2500/aap.2012.33.3539
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chapter 9: Asthma classification.
**Authors:** Koterba AP, Saltoun CA
**Journal:** Allergy Asthma Proc (2012)
**DOI:** [10.2500/aap.2012.33.3539](https://doi.org/10.2500/aap.2012.33.3539)

## Content

1. Allergy Asthma Proc. 2012 May-Jun;33 Suppl 1:28-31. doi: 
10.2500/aap.2012.33.3539.

Chapter 9: Asthma classification.

Koterba AP, Saltoun CA.

Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the airways resulting 
physiologically in hyperreactivity and clinically in recurrent episodes of 
wheezing, chest tightness, or coughing. Airway inflammation, smooth muscle 
contraction, epithelial sloughing, mucous hypersecretion, bronchial 
hyperresponsiveness, and mucosal edema contribute to the underlying 
pathophysiology of asthma. Diagnostic tests such as methacholine or mannitol 
challenges or spirometry (pre- and postbronchodilator responses) help to 
identify such underlying pathophysiology via assessments of bronchial 
hyperreactivity and lung mechanics but are imperfect and ultimately must be 
viewed in the context of a patient's clinical presentation including response to 
pharmacotherapy. The National Asthma Education and Prevention Program Expert 
Panel Report (2007) classifies asthma into either intermittent or persistent, 
and the latter is either mild, moderate, or severe. Some patients change in 
either direction from intermittent to persistent asthma. In addition, patients 
with asthma may be classified as allergic (IgE mediated), nonallergic (often 
triggered by viral upper respiratory tract infections or no apparent cause), 
occupational, aspirin-exacerbated respiratory disease, potentially (near) fatal, 
exercise induced, and cough variant asthma. In the latter, the patients have a 
nonproductive cough that responds to treatment for asthma but not with 
antibiotics, expectorants, mucolytics, antitussives, beta(2)-adrenergic 
agonists, treatment for acid reflux, or rhinosinusitis. Thus, cough variant 
asthma is in the differential diagnosis of chronic cough.

DOI: 10.2500/aap.2012.33.3539
PMID: 22794682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]