---
reference_id: "PMID:9207788"
title: "Alagille syndrome is caused by mutations in human Jagged1, which encodes a ligand for Notch1."
authors:
- Li L
- Krantz ID
- Deng Y
- Genin A
- Banta AB
- Collins CC
- Qi M
- Trask BJ
- Kuo WL
- Cochran J
- Costa T
- Pierpont ME
- Rand EB
- Piccoli DA
- Hood L
- Spinner NB
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1038/ng0797-243
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alagille syndrome is caused by mutations in human Jagged1, which encodes a ligand for Notch1.
**Authors:** Li L, Krantz ID, Deng Y, Genin A, Banta AB, Collins CC, Qi M, Trask BJ, Kuo WL, Cochran J, Costa T, Pierpont ME, Rand EB, Piccoli DA, Hood L, Spinner NB
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0797-243](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0797-243)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1997 Jul;16(3):243-51. doi: 10.1038/ng0797-243.

Alagille syndrome is caused by mutations in human Jagged1, which encodes a 
ligand for Notch1.

Li L(1), Krantz ID, Deng Y, Genin A, Banta AB, Collins CC, Qi M, Trask BJ, Kuo 
WL, Cochran J, Costa T, Pierpont ME, Rand EB, Piccoli DA, Hood L, Spinner NB.

Author information:
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Department of Molecular 
Biotechnology, University of Washington, Seattle 98195 USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1997 Jul;16(3):212-3. doi: 10.1038/ng0797-212.

Alagille syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by abnormal 
development of liver, heart, skeleton, eye, face and, less frequently, kidney. 
Analyses of many patients with cytogenetic deletions or rearrangements have 
mapped the gene to chromosome 20p12, although deletions are found in a 
relatively small proportion of patients (< 7%). We have mapped the human Jagged1 
gene (JAG1), encoding a ligand for the developmentally important Notch 
transmembrane receptor, to the Alagille syndrome critical region within 20p12. 
The Notch intercellular signalling pathway has been shown to mediate cell fate 
decisions during development in invertebrates and vertebrates. We demonstrate 
four distinct coding mutations in JAG1 from four Alagille syndrome families, 
providing evidence that it is the causal gene for Alagille syndrome. All four 
mutations lie within conserved regions of the gene and cause translational 
frameshifts, resulting in gross alterations of the protein product Patients with 
cytogenetically detectable deletions including JAG1 have Alagille syndrome, 
supporting the hypothesis that haploinsufficiency for this gene is one of the 
mechanisms causing the Alagille syndrome phenotype.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0797-243
PMID: 9207788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]