---
reference_id: "PMID:38164753"
title: Recent Advances in Understanding Peripheral and Gut Immune Cell-Mediated Salt-Sensitive Hypertension and Nephropathy.
authors:
- Saleem M
- Masenga SK
- Ishimwe JA
- Demirci M
- Ahmad T
- Jamison S
- Albritton CF
- Mwesigwa N
- Porcia Haynes A
- White J
- Neikirk K
- Vue Z
- Hinton A Jr
- Arshad S
- Desta S
- Kirabo A
journal: Hypertension
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.123.22031
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent Advances in Understanding Peripheral and Gut Immune Cell-Mediated Salt-Sensitive Hypertension and Nephropathy.
**Authors:** Saleem M, Masenga SK, Ishimwe JA, Demirci M, Ahmad T, Jamison S, Albritton CF, Mwesigwa N, Porcia Haynes A, White J, Neikirk K, Vue Z, Hinton A Jr, Arshad S, Desta S, Kirabo A
**Journal:** Hypertension (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.123.22031](https://doi.org/10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.123.22031)

## Content

1. Hypertension. 2024 Mar;81(3):436-446. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.123.22031. 
Epub 2024 Jan 2.

Recent Advances in Understanding Peripheral and Gut Immune Cell-Mediated 
Salt-Sensitive Hypertension and Nephropathy.

Saleem M(1), Masenga SK(2), Ishimwe JA(1), Demirci M(1), Ahmad T(1)(3), Jamison 
S(1)(4), Albritton CF(1)(4), Mwesigwa N(1), Porcia Haynes A(1), White J(1)(5), 
Neikirk K(6), Vue Z(6)(7), Hinton A Jr(6), Arshad S(1), Desta S(1), Kirabo 
A(1)(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN (M.S., J.A.I., M.D., T.A., S.J., 
C.F.A., N.M., A.P.H., J.W., S.A., S.D., A.K.).
(2)Mulungushi University, School of Medicine and Health Sciences, HAND Research 
Group, Livingstone, Zambia (S.K.M.).
(3)Department of Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy, University of Sargodha, 
Punjab, Pakistan (T.A.).
(4)School of Graduate Studies, Meharry Medical College, Nashville, TN (S.J., 
C.F.A.).
(5)Spelman College Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Atlanta, GA (J.W.).
(6)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, TN (K.N., Z.V., A.H.).
(7)Vanderbilt Center for Immunobiology (Z.V., A.K.).
(8)Vanderbilt Institute for Infection, Immunology and Inflammation (A.K.).
(9)Vanderbilt Institute for Global Health (A.K.).

Hypertension is the primary modifiable risk factor for cardiovascular, renal, 
and cerebrovascular diseases and is considered the main contributing factor to 
morbidity and mortality worldwide. Approximately 50% of hypertensive and 25% of 
normotensive people exhibit salt sensitivity of blood pressure, which is an 
independent risk factor for cardiovascular disease. Human and animal studies 
demonstrate that the immune system plays an important role in the etiology and 
pathogenesis of salt sensitivity of blood pressure, kidney damage, and vascular 
diseases. Antigen-presenting and adaptive immune cells are implicated in 
salt-sensitive hypertension and salt-induced renal and vascular injury. Elevated 
sodium activates antigen-presenting cells to release proinflammatory cytokines 
including IL (interleukin) 6, tumor necrosis factor-α, IL-1β, and accumulate 
isolevuglandin-protein adducts. In turn, these activate T cells release 
prohypertensive cytokines including IL-17A. Moreover, high-salt intake is 
associated with gut dysbiosis, leading to inflammation, oxidative stress, and 
blood pressure elevation but the mechanistic contribution to salt-sensitivity of 
blood pressure is not clearly understood. Here, we discuss recent advances in 
research investigating the cause, potential biomarkers, and therapeutic targets 
for salt-sensitive hypertension as they pertain to the gut microbiome, immunity, 
and inflammation.

DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.123.22031
PMCID: PMC10922672
PMID: 38164753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures None.