---
reference_id: "PMID:21885617"
title: Homozygosity mapping and targeted genomic sequencing reveal the gene responsible for cerebellar hypoplasia and quadrupedal locomotion in a consanguineous kindred.
authors:
- Gulsuner S
- Tekinay AB
- Doerschner K
- Boyaci H
- Bilguvar K
- Unal H
- Ors A
- Onat OE
- Atalar E
- Basak AN
- Topaloglu H
- Kansu T
- Tan M
- Tan U
- Gunel M
- Ozcelik T
journal: Genome Res
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1101/gr.126110.111
keywords:
- Adult
- Cerebellum
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17/genetics"
- Female
- Gait/genetics
- "Genetic Diseases, Inborn/diagnostic imaging, genetics, physiopathology"
- Genetic Loci
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Posture
- Radiography
- Turkey
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homozygosity mapping and targeted genomic sequencing reveal the gene responsible for cerebellar hypoplasia and quadrupedal locomotion in a consanguineous kindred.
**Authors:** Gulsuner S, Tekinay AB, Doerschner K, Boyaci H, Bilguvar K, Unal H, Ors A, Onat OE, Atalar E, Basak AN, Topaloglu H, Kansu T, Tan M, Tan U, Gunel M, Ozcelik T
**Journal:** Genome Res (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gr.126110.111](https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.126110.111)

## Content

1. Genome Res. 2011 Dec;21(12):1995-2003. doi: 10.1101/gr.126110.111. Epub 2011
Sep  1.

Homozygosity mapping and targeted genomic sequencing reveal the gene responsible 
for cerebellar hypoplasia and quadrupedal locomotion in a consanguineous 
kindred.

Gulsuner S(1), Tekinay AB, Doerschner K, Boyaci H, Bilguvar K, Unal H, Ors A, 
Onat OE, Atalar E, Basak AN, Topaloglu H, Kansu T, Tan M, Tan U, Gunel M, 
Ozcelik T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Science, Bilkent 
University, Ankara 06800, Turkey.

The biological basis for the development of the cerebro-cerebellar structures 
required for posture and gait in humans is poorly understood. We investigated a 
large consanguineous family from Turkey exhibiting an extremely rare phenotype 
associated with quadrupedal locomotion, mental retardation, and 
cerebro-cerebellar hypoplasia, linked to a 7.1-Mb region of homozygosity on 
chromosome 17p13.1-13.3. Diffusion weighted imaging and fiber tractography of 
the patients' brains revealed morphological abnormalities in the cerebellum and 
corpus callosum, in particular atrophy of superior, middle, and inferior 
peduncles of the cerebellum. Structural magnetic resonance imaging showed 
additional morphometric abnormalities in several cortical areas, including the 
corpus callosum, precentral gyrus, and Brodmann areas BA6, BA44, and BA45. 
Targeted sequencing of the entire homozygous region in three affected 
individuals and two obligate carriers uncovered a private missense mutation, 
WDR81 p.P856L, which cosegregated with the condition in the extended family. The 
mutation lies in a highly conserved region of WDR81, flanked by an N-terminal 
BEACH domain and C-terminal WD40 beta-propeller domains. WDR81 is predicted to 
be a transmembrane protein. It is highly expressed in the cerebellum and corpus 
callosum, in particular in the Purkinje cell layer of the cerebellum. WDR81 
represents the third gene, after VLDLR and CA8, implicated in quadrupedal 
locomotion in humans.

DOI: 10.1101/gr.126110.111
PMCID: PMC3227090
PMID: 21885617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]