---
reference_id: "PMID:1325541"
title: "Systemic chemotherapy of brain metastases from small-cell lung cancer: a review."
authors:
- Kristensen CA
- Kristjansen PE
- Hansen HH
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.1992.10.9.1498
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systemic chemotherapy of brain metastases from small-cell lung cancer: a review.
**Authors:** Kristensen CA, Kristjansen PE, Hansen HH
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.1992.10.9.1498](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.1992.10.9.1498)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 1992 Sep;10(9):1498-502. doi: 10.1200/JCO.1992.10.9.1498.

Systemic chemotherapy of brain metastases from small-cell lung cancer: a review.

Kristensen CA(1), Kristjansen PE, Hansen HH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology ONK, Finsen Institute/Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.

PURPOSE: For decades the treatment of choice in small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) 
with brain metastases has been corticosteroids and radiotherapy (RT) because of 
a presumed lack of penetrance of cytostatic agents into parenchymatous brain 
metastases. In recent years, several reports have appeared on radiologic and 
clinical responses to systemic chemotherapy without additional RT in patients 
with metastatic SCLC in the brain. We reviewed the literature and focused on the 
methodologic aspects in comparison with RT data.
DESIGN: We reviewed 12 patient series that included 116 patients and were 
published between 1981 and 1990.
RESULTS: The overall brain response to chemotherapy without irradiation in 
patients with intracranial metastases at diagnosis was 76%, whereas the response 
rate of brain relapses was 43%.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that intracranial metastases from SCLC seem to respond 
to chemotherapy as readily as other metastatic locations of SCLC do. Thus 
first-line cranial irradiation probably should be applied routinely only in 
cases of delayed brain metastases. Whether consolidating cranial RT should be 
given after a few courses of initial chemotherapy in SCLC patients with brain 
metastases at diagnosis is unclear and warrants a randomized evaluation.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.1992.10.9.1498
PMID: 1325541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]