---
reference_id: "PMID:38074478"
title: Sinonasal Neuroendocrine Carcinoma in Adult Proteus Syndrome.
authors:
- Sideris G
- Nikolopoulos T
- Sourla A
- Korkolopoulou P
- Papadakis P
- Delides A
journal: Iran J Otorhinolaryngol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.22038/IJORL.2023.73128.3472
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sinonasal Neuroendocrine Carcinoma in Adult Proteus Syndrome.
**Authors:** Sideris G, Nikolopoulos T, Sourla A, Korkolopoulou P, Papadakis P, Delides A
**Journal:** Iran J Otorhinolaryngol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.22038/IJORL.2023.73128.3472](https://doi.org/10.22038/IJORL.2023.73128.3472)

## Content

1. Iran J Otorhinolaryngol. 2023 Nov;35(131):321-324. doi: 
10.22038/IJORL.2023.73128.3472.

Sinonasal Neuroendocrine Carcinoma in Adult Proteus Syndrome.

Sideris G(1), Nikolopoulos T(1), Sourla A(2), Korkolopoulou P(2), Papadakis 
P(2), Delides A(1).

Author information:
(1)Second ΕΝΤ Department, School of Medicine, "Attikon" University Hospital, 
National & Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece.
(2)First Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, National & Kapodistrian 
University of Athens, Athens, Greece.

INTRODUCTION: Proteus syndrome (PS) is a rare genetic disorder usually caused by 
mutations in AKT1 or PTEN genes, characterized by multiple, asymmetric tissue 
overgrowth with high clinical variability. Sinonasal neuroendocrine carcinomas 
(SNEC) are exceptionally rare tumors encountered in the ethmoid sinus, nasal 
cavity, or maxillary sinus.
CASE REPORT: We report a 35-year-old patient with PS, who underwent successful 
surgical removal of a well-differentiated SNEC obstructing his nasal cavity and 
highlight the role of the otolaryngologist for safe airway management, minimal 
surgical intervention and coordination of the multidisciplinary care. 
Histologically, focally hyperplastic mucosal epithelium of respiratory type of 
the nasal chamber was noticed along with seromucinous glands and capillary 
congestion of the subepithelial fibrovascular tissue. The limited presence of 
neoplastic tissue with histomorphological and immunophenotypic features of a 
neuroendocrine neoplasm was focally observed. Tumor cells grow in the form of 
islets within a vascular stroma; these neoplastic cells are 
immunohistochemically positive for synaptophysin, CD56, EMA, Ki67 (low 
expression, cell proliferation rate: 2%), CD31, chromogranin and pancytokeratin 
AE1 / AE3 as well as for S-100 protein (weak intensity).
CONCLUSIONS: This first description of a SNEC in a PS patient, might hint 
towards a common basis between the two conditions, due to the mosaic AKT1 
variant and an activated AKT/PIK3CA/PTEN pathway.

DOI: 10.22038/IJORL.2023.73128.3472
PMCID: PMC10701243
PMID: 38074478