---
reference_id: "PMID:35397478"
title: Upfront molecular targeted therapy for the treatment of BRAF-mutant pediatric high-grade glioma.
authors:
- Rosenberg T
- Yeo KK
- Mauguen A
- Alexandrescu S
- Prabhu SP
- Tsai JW
- Malinowski S
- Joshirao M
- Parikh K
- Farouk Sait S
- Rosenblum MK
- Benhamida JK
- Michaiel G
- Tran HN
- Dahiya S
- Kachurak K
- Friedman GK
- Krystal JI
- Huang MA
- Margol AS
- Wright KD
- Aguilera D
- MacDonald TJ
- Chi SN
- Karajannis MA
journal: Neuro Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noac096
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- "Child, Preschool"
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Adult
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Brain Neoplasms/pathology
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- Retrospective Studies
- Glioma/pathology
- Mutation
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Glioblastoma/drug therapy
- Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase Kinases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Upfront molecular targeted therapy for the treatment of BRAF-mutant pediatric high-grade glioma.
**Authors:** Rosenberg T, Yeo KK, Mauguen A, Alexandrescu S, Prabhu SP, Tsai JW, Malinowski S, Joshirao M, Parikh K, Farouk Sait S, Rosenblum MK, Benhamida JK, Michaiel G, Tran HN, Dahiya S, Kachurak K, Friedman GK, Krystal JI, Huang MA, Margol AS, Wright KD, Aguilera D, MacDonald TJ, Chi SN, Karajannis MA
**Journal:** Neuro Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/neuonc/noac096](https://doi.org/10.1093/neuonc/noac096)

## Content

1. Neuro Oncol. 2022 Nov 2;24(11):1964-1975. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noac096.

Upfront molecular targeted therapy for the treatment of BRAF-mutant pediatric 
high-grade glioma.

Rosenberg T(1), Yeo KK(1), Mauguen A(2), Alexandrescu S(3), Prabhu SP(4), Tsai 
JW(1), Malinowski S(5), Joshirao M(6)(7), Parikh K(7), Farouk Sait S(7), 
Rosenblum MK(8), Benhamida JK(8), Michaiel G(9), Tran HN(10), Dahiya S(11), 
Kachurak K(12), Friedman GK(12), Krystal JI(13), Huang MA(14), Margol AS(9), 
Wright KD(1), Aguilera D(15), MacDonald TJ(15), Chi SN(1), Karajannis MA(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and 
Blood Disorders Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York, New York, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.
(4)Department of Radiology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.
(5)Department of Oncologic Pathology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, SUNY Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York, 
USA.
(7)Pediatric Neuro-Oncology Service, Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan 
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA.
(8)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
New York, USA.
(9)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Cancer and Blood Disease Institute at 
Children's Hospital Los Angeles and Keck School of Medicine at University of 
Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Kaiser Permanente Southern California, Los 
Angeles, California, USA.
(11)Department of Pathology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, Missouri, USA.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
Alabama, USA.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, Cohen Children's Medical Center, New Hyde Park, 
New York, USA.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, Norton Children's Hospital/Affiliate of University 
of Louisville School of Medicine, Louisville, Kentucky, USA.
(15)Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Emory University School of Medicine, 
Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

Comment in
    Neuro Oncol. 2022 Nov 2;24(11):1976-1977. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noac160.

BACKGROUND: The prognosis for patients with pediatric high-grade glioma (pHGG) 
is poor despite aggressive multimodal therapy. Objective responses to targeted 
therapy with BRAF inhibitors have been reported in some patients with recurrent 
BRAF-mutant pHGG but are rarely sustained.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective, multi-institutional review of patients 
with BRAF-mutant pHGG treated with off-label BRAF +/- MEK inhibitors as part of 
their initial therapy.
RESULTS: Nineteen patients were identified, with a median age of 11.7 years 
(range, 2.3-21.4). Histologic diagnoses included HGG (n = 6), glioblastoma (n = 
3), anaplastic ganglioglioma (n = 4), diffuse midline glioma (n = 3), high-grade 
neuroepithelial tumor (n = 1), anaplastic astrocytoma (n = 1), and anaplastic 
astroblastoma (n = 1). Recurrent concomitant oncogenic alterations included 
CDKN2A/B loss, H3 K27M, as well as mutations in ATRX, EGFR, and TERT. Eight 
patients received BRAF inhibitor monotherapy. Eleven patients received 
combination therapy with BRAF and MEK inhibitors. Most patients tolerated 
long-term treatment well with no grade 4-5 toxicities. Objective and durable 
imaging responses were seen in the majority of patients with measurable disease. 
At a median follow-up of 2.3 years (range, 0.3-6.5), three-year progression-free 
and overall survival for the cohort were 65% and 82%, respectively, and superior 
to a historical control cohort of BRAF-mutant pHGG patients treated with 
conventional therapies.
CONCLUSIONS: Upfront targeted therapy for patients with BRAF-mutant pHGG is 
feasible and effective, with superior clinical outcomes compared to historical 
data. This promising treatment paradigm is currently being evaluated 
prospectively in the Children's Oncology Group ACNS1723 clinical trial.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Neuro-Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/neuonc/noac096
PMCID: PMC9629451
PMID: 35397478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]