---
reference_id: "PMID:35025759"
title: AAV9/MFSD8 gene therapy is effective in preclinical models of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis type 7 disease.
authors:
- Chen X
- Dong T
- Hu Y
- Shaffo FC
- Belur NR
- Mazzulli JR
- Gray SJ
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1172/JCI146286
keywords:
- Animals
- Dependovirus
- Genetic Therapy
- Humans
- Lysosomal Storage Diseases/metabolism
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- Membrane Transport Proteins/metabolism
- Mice
- Mutation
- "Neuronal Ceroid-Lipofuscinoses/genetics, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# AAV9/MFSD8 gene therapy is effective in preclinical models of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis type 7 disease.
**Authors:** Chen X, Dong T, Hu Y, Shaffo FC, Belur NR, Mazzulli JR, Gray SJ
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI146286](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI146286)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2022 Mar 1;132(5):e146286. doi: 10.1172/JCI146286.

AAV9/MFSD8 gene therapy is effective in preclinical models of neuronal ceroid
lipofuscinosis type 7 disease.

Chen X(1), Dong T(1), Hu Y(1), Shaffo FC(1), Belur NR(2), Mazzulli JR(2), Gray
SJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern (UTSW) Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
(2)The Ken and Ruth Davee Department of Neurology, Northwestern University
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2022 Mar 1;132(5):e157820. doi: 10.1172/JCI157820.

Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis type 7 (CLN7) disease is a lysosomal storage
disease caused by mutations in the facilitator superfamily domain containing 8
(MFSD8) gene, which encodes a membrane-bound lysosomal protein, MFSD8. To test
the effectiveness and safety of adeno-associated viral (AAV) gene therapy, an in
vitro study demonstrated that AAV2/MFSD8 dose dependently rescued lysosomal
function in fibroblasts from a CLN7 patient. An in vivo efficacy study using
intrathecal administration of AAV9/MFSD8 to Mfsd8- /- mice at P7-P10 or P120
with high or low dose led to clear age- and dose-dependent effects. A high dose
of AAV9/MFSD8 at P7-P10 resulted in widespread MFSD8 mRNA expression, tendency
of amelioration of subunit c of mitochondrial ATP synthase accumulation and
glial fibrillary acidic protein immunoreactivity, normalization of impaired
behaviors, doubled median life span, and extended normal body weight gain. In
vivo safety studies in rodents concluded that intrathecal administration of
AAV9/MFSD8 was safe and well tolerated. In summary, these results demonstrated
that the AAV9/MFSD8 vector is both effective and safe in preclinical models.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI146286
PMCID: PMC8884910
PMID: 35025759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: XC received a consulting
fee from Neurogene Inc. SJG received patent royalties for intellectual property
(IP) licensed to Asklepios Biophama (patent 9636370, AAV vectors targeted to
oligodendrocytes), and he received consulting and royalty income from Neurogene
Inc. (patent application 17/267251, Optimized CLN7 genes and expression
cassettes and their use). UTSW Medical Center may benefit from the potential
commercialization of the technology described in this manuscript.