---
reference_id: "PMID:24357251"
title: "Narrowing of the responsible region for severe developmental delay and autistic behaviors in WAGR syndrome down to 1.6 Mb including PAX6, WT1, and PRRG4."
authors:
- Yamamoto T
- Togawa M
- Shimada S
- Sangu N
- Shimojima K
- Okamoto N
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36325
keywords:
- Autistic Disorder/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Deletion
- Chromosome Mapping
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- Developmental Disabilities/genetics
- Eye Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Haploinsufficiency
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- PAX6 Transcription Factor
- Paired Box Transcription Factors/genetics
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
- Severity of Illness Index
- "WAGR Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- WT1 Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Narrowing of the responsible region for severe developmental delay and autistic behaviors in WAGR syndrome down to 1.6 Mb including PAX6, WT1, and PRRG4.
**Authors:** Yamamoto T, Togawa M, Shimada S, Sangu N, Shimojima K, Okamoto N
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.36325](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.36325)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Mar;164A(3):634-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36325. Epub 2013
 Dec 19.

Narrowing of the responsible region for severe developmental delay and autistic 
behaviors in WAGR syndrome down to 1.6 Mb including PAX6, WT1, and PRRG4.

Yamamoto T(1), Togawa M, Shimada S, Sangu N, Shimojima K, Okamoto N.

Author information:
(1)Tokyo Women's Medical University Institute for Integrated Medical Sciences 
(TIIMS), Tokyo, Japan.

Interstitial deletions of the 11p13 region are known to cause WAGR (Wilms tumor, 
aniridia, genitourinary malformation, and "mental retardation") syndrome, a 
contiguous gene deletion syndrome due to haploinsufficiencies of the genes in 
this region, including WT1 and PAX6. Developmental delay and autistic features 
are major complications of this syndrome. Previously, some genes located in this 
region have been suggested as responsible for autistic features. In this study, 
we identified two patients who showed the chromosomal deletions involving 11p13. 
Patient 1, having an 8.6 Mb deletion of chr11p14.1p12:29,676,434-38,237,948, 
exhibited a phenotype typical of WAGR syndrome and had severe developmental 
delay and autistic behaviors. On the other hand, Patient 2 had a larger 
aberration region in 11p14.1-p12 which was split into two regions, that is, a 
2.2-Mb region of chr11p14.1: 29,195,161-31,349,732 and a 10.5-Mb region of 
chr11p13p12: 32,990,627-43,492,580. As a consequence, 1.6 Mb region of the WAGR 
syndrome critical region was intact between the two deletions. This patient 
showed no symptom of WAGR syndrome and no autistic behaviors. Therefore, the 
region responsible for severe developmental delay and autistic features on WAGR 
syndrome can be narrowed down to the region remaining intact in Patient 2. Thus, 
the unique genotype identified in this study suggested that haploinsufficiencies 
of PAX6 or PRRG4 included in this region are candidate genes for severe 
developmental delay and autistic features characteristic of WAGR syndrome.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36325
PMID: 24357251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]