---
reference_id: "PMID:33439395"
title: Hereditary spastic paraplegia.
authors:
- Murala S
- Nagarajan E
- Bollu PC
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s10072-020-04981-7
keywords:
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- Nervous System Diseases
- Phenotype
- Pyramidal Tracts
- "Spastic Paraplegia, Hereditary/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary spastic paraplegia.
**Authors:** Murala S, Nagarajan E, Bollu PC
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10072-020-04981-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-020-04981-7)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2021 Mar;42(3):883-894. doi: 10.1007/s10072-020-04981-7. Epub 2021
 Jan 13.

Hereditary spastic paraplegia.

Murala S(1), Nagarajan E(2), Bollu PC(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA. 
siri.murala@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Neurology, Peripheral Neuropathy Center, The Neurological 
Institute of New York, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA.

Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSPs) are a group of neurodegenerative disorders 
which involve the corticospinal tracts and present with distinct spasticity and 
weakness of the lower extremities. The estimated prevalence of HSP is around 
1.8/100,000 cases for both autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive types. 
Classification of HSP is based on inheritance pattern, clinical phenotype, and 
molecular pathophysiological mechanisms. The most common neuropathological sign 
is the axonal degeneration involving the lateral corticospinal tracts in both 
the cervical and thoracic spinal cord. The target of this review article is to 
provide a comprehensive overview of the HSP classification, neuropathology, and 
differential diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-020-04981-7
PMID: 33439395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]