---
reference_id: "PMID:37263266"
title: New perspectives in diabetic neuropathy.
authors:
- Eid SA
- Rumora AE
- Beirowski B
- Bennett DL
- Hur J
- Savelieff MG
- Feldman EL
journal: Neuron
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2023.05.003
keywords:
- Humans
- Aged
- Diabetic Neuropathies/metabolism
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/complications, metabolism"
- Peripheral Nerves
- "Hyperglycemia/complications, metabolism"
- "Dyslipidemias/complications, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New perspectives in diabetic neuropathy.
**Authors:** Eid SA, Rumora AE, Beirowski B, Bennett DL, Hur J, Savelieff MG, Feldman EL
**Journal:** Neuron (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuron.2023.05.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2023.05.003)

## Content

1. Neuron. 2023 Sep 6;111(17):2623-2641. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2023.05.003. Epub 
2023 May 31.

New perspectives in diabetic neuropathy.

Eid SA(1), Rumora AE(2), Beirowski B(3), Bennett DL(4), Hur J(5), Savelieff 
MG(5), Feldman EL(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA; 
NeuroNetwork for Emerging Therapies, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, 
Columbus, OH 43210, USA; Neuroscience Research Institute, The Ohio State 
University Wexner Medical Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(4)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neuroscience, University of Oxford, Oxford 
OX3 9DU, UK.
(5)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, 
ND 58202, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA; 
NeuroNetwork for Emerging Therapies, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109, USA. Electronic address: efeldman@umich.edu.

Diabetes prevalence continues to climb with the aging population. Type 2 
diabetes (T2D), which constitutes most cases, is metabolically acquired. 
Diabetic peripheral neuropathy (DPN), the most common microvascular 
complication, is length-dependent damage to peripheral nerves. DPN pathogenesis 
is complex, but, at its core, it can be viewed as a state of impaired metabolism 
and bioenergetics failure operating against the backdrop of long peripheral 
nerve axons supported by glia. This unique peripheral nerve anatomy and the 
injury consequent to T2D underpins the distal-to-proximal symptomatology of DPN. 
Earlier work focused on the impact of hyperglycemia on nerve damage and 
bioenergetics failure, but recent evidence additionally implicates contributions 
from obesity and dyslipidemia. This review will cover peripheral nerve anatomy, 
bioenergetics, and glia-axon interactions, building the framework for 
understanding how hyperglycemia and dyslipidemia induce bioenergetics failure in 
DPN. DPN and painful DPN still lack disease-modifying therapies, and research on 
novel mechanism-based approaches is also covered.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2023.05.003
PMCID: PMC10525009
PMID: 37263266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests D.L.B. has acted as a 
consultant in the last 2 years for AditumBio, Amgen, Biointervene, Bristows, 
LatigoBio, GSK, Ionis, Lexicon therapeutics, Neuvati, Olipass, Orion, Replay, 
Third Rock Ventures, and Vida Ventures on behalf of Oxford University 
Innovation. D.L.B. has received research funding from Lilly and Astra Zeneca.