---
reference_id: "PMID:30735695"
title: Comparison of stochastic and deterministic frameworks in dengue modelling.
authors:
- Champagne C
- Cazelles B
journal: Math Biosci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.mbs.2019.01.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparison of stochastic and deterministic frameworks in dengue modelling.
**Authors:** Champagne C, Cazelles B
**Journal:** Math Biosci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mbs.2019.01.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mbs.2019.01.010)

## Content

1. Math Biosci. 2019 Apr;310:1-12. doi: 10.1016/j.mbs.2019.01.010. Epub 2019 Feb
6.

Comparison of stochastic and deterministic frameworks in dengue modelling.

Champagne C(1), Cazelles B(2).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Biologie de l'Ecole Normale Supérieure (IBENS), Ecole Normale 
Supérieure, CNRS UMR 8197,46 rue d'Ulm, Paris 75005, France; CREST, ENSAE, 
Université Paris Saclay, 5, avenue Henry Le Chatelier, Palaiseau cedex 91764, 
France. Electronic address: champagn@biologie.ens.fr.
(2)Institut de Biologie de l'Ecole Normale Supérieure (IBENS), Ecole Normale 
Supérieure, CNRS UMR 8197,46 rue d'Ulm, Paris 75005, France; International 
Center for Mathematical and Computational Modeling of Complex Systems (UMMISCO), 
UMI 209 Sorbonne Université - IRD, Bondy cedex, France.

We perform estimations of compartment models for dengue transmission in rural 
Cambodia with increasing complexity regarding both model structure and the 
account for stochasticity. On the one hand, we successively account for three 
embedded sources of stochasticity: observation noise, demographic variability 
and environmental hazard. On the other hand, complexity in the model structure 
is increased by introducing vector-borne transmission, explicit asymptomatic 
infections and interacting virus serotypes. Using two sources of case data from 
dengue epidemics in Kampong Cham (Cambodia), models are estimated in the 
bayesian framework, with Markov Chain Monte Carlo and Particle Markov Chain 
Monte Carlo. We highlight the advantages and drawbacks of the different 
formulations in a practical setting. Although in this case the deterministic 
models provide a good approximation of the mean trajectory for a low 
computational cost, the stochastic frameworks better reflect and account for 
parameter and simulation uncertainty.

Copyright © 2019. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mbs.2019.01.010
PMID: 30735695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]