---
reference_id: "PMID:41555764"
title: Genetic and Clinical Features of FOXL2-Associated Blepharophimosis-Ptosis-Epicanthus Inversus Syndrome Based on 11 Chinese Families and Literature Review.
authors:
- Dong Y
- Xiao X
- Li S
- Jia X
- Sun W
- Zhang Q
- Yi Z
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1002/ajmga.70058
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic and Clinical Features of FOXL2-Associated Blepharophimosis-Ptosis-Epicanthus Inversus Syndrome Based on 11 Chinese Families and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Dong Y, Xiao X, Li S, Jia X, Sun W, Zhang Q, Yi Z
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmga.70058](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmga.70058)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2026 Jan 19. doi: 10.1002/ajmga.70058. Online ahead of
print.

Genetic and Clinical Features of FOXL2-Associated
Blepharophimosis-Ptosis-Epicanthus Inversus Syndrome Based on 11 Chinese
Families and Literature Review.

Dong Y(1), Xiao X(1), Li S(1), Jia X(1), Sun W(1), Zhang Q(1), Yi Z(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology and
Visual Science, Guangzhou, China.

Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES), caused by FOXL2
variants, has been divided into two subtypes by eyelid abnormalities with
(BPES-I) or without (BPES-II) primary ovarian insufficiency (POI). This study
investigated the genetic and phenotypic characteristics of FOXL2-associated BPES
and their genotype-phenotype correlations. FOXL2 variants were identified by
in-house next-generation sequencing and compared with public databases. Clinical
features were also summarized. Eleven FOXL2 variants, including four novel, were
detected in 11 families from our cohort. Based on literature, 273 FOXL2
pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants were reviewed in 650 patients from 548
families. Nearly half (47.6%, 130/273) of the variants were truncation. The most
frequent (24.0%, 132/549) variant was p.A225_A234dup. In the polyalanine tract,
variants leading to the deletion of 1-10 or expansion/insertion of 2 alanine
residues were likely benign, whereas variants causing the expansion/insertion of
10-15 alanine residues were pathogenic. The proportion of truncation variants
was significantly higher in patients with BPES-I (73.8%, 48/65) than in those
with BPES-II (19.6%, 19/97). In conclusion, the pathogenicity of in-frame
variants within the polyalanine tract was associated with the number of
polyalanine residues. Truncation variants were frequently linked to the severe
phenotype (BPES-I), highlighting their potential value in clinical diagnosis and
patient management, particularly for preventing or treating POI.

© 2026 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmga.70058
PMID: 41555764
