---
reference_id: "PMID:37510884"
title: Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophies Classification and Therapies.
authors:
- Bouchard C
- Tremblay JP
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/jcm12144769
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophies Classification and Therapies.
**Authors:** Bouchard C, Tremblay JP
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm12144769](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm12144769)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2023 Jul 19;12(14):4769. doi: 10.3390/jcm12144769.

Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophies Classification and Therapies.

Bouchard C(1)(2), Tremblay JP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Departement de Médecine Moléculaire, Université Laval, Quebec, QC G1V 0A6, 
Canada.
(2)Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Quebec, Quebec, QC 
G1E 6W2, Canada.

Limb-girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMDs) are caused by mutations in multiple 
genes. This review article presents 39 genes associated with LGMDs. Some forms 
are inherited in a dominant fashion, while for others this occurs recessively. 
The classification of LGMDs has evolved through time. Lately, to be considered 
an LGMD, the mutation has to cause a predominant proximal muscle weakness and 
must be found in two or more unrelated families. This article also presents 
therapies for LGMDs, examining both available treatments and those in 
development. For now, only symptomatic treatments are available for patients. 
The goal is now to solve the problem at the root of LGMDs instead of treating 
each symptom individually. In the last decade, multiple other potential 
treatments were developed and studied, such as stem-cell transplantation, exon 
skipping, gene delivery, RNAi, and gene editing.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm12144769
PMCID: PMC10381329
PMID: 37510884

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.