---
reference_id: "PMID:35373599"
title: Epidemiology and Prognostic Indicators of Survival in Tongue Lymphoma.
authors:
- Hong SA
- Simpson MC
- Du EY
- Ward GM
journal: Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1177/00034894221088175
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology and Prognostic Indicators of Survival in Tongue Lymphoma.
**Authors:** Hong SA, Simpson MC, Du EY, Ward GM
**Journal:** Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1177/00034894221088175](https://doi.org/10.1177/00034894221088175)

## Content

1. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 2023 Feb;132(2):190-199. doi: 
10.1177/00034894221088175. Epub 2022 Apr 2.

Epidemiology and Prognostic Indicators of Survival in Tongue Lymphoma.

Hong SA(1), Simpson MC(1), Du EY(2), Ward GM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, St. Louis University 
Hospital, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(2)Saint Louis University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Lymphoma, categorized as either non-Hodgkin's lymphoma or Hodgkin's 
lymphoma, is the second most common malignancy in the head and neck. Primary 
tongue lymphoma is exceedingly rare, with only case reports or small case series 
in the literature. This population-based analysis is the first to report the 
epidemiology and prognostic factors of survival in patients with primary tongue 
lymphoma.
METHODS: The Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results 18 database from the 
National Cancer Institute was queried for patients diagnosed between the years 
2000 and 2016 with tongue lymphoma. Outcomes of interest were overall and 
disease-specific survival. Independent variables included age at diagnosis, sex, 
race, marital status, primary subsite, histologic subtype, stage, and treatment 
type.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: Seven hundred forty patients met criteria; the 
male-female ratio was 1.5:1 and the mean age at diagnosis was 67.8 years. The 
majority of lesions localized to the base of tongue (90.0%), were histologically 
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (59.5%), and presented at stage I or II (77.9%). 
Most early-stage lymphomas were treated with chemotherapy only (40.5%) or a 
combination of both chemotherapy and radiation (31.3%), while late-stage cancers 
were primarily treated with chemotherapy alone (68.5%). In multivariate 
analysis, younger age at diagnosis, female sex, married/partnered marital 
status, mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue histologic subtype, and earlier cancer 
stage were found to be associated with improved survival. Chemotherapy treatment 
with or without radiation was also associated with better survival compared to 
no treatment or radiation alone, though data regarding immunotherapy was 
unavailable.

DOI: 10.1177/00034894221088175
PMID: 35373599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]