---
reference_id: "PMID:29340061"
title: Analysis of the mutational landscape of classic Hodgkin lymphoma identifies disease heterogeneity and potential therapeutic targets.
authors:
- Mata E
- Díaz-López A
- Martín-Moreno AM
- Sánchez-Beato M
- Varela I
- Mestre MJ
- Santonja C
- Burgos F
- Menárguez J
- Estévez M
- Provencio M
- Sánchez-Espiridión B
- Díaz E
- Montalbán C
- Piris MA
- García JF
journal: Oncotarget
year: '2017'
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.22799
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of the mutational landscape of classic Hodgkin lymphoma identifies disease heterogeneity and potential therapeutic targets.
**Authors:** Mata E, Díaz-López A, Martín-Moreno AM, Sánchez-Beato M, Varela I, Mestre MJ, Santonja C, Burgos F, Menárguez J, Estévez M, Provencio M, Sánchez-Espiridión B, Díaz E, Montalbán C, Piris MA, García JF
**Journal:** Oncotarget (2017)
**DOI:** [10.18632/oncotarget.22799](https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.22799)

## Content

1. Oncotarget. 2017 Nov 30;8(67):111386-111395. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.22799.
eCollection 2017 Dec 19.

Analysis of the mutational landscape of classic Hodgkin lymphoma identifies
disease heterogeneity and potential therapeutic targets.

Mata E(1), Díaz-López A(1), Martín-Moreno AM(1), Sánchez-Beato M(2), Varela
I(3), Mestre MJ(4), Santonja C(5), Burgos F(6), Menárguez J(7), Estévez M(8),
Provencio M(2), Sánchez-Espiridión B(9), Díaz E(1), Montalbán C(8), Piris MA(5),
García JF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Translational Research, MD Anderson Cancer Center
Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Lymphoma Research Group, Medical Oncology Department, Instituto Investigación
Sanitaria Puerta de Hierro (IDIPHIM), Madrid, Spain.
(3)Instituto de Biomedicina y Biotecnología de Cantabria, IBBTEC (CSIC,
Universidad de Cantabria), Santander, Spain.
(4)Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitario de Móstoles, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Department of Pathology, Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Department of Pathology, Hospital Severo Ochoa, Madrid, Spain.
(7)Department of Pathology, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón,
Madrid, Spain.
(8)Department of Hematology, MD Anderson Cancer Center Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(9)Department of Molecular Translational Pathology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

Defining the mutational landscape of classic Hodgkin lymphoma is still a major
research goal. New targeted next-generation sequencing (NGS) techniques may
identify pathogenic mechanisms and new therapeutic opportunities related to this
disease. We describe the mutational profile of a series of 57 cHL cases,
enriched in Hodgkin and Reed-Sternberg (HRS) cells. Overall, the results confirm
the presence of strong genomic heterogeneity. However, several variants were
consistently detected in genes related to relevant signaling pathways, such as
GM-CSF/IL-3, CBP/EP300, JAK/STAT, NF-kappaB, and numerous variants of genes
affecting the B-cell receptor (BCR) pathway, such as BTK, CARD11, BCL10, among
others. This unexpectedly high prevalence of mutations affecting the BCR pathway
suggests some requirement for active BCR signaling for cHL cell viability.
Additionally, incubation of a panel of cHL cellular models with selective BTK
inhibitors in vitro constrains cell proliferation and causes cell death. Our
results indicate new pathogenic mechanisms and therapeutic opportunities in this
disease.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.22799
PMCID: PMC5762329
PMID: 29340061

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare no
conflicts of interest.
