---
reference_id: "PMID:26527439"
title: "Unusual Acute Sequelae of α1-Antitrypsin Deficiency: A Myriad of Symptoms With One Common Cure."
authors:
- Franciosiz AN
- McCarthy C
- Carroll TP
- McElvaney NG
journal: Chest
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1378/chest.15-0699
keywords:
- Biomarkers/blood
- Humans
- "Injections, Intravenous"
- Male
- "Panniculitis/blood, etiology"
- Young Adult
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin/administration & dosage"
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/blood, complications, drug therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unusual Acute Sequelae of α1-Antitrypsin Deficiency: A Myriad of Symptoms With One Common Cure.
**Authors:** Franciosiz AN, McCarthy C, Carroll TP, McElvaney NG
**Journal:** Chest (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1378/chest.15-0699](https://doi.org/10.1378/chest.15-0699)

## Content

1. Chest. 2015 Nov;148(5):e136-e138. doi: 10.1378/chest.15-0699.

Unusual Acute Sequelae of α1-Antitrypsin Deficiency: A Myriad of Symptoms With
One Common Cure.

Franciosiz AN(1), McCarthy C(2), Carroll TP(1), McElvaney NG(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Respiratory Research Division, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland,
Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(2)From the Respiratory Research Division, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland,
Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.. Electronic address: cmccarthy@rcsi.ie.

Panniculitis associated with α1-antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) is well documented
but rare. We report the first case, to our knowledge, of successful induction of
clinical remission of AATD-related panniculitis following a single 120-mg/kg
dose administration of plasma-purified α1-antitrypsin (AAT). A 23-year-old man
with known PiZZ AATD presented to the hospital with a diffusely swollen and
tender right upper limb. This was associated with subcutaneous induration, and a
discrepancy of 5 cm in upper limb circumference at the mid arm was noted. There
was no convincing precipitant for cellulitis or an infectious cause, and
inflammatory markers were raised, with a C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 93.9
mg/L and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 71 mm/h. Doppler
ultrasonography ruled out DVT. No antimicrobials or antiinflammatory medications
were administered during or prior to admission. Biopsy specimens of the right
upper limb revealed extensive panniculitis with neutrophils, foamy macrophages,
and fat necrosis. A diagnosis of AATD-associated panniculitis was made.
Following this, a single IV dose of 120 mg/kg of plasma-purified AAT was
administered. By day 7 post AAT infusion, CRP level had normalized to 4.6 mg/L
and ESR had dropped to 22 mm/h. Limb circumference discrepancy on day 7 was 1
cm. There was no tenderness to palpation or induration, and a clinical remission
of panniculitis was observed. We report the first case, to our knowledge, of
clinical remission following a single treatment with IV AAT at a dose of 120
mg/kg. This opens avenues to more timely and effective treatment of the more
severe presentations of AAT-associated panniculitis.

DOI: 10.1378/chest.15-0699
PMID: 26527439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
