---
reference_id: "PMID:35695271"
title: "Health care resource utilization in the management of patients with Arginase 1 Deficiency in the US: a retrospective, observational, claims database study."
authors:
- Bin Sawad A
- Jackimiec J
- Bechter M
- Hull M
- Yeaw J
- Wang Y
- Diaz GA
journal: J Med Econ
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/13696998.2022.2089517
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Aged
- Arginase
- Delivery of Health Care
- Female
- Health Care Costs
- Humans
- Male
- Medicare
- Patient Acceptance of Health Care
- Retrospective Studies
- United States
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Health care resource utilization in the management of patients with Arginase 1 Deficiency in the US: a retrospective, observational, claims database study.
**Authors:** Bin Sawad A, Jackimiec J, Bechter M, Hull M, Yeaw J, Wang Y, Diaz GA
**Journal:** J Med Econ (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/13696998.2022.2089517](https://doi.org/10.1080/13696998.2022.2089517)

## Content

1. J Med Econ. 2022 Jan-Dec;25(1):848-856. doi: 10.1080/13696998.2022.2089517.

Health care resource utilization in the management of patients with Arginase 1
Deficiency in the US: a retrospective, observational, claims database study.

Bin Sawad A(1), Jackimiec J(1), Bechter M(1), Hull M(2), Yeaw J(2), Wang Y(2),
Diaz GA(3).

Author information:
(1)Aeglea BioTherapeutics Inc, Austin, TX, USA.
(2)IQVIA, Inc, Falls Church, VA, USA.
(3)Division of Medical Genetics and Genomics in the Department of Genetics and
Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Arginase 1 Deficiency (ARG1-D) is an inherited metabolic disease
that leads to significant morbidity.
AIMS: Despite the recognized burden of disease, information on health care
resource utilization (HCRU) among patients with ARG1-D is lacking. We,
therefore, sought to evaluate HCRU in ARG1-D relative to non-ARG1-D cohort.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Patients with ≥2 ICD-10-CM diagnosis codes for ARG1-D
were identified (first diagnosis code = index date) using professional fee
claims linked with prescription claims. Patients with ARG1-D were matched 1:1 to
a comparator cohort of patients with other medical conditions. Matching
variables included age, sex, index year, payer type (Medicare, Medicaid, third
party) and geographic region.
RESULTS: A total of 77 patients met the inclusion criteria for the ARG1-D
cohort, with a median age of 15 years, 52% <18 years, and 52% male. Several
concurrent diagnoses were recorded at a higher frequency in the ARG1-D cohort
versus the matched comparator (spasticity 7 times higher; developmental delay ∼2
times higher; intellectual disability 5 times higher; and seizures 8 times
higher). Emergency room visits occurred twice as often, laboratory tests were
performed 1.5 times more often, hospitalization was required 3 times more often,
and mean length of stay was longer for patients with ARG1-D than the comparator
cohort (2.4 days vs. 0.3 days).
LIMITATIONS: A relatively short study period while the burden of ARG1-D
increases over a lifetime due to disease progression.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with ARG1-D had significantly greater HCRU compared with
those without the disease; they presented with a more extensive comorbidity
profile, accessed the health care system more frequently, required more intense
monitoring and management, and had more frequent and longer hospitalizations
relative to the comparator group. These findings demonstrate a high health
burden in ARG1-D that is not mitigated by standard-of-care measures and
emphasize the need for improved treatment options.

DOI: 10.1080/13696998.2022.2089517
PMID: 35695271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
