---
reference_id: "PMID:40104154"
title: "Evaluation of efficacy and safety of AAV8-ΔC4ATP7B gene therapy in a mutant mouse model of Wilson's disease."
authors:
- Zeng C
- Lin Y
- Lu X
- Chen S
- Xia Y
- Zhang K
- Shao Y
- Guan Z
- Du R
- Liu Z
- Zhao M
- Jiang X
- Cai Y
- Li T
- Su X
- Chen Y
- Dong X
- Zhang W
- Liu L
- Zhou W
journal: Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.omtm.2025.101435
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of efficacy and safety of AAV8-ΔC4ATP7B gene therapy in a mutant mouse model of Wilson's disease.
**Authors:** Zeng C, Lin Y, Lu X, Chen S, Xia Y, Zhang K, Shao Y, Guan Z, Du R, Liu Z, Zhao M, Jiang X, Cai Y, Li T, Su X, Chen Y, Dong X, Zhang W, Liu L, Zhou W
**Journal:** Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.omtm.2025.101435](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omtm.2025.101435)

## Content

1. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2025 Feb 13;33(1):101435. doi: 
10.1016/j.omtm.2025.101435. eCollection 2025 Mar 13.

Evaluation of efficacy and safety of AAV8-ΔC4ATP7B gene therapy in a mutant 
mouse model of Wilson's disease.

Zeng C(1), Lin Y(1), Lu X(1), Chen S(1)(2), Xia Y(3), Zhang K(1), Shao Y(1), 
Guan Z(1), Du R(1), Liu Z(1), Zhao M(4), Jiang X(5), Cai Y(1), Li T(1), Su X(1), 
Chen Y(2), Dong X(3), Zhang W(1), Liu L(1), Zhou W(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Endocrinology, Guangzhou Women and Children's 
Medical Center, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangdong Provincial Clinical 
Research Center for Child Health, Guangzhou 510623, China.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical 
University, Guangzhou 510150, China.
(3)GeneCradle Therapeutics, Beijing 100176, China.
(4)Center Laboratory, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical Center, Guangzhou 
Medical University, Guangdong Provincial Clinical Research Center for Child 
Health, Guangzhou 510623, China.
(5)Children's Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, National 
Clinical Research Center for Child Health, Hangzhou 310000, China.
(6)Division of Neonatology and Center for Newborn Care, Guangzhou Women and 
Children's Medical Center, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangdong Provincial 
Clinical Research Center for Child Health, Guangzhou 510623, China.

Wilson's disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by pathogenic 
variants in the ATP7B gene, resulting in the toxic accumulation of copper (Cu). 
Impaired Cu homeostasis in WD is characterized by low serum ceruloplasmin, 
excess hepatic Cu, and elevated urinary Cu. WD often presents with hepatic 
and/or neurological diseases and is fatal if untreated. Adeno-associated virus 
(AAV)-mediated gene therapy holds promise for WD, but challenges remain in 
efficacy and safety. Here, we established an Atp7b R780L knockin (KI) mouse 
model corresponding to the human ATP7B R778L variant and investigated the 
therapeutic efficacy and safety of liver-targeted AAV8-mediated ATP7B 
(AAV8-ΔC4ATP7B) gene therapy in this model. The results demonstrated the Atp7b 
KI/KI mice recapitulated key features of impaired Cu metabolism in WD but had 
mild liver disease. Ten-week-old Atp7b KI/KI mice received a single-dose of 
AAV8-ΔC4ATP7B and were sacrificed at 8 or 30 weeks after treatment. Treated 
Atp7b KI/KI mice showed normalization of serum ceruloplasmin, reduced hepatic 
Cu, decreased urinary Cu, and reversed liver histopathology. Serum transaminases 
had a transient increase at 8 weeks after treatment but returned to normal at 
30 weeks after treatment. These data provide evidence for the efficacy and 
safety of AAV8-ΔC4ATP7B in animals, supporting clinical translation to patients 
with WD.

© 2025 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtm.2025.101435
PMCID: PMC11919453
PMID: 40104154

Conflict of interest statement: X.D. is a co-inventor of a patent entitled “AAV 
Vector Carrying ATP7B Gene Expression Frame and Variants and Its Application” 
(patent publication no. CN111088285B) and a co-founder of GeneCradle 
Therapeutics. Y.X. is an employee of GeneCradle Therapeutics. The drug 
structures used in this article have been authorized by the inventors and do not 
involve patent infringement issues.