---
reference_id: "PMID:7038074"
title: Virologic features of chronic hepatitis B virus infection in childhood.
authors:
- Trevisan A
- Cadrobbi P
- Crivellaro C
- Bortolotti F
- Rugge M
- Realdi G
journal: J Pediatr
year: '1982'
doi: 10.1016/s0022-3476(82)80431-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Virologic features of chronic hepatitis B virus infection in childhood.
**Authors:** Trevisan A, Cadrobbi P, Crivellaro C, Bortolotti F, Rugge M, Realdi G
**Journal:** J Pediatr (1982)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0022-3476(82)80431-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022-3476(82)80431-9)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 1982 Mar;100(3):366-72. doi: 10.1016/s0022-3476(82)80431-9.

Virologic features of chronic hepatitis B virus infection in childhood.

Trevisan A, Cadrobbi P, Crivellaro C, Bortolotti F, Rugge M, Realdi G.

Hepatitis B virus markers were studied in serum and liver of 24 children with 
chronic hepatitis. All patients had evidence of active virus replication, as 
shown by hepatitis B core antigen in the liver cell nuclei, independently of the 
severity of histologic lesions. Furthermore, 19 of 24 patients had hepatitis B e 
antigen in serum, and most patients showed a diffuse pattern of HBcAg 
distribution in the liver. In all 24 children, the presence of immunoglobin G 
bound to the liver cell surface paralleled the activity of virus replication, 
but it did not correlate with the severity of liver lesions. During a follow-up 
period of two to four years, the virus replication persisted in all eight 
patients receiving immunosuppressive therapy, whereas in 5 of 16 untreated 
patients we observed a seroconversion to antibody to HBeAg, which is currently 
regarded as a favorable event for the prognosis of the disease.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-3476(82)80431-9
PMID: 7038074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]