---
reference_id: "PMID:37216008"
title: A complex structural variant near SOX3 causes X-linked split-hand/foot malformation.
authors:
- de Boer E
- Marcelis C
- Neveling K
- van Beusekom E
- Hoischen A
- Klein WM
- de Leeuw N
- Mantere T
- Melo US
- van Reeuwijk J
- Smeets D
- Spielmann M
- Kleefstra T
- van Bokhoven H
- Vissers LELM
journal: HGG Adv
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2023.100200
keywords:
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Genetic Loci
- SOXB1 Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A complex structural variant near SOX3 causes X-linked split-hand/foot malformation.
**Authors:** de Boer E, Marcelis C, Neveling K, van Beusekom E, Hoischen A, Klein WM, de Leeuw N, Mantere T, Melo US, van Reeuwijk J, Smeets D, Spielmann M, Kleefstra T, van Bokhoven H, Vissers LELM
**Journal:** HGG Adv (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.xhgg.2023.100200](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xhgg.2023.100200)

## Content

1. HGG Adv. 2023 Apr 25;4(3):100200. doi: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2023.100200. eCollection
 2023 Jul 13.

A complex structural variant near SOX3 causes X-linked split-hand/foot 
malformation.

de Boer E(1)(2), Marcelis C(1), Neveling K(1)(2), van Beusekom E(1), Hoischen 
A(1)(3)(4), Klein WM(5), de Leeuw N(1), Mantere T(1)(6), Melo US(7)(8), van 
Reeuwijk J(1)(2), Smeets D(1), Spielmann M(7)(9)(10), Kleefstra T(1)(2)(11), van 
Bokhoven H(1)(2)(12), Vissers LELM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboudumc University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 
the Netherlands.
(2)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine and Radboud Center for Infectious Diseases, 
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(4)Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical 
Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Medical Imaging, Radiology, Radboud University Medical Center, 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(6)Laboratory of Cancer Genetics and Tumor Biology, Cancer and Translational 
Medicine Research Unit and Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.
(7)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, RG Development & Disease, 
Berlin, Germany.
(8)Institute for Medical and Human Genetics, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
Berlin, Germany.
(9)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospitals Schleswig-Holstein, 
University of Lübeck and Kiel University, 23562 Lübeck, Kiel, Germany.
(10)DZHK (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), Partner Site 
Hamburg/Lübeck/Kiel, Lübeck, Germany.
(11)Center of Excellence for Neuropsychiatry, Vincent van Gogh Institute for 
Psychiatry, Venray, the Netherlands.
(12)Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.

Split-hand/foot malformation (SHFM) is a congenital limb defect most typically 
presenting with median clefts in hands and/or feet, that can occur in a 
syndromic context as well as in isolated form. SHFM is caused by failure to 
maintain normal apical ectodermal ridge function during limb development. 
Although several genes and contiguous gene syndromes are implicated in the 
monogenic etiology of isolated SHFM, the disorder remains genetically 
unexplained for many families and associated genetic loci. We describe a family 
with isolated X-linked SHFM, for which the causative variant could be detected 
after a diagnostic journey of 20 years. We combined well-established approaches 
including microarray-based copy number variant analysis and fluorescence in situ 
hybridization coupled with optical genome mapping and whole genome sequencing. 
This strategy identified a complex structural variant (SV) comprising a 165-kb 
gain of 15q26.3 material ([GRCh37/hg19] chr15:99795320-99960362dup) inserted in 
inverted position at the site of a 38-kb deletion on Xq27.1 ([GRCh37/hg19] 
chrX:139481061-139518989del). In silico analysis suggested that the SV disrupts 
the regulatory framework on the X chromosome and may lead to SOX3 misexpression. 
We hypothesize that SOX3 dysregulation in the developing limb disturbed the fine 
balance between morphogens required for maintaining AER function, resulting in 
SHFM in this family.

© 2023 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2023.100200
PMCID: PMC10196709
PMID: 37216008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.