---
reference_id: "PMID:38767544"
title: "Cutaneous vasculitis: insights into pathogenesis and histopathological features."
authors:
- Cassisa A
- Cima L
journal: Pathologica
year: '2024'
doi: 10.32074/1591-951X-985
keywords:
- Humans
- "Vasculitis/pathology, etiology"
- "Skin/pathology, blood supply"
- Neutrophils/pathology
- "Lymphocytes/pathology, immunology"
- "Skin Diseases, Vascular/pathology, immunology, etiology, diagnosis"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cutaneous vasculitis: insights into pathogenesis and histopathological features.
**Authors:** Cassisa A, Cima L
**Journal:** Pathologica (2024)
**DOI:** [10.32074/1591-951X-985](https://doi.org/10.32074/1591-951X-985)

## Content

1. Pathologica. 2024 Apr;116(2):119-133. doi: 10.32074/1591-951X-985.

Cutaneous vasculitis: insights into pathogenesis and histopathological features.

Cassisa A(1), Cima L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Section of Pathology, San Giovanni di Dio Hospital,
USL Centro Toscana, Florence, Italy.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Pathology Unit, Santa Chiara Hospital,
Trento, Italy.

The mechanisms underlying the onset and progression of vasculitis remain poorly
understood. This condition is characterized by damage to the vascular wall,
recruitment of inflammatory cells, and subsequent structural remodeling, which
are hallmarks of vasculitis. The histopathological classification of vasculitis
relies on the size of the affected vessel and the predominant type of
inflammatory cell involved - neutrophils in acute cases, lymphocytes in chronic
conditions, and histiocytes in granulomatous forms. Pathological changes
progress in every context, and a single vasculitic pattern can be associated
with various systemic conditions. Conversely, a single causative agent may lead
to multiple distinct clinical and pathological manifestations of vasculitis.
Moreover, many cases of vasculitis have no identifiable cause. A foundational
understanding of the normal structure of the cutaneous vascular network is
crucial. Similarly, identifying the cellular and molecular participants and
their roles in forming the "dermal microvascular unit" is propedeutical. This
review aims to elucidate the complex mechanisms involved in the initiation and
progression of vasculitis, offering a comprehensive overview of its
histopathological classification, underlying causes, and the significant role of
the cutaneous vascular network and cellular dynamics. By integrating the latest
insights from studies on NETosis and the implications of lymphocytic
infiltration in autoimmune diseases, we seek to bridge gaps in current knowledge
and highlight areas for future research. Our discussion extends to the clinical
implications of vasculitis, emphasizing the importance of identifying
etiological agents and understanding the diverse histopathological
manifestations to improve diagnostic accuracy and treatment outcomes.

Copyright © 2024 Società Italiana di Anatomia Patologica e Citopatologia
Diagnostica, Divisione Italiana della International Academy of Pathology.

DOI: 10.32074/1591-951X-985
PMCID: PMC11138767
PMID: 38767544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Date: 19/02/2024
