---
reference_id: "PMID:37612758"
title: "Long-term follow-up in a pediatric patient with Ligneous Conjunctivitis due to PLG gene mutation in topical plasminogen treatment after successful use of ocular prosthesis for aesthetic rehabilitation: a case report."
authors:
- Panfili FM
- Valente P
- Ficari A
- Cortellessa F
- Vecchio D
- Gonfiantini MV
- Buonuomo PS
- Colafati GS
- Agolini E
- Bartuli M
- Modugno AC
- Macchiaiolo M
journal: Ital J Pediatr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13052-023-01503-x
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Plasminogen/deficiency
- Female
- Mutation
- Esthetics
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- "Eye, Artificial"
- Conjunctivitis
- "Skin Diseases, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term follow-up in a pediatric patient with Ligneous Conjunctivitis due to PLG gene mutation in topical plasminogen treatment after successful use of ocular prosthesis for aesthetic rehabilitation: a case report.
**Authors:** Panfili FM, Valente P, Ficari A, Cortellessa F, Vecchio D, Gonfiantini MV, Buonuomo PS, Colafati GS, Agolini E, Bartuli M, Modugno AC, Macchiaiolo M
**Journal:** Ital J Pediatr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13052-023-01503-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13052-023-01503-x)

## Content

1. Ital J Pediatr. 2023 Aug 23;49(1):101. doi: 10.1186/s13052-023-01503-x.

Long-term follow-up in a pediatric patient with Ligneous Conjunctivitis due to 
PLG gene mutation in topical plasminogen treatment after successful use of 
ocular prosthesis for aesthetic rehabilitation: a case report.

Panfili FM(1)(2), Valente P(3), Ficari A(1), Cortellessa F(2), Vecchio D(2), 
Gonfiantini MV(2), Buonuomo PS(2), Colafati GS(4), Agolini E(5), Bartuli M(6), 
Modugno AC(7), Macchiaiolo M(8).

Author information:
(1)Academic Department of Pediatrics, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, 
Rome, Italy.
(2)Rare Diseases and Medical Genetics Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, 
IRCCS, Pediatric Department, Piazza Di Sant'Onofrio, 4, 00165, Rome, Italy.
(3)Ophthalmology Department, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS Pediatric 
Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Imaging, Neuroradiology Unit, IRCCS Bambino Gesù Children's 
Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(5)Laboratory of Medical Genetics Translational Cytogenomics Research Unit, 
Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(6)University of Rome "La Sapienza", Rome, Italy.
(7)Ocularistica Italiana, Rome, Italy.
(8)Rare Diseases and Medical Genetics Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, 
IRCCS, Pediatric Department, Piazza Di Sant'Onofrio, 4, 00165, Rome, Italy. 
marina.macchiaiolo@opbg.net.

BACKGROUND: Ligneous Conjunctivitis (LC) is the most common clinical 
manifestation of Type I Plasminogen deficiency (T1PD; OMIM# 217090), and it is 
characterized by the formation of pseudomembranes (due to deposition of fibrin) 
on the conjunctivae leading to progressive vision loss. In past times, patients 
with LC were treated with surgery, topical anti-inflammatory, cytostatic agents, 
and systemic immunosuppressive drugs with limited results (Blood 108:3021-3026, 
2006, Ophthalmology 129:955-957, 2022, Surv Ophthalmol 48:369-388, 2003, Blood 
131:1301-1310, 2018). The surgery can also trigger the development of membranes, 
as observed in patients needing ocular prosthesis (Surv Ophthalmol 48:369-388, 
2003). Treatment with topical purified plasminogen is used to prevent 
pseudomembranes formation (Blood 108:3021-3026, 2006, Ophthalmology 129:955-957, 
2022).
CASE PRESENTATION: We present the case of a sixteen-year-old girl with LC with 
severe left eye involvement. We reported the clinical conditions of the patient 
before and after the use of topical plasminogen eye drops and described the 
treatment schedule allowing the surgical procedure for the pseudomembranes 
debulking and the subsequent use of ocular prosthesis for aesthetic 
rehabilitation.
CONCLUSIONS: The patient showed a progressive response to the topical 
plasminogen, with a complete absence of pseudomembrane formation at a 
twelve-year follow-up, despite using an ocular prosthesis.

© 2023. Società Italiana di Pediatria.

DOI: 10.1186/s13052-023-01503-x
PMCID: PMC10463973
PMID: 37612758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests.