---
reference_id: "PMID:14631097"
title: Absence of GABRA1 Ala322Asp mutation in juvenile myoclonic epilepsy families from India.
authors:
- Kapoor A
- Vijai J
- Ravishankar HM
- Satishchandra P
- Radhakrishnan K
- Anand A
journal: J Genet
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1007/BF02715876
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Absence of GABRA1 Ala322Asp mutation in juvenile myoclonic epilepsy families from India.
**Authors:** Kapoor A, Vijai J, Ravishankar HM, Satishchandra P, Radhakrishnan K, Anand A
**Journal:** J Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF02715876](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02715876)

## Content

1. J Genet. 2003 Apr-Aug;82(1-2):17-21. doi: 10.1007/BF02715876.

Absence of GABRA1 Ala322Asp mutation in juvenile myoclonic epilepsy families 
from India.

Kapoor A(1), Vijai J, Ravishankar HM, Satishchandra P, Radhakrishnan K, Anand A.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology and Genetics Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced 
Scientific Research, Jakkur, Bangalore 560 064, India. anand@jncasr.ac.in

An Ala322Asp mutation in the GABRA1 gene was recently reported to be responsible 
for causing the autosomal dominant (AD) form of juvenile myoclonic epilepsy 
(JME) in a French-Canadian family. To study if JME families from India 
exhibiting the AD mode of inheritance carry the Ala322Asp mutation, we examined 
35 unrelated JME-affected individuals from such families for the Ala322Asp 
mutation in GABRA1. Ala322Asp mutation was not observed in any of these 
JME-affected individuals, suggesting that this mutation is unlikely to be a 
predominant mutation involved in causation of epilepsy. To evaluate the 
possibility of other mutation(s) in and around GABRA1 that may predispose to 
JME, we compared the allele frequencies at two marker loci, D5S2118 and D5S422, 
flanking GABRA1, in probands and 100 matched population controls. One of the 
allele frequencies at D5S422 shows a significant difference between the cases 
and controls (chi-square = 11.44, d.f. = 1, P = 0.0007), suggesting genetic 
association between JME and genes located in the proximity of the DNA marker.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02715876
PMID: 14631097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]