---
reference_id: "PMID:32751922"
title: Molecular Biology of Osteosarcoma.
authors:
- Czarnecka AM
- Synoradzki K
- Firlej W
- Bartnik E
- Sobczuk P
- Fiedorowicz M
- Grieb P
- Rutkowski P
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3390/cancers12082130
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular Biology of Osteosarcoma.
**Authors:** Czarnecka AM, Synoradzki K, Firlej W, Bartnik E, Sobczuk P, Fiedorowicz M, Grieb P, Rutkowski P
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers12082130](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers12082130)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2020 Jul 31;12(8):2130. doi: 10.3390/cancers12082130.

Molecular Biology of Osteosarcoma.

Czarnecka AM(1)(2), Synoradzki K(1), Firlej W(2)(3), Bartnik E(4)(5), Sobczuk
P(2)(6), Fiedorowicz M(7)(8), Grieb P(1), Rutkowski P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Pharmacology, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre,
Polish Academy of Sciences, 02-106 Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Department of Soft Tissue/Bone Sarcoma and Melanoma, Maria Sklodowska-Curie
Institute-Oncology Centre, 02-781 Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Medical University of Warsaw, 02-091 Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Institute of Genetics and Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, University of
Warsaw, 02-106 Warsaw, Poland.
(5)Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, 02-106
Warsaw, Poland.
(6)Department of Experimental and Clinical Physiology, Laboratory of Centre for
Preclinical Research, Medical University of Warsaw, 02-097 Warsaw, Poland.
(7)Small Animal Magnetic Resonance Imaging Laboratory, Mossakowski Medical
Research Centre, Polish Academy of Sciences, 02-106 Warsaw, Poland.
(8)Interinstitute Laboratory of New Diagnostic Applications of MRI, Nalecz
Institute of Biocybernetics and Biomedical Engineering, Polish Academy of
Sciences, 02-109 Warsaw, Poland.

Osteosarcoma (OS) is the most frequent primary bone cancer in children and
adolescents and the third most frequent in adults. Many inherited germline
mutations are responsible for syndromes that predispose to osteosarcomas
including Li Fraumeni syndrome, retinoblastoma syndrome, Werner syndrome, Bloom
syndrome or Diamond-Blackfan anemia. TP53 is the most frequently altered gene in
osteosarcoma. Among other genes mutated in more than 10% of OS cases, c-Myc
plays a role in OS development and promotes cell invasion by activating MEK-ERK
pathways. Several genomic studies showed frequent alterations in the RB gene in
pediatric OS patients. Osteosarcoma driver mutations have been reported in
NOTCH1, FOS, NF2, WIF1, BRCA2, APC, PTCH1 and PRKAR1A genes. Some miRNAs such as
miR-21, -34a, -143, -148a, -195a, -199a-3p and -382 regulate the pathogenic
activity of MAPK and PI3K/Akt-signaling pathways in osteosarcoma. CD133+
osteosarcoma cells have been shown to exhibit stem-like gene expression and can
be tumor-initiating cells and play a role in metastasis and development of drug
resistance. Although currently osteosarcoma treatment is based on adriamycin
chemoregimens and surgery, there are several potential targeted therapies in
development. First of all, activity and safety of cabozantinib in osteosarcoma
were studied, as well as sorafenib and pazopanib. Finally, novel bifunctional
molecules, of potential imaging and osteosarcoma targeting applications may be
used in the future.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers12082130
PMCID: PMC7463657
PMID: 32751922

Conflict of interest statement: A.M.C. has received travel grants, payment for
lectures and consulting fees from BMS, MSD, Roche and Novartis. P.S. has
received travel grants from MSD, BMS, Roche and Pierre Fabre. P.R. has received
honoraria for lectures from Novartis, Roche, Pfizer, BMS, Eli Lilly and MSD and
is a member of the advisory boards of Novartis, Merck, Amgen, Blueprint
Medicine, Roche, BMS and MSD. Other authors declare no conflicts of interest.
