---
reference_id: "PMID:7553856"
title: Mutation in the follicle-stimulating hormone receptor gene causes hereditary hypergonadotropic ovarian failure.
authors:
- Aittomäki K
- Lucena JL
- Pakarinen P
- Sistonen P
- Tapanainen J
- Gromoll J
- Kaskikari R
- Sankila EM
- Lehväslaiho H
- Engel AR
- Nieschlag E
- Huhtaniemi I
- de la Chapelle A
journal: Cell
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(95)90275-9
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- "Cells, Cultured/physiology"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 2"
- Electrophoresis
- Family Health
- Female
- Genetic Linkage
- Genetic Testing
- Haplotypes/genetics
- Humans
- Incidence
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/physiology
- Pedigree
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- "Primary Ovarian Insufficiency/epidemiology, etiology, genetics"
- "Receptors, FSH/genetics"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation in the follicle-stimulating hormone receptor gene causes hereditary hypergonadotropic ovarian failure.
**Authors:** Aittomäki K, Lucena JL, Pakarinen P, Sistonen P, Tapanainen J, Gromoll J, Kaskikari R, Sankila EM, Lehväslaiho H, Engel AR, Nieschlag E, Huhtaniemi I, de la Chapelle A
**Journal:** Cell (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0092-8674(95)90275-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/0092-8674(95)90275-9)

## Content

1. Cell. 1995 Sep 22;82(6):959-68. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(95)90275-9.

Mutation in the follicle-stimulating hormone receptor gene causes hereditary
hypergonadotropic ovarian failure.

Aittomäki K(1), Lucena JL, Pakarinen P, Sistonen P, Tapanainen J, Gromoll J,
Kaskikari R, Sankila EM, Lehväslaiho H, Engel AR, Nieschlag E, Huhtaniemi I, de
la Chapelle A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Finland.

Hypergonadotropic ovarian dysgenesis (ODG) with normal karyotype is a
heterogeneous condition that in some cases displays Mendelian recessive
inheritance. By systematically searching for linkage in multiplex affected
families, we mapped a locus for ODG to chromosome 2p. As the previously cloned
follicle-stimulating hormone receptor (FSHR) gene had been assigned to 2p, we
searched it for mutations. A C566T transition in exon 7 of FSHR predicting an
Ala to Val substitution at residue 189 in the extracellular ligand-binding
domain segregated perfectly with the disease phenotype. Expression of the gene
in transfected cells demonstrated a dramatic reduction of binding capacity and
signal transduction, but apparently normal ligand-binding affinity of the
mutated receptor. We conclude that the mutation causes ODG in these families.

DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(95)90275-9
PMID: 7553856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
