---
reference_id: "PMID:38335423"
title: "Primary clostridium difficile infection in patients with ulcerative colitis: Case report and literature review."
authors:
- Gao X
- Zhou H
- Hu Z
- Wang Q
- Chen Y
- Zh F
- Zhou G
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000036693
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary clostridium difficile infection in patients with ulcerative colitis: Case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Gao X, Zhou H, Hu Z, Wang Q, Chen Y, Zh F, Zhou G
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000036693](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000036693)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2024 Feb 9;103(6):e36693. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000036693.

Primary clostridium difficile infection in patients with ulcerative colitis: 
Case report and literature review.

Gao X(1), Zhou H(2), Hu Z(2), Wang Q(3), Chen Y(2), Zh F(2), Zhou G(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, Jining Medical University, Jining, Shandong, 
P.R. China.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Affiliated Hospital of Jining Medical 
University, Jining Medical University, Jining, Shandong, P.R. China.
(3)Pathology Department, Affiliated Hospital of Jining Medical University, 
Jining Medical University, Jining, Shandong, P.R. China.

RATIONALE: Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), including Crohn disease (CD) and 
ulcerative colitis (UC), is a chronic immune-mediated disorder characterized by 
inflammation of the gastrointestinal tract. Patients with IBD are susceptible to 
various complications, including the coexistence of Clostridioides difficile 
infection (CDI). The incidence of IBD combined with difficile infection is 
higher in patients with compromised immune function, which can lead to increased 
mortality.
PATIENT CONCERNS: A 43-year-old male presented with recurrent episodes of mucus 
and bloody stools persisting for more than a month without any identifiable 
triggering factors. Initially, the stool consistency was normal, but it 
progressively shifted to a loose and watery texture, with up to 8 occurrences 
daily.
DIAGNOSES: This case underscores the diagnosis of severe UC through colonoscopy 
and colonic biopsy, along with the supplementary identification of a positive 
result for Clostridioides difficile in the fecal sample.
INTERVENTIONS: The patient initiated infliximab therapy alongside a full 
vancomycin course, demonstrating the potential effectiveness of this 
intervention in managing early-stage ulcerative colitis with concurrent 
Clostridioides difficile infection.
OUTCOMES: Following the completion of a full vancomycin course, the patient 
initiated infliximab therapy. The patient was free from significant discomfort, 
exhibited no fever, and had no mucopurulent bloody stools. A follow-up blood 
test indicated reduced inflammatory markers compared to the preoperative period, 
and the stools were normal.
LESSONS: We illustrate the potential effectiveness of this medication by 
presenting an in-depth case report of a patient with early-stage UC. The report 
outlines the patient inclusion of infliximab to better manage UC inflammation 
alongside an adjunct vancomycin regimen, given the ineffectiveness of mesalazine 
therapy and the concurrent presence of Clostridium difficile infection. This 
case prompts consideration of therapeutic approaches for complex UC and 
contributes to advancing both research and clinical practice. Nonetheless, we 
should remain attentive to the variations and potential risks unique to each 
patient in order to formulate personalized treatment strategies.

Copyright © 2024 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000036693
PMCID: PMC10861005
PMID: 38335423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.