---
reference_id: "PMID:40701343"
title: ARRDC3 promotes lysosome-mediated YAP degradation to inhibit enterovirus replication.
authors:
- Huang X
- Wang S
- Huang Y
- Wang Y
- Zang G
- Liang Y
- Liu J
- Han X
- Liao J
- Chen T
- Lu N
- Zhang G
journal: Virol Sin
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.virs.2025.07.009
keywords:
- Virus Replication
- Humans
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- YAP-Signaling Proteins
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/metabolism, genetics"
- "Transcription Factors/metabolism, genetics"
- "Enterovirus A, Human/physiology"
- Enterovirus/physiology
- Host-Pathogen Interactions
- "Immunity, Innate"
- "Parainfluenza Virus 3, Human/physiology"
- Enterovirus Infections/virology
- Cell Line
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ARRDC3 promotes lysosome-mediated YAP degradation to inhibit enterovirus replication.
**Authors:** Huang X, Wang S, Huang Y, Wang Y, Zang G, Liang Y, Liu J, Han X, Liao J, Chen T, Lu N, Zhang G
**Journal:** Virol Sin (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.virs.2025.07.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.virs.2025.07.009)

## Content

1. Virol Sin. 2025 Aug;40(4):658-668. doi: 10.1016/j.virs.2025.07.009. Epub 2025
Jul 21.

ARRDC3 promotes lysosome-mediated YAP degradation to inhibit enterovirus
replication.

Huang X(1), Wang S(2), Huang Y(1), Wang Y(1), Zang G(1), Liang Y(1), Liu J(1),
Han X(1), Liao J(1), Chen T(3), Lu N(4), Zhang G(5).

Author information:
(1)Pathogen Biology and Immunology Laboratory, Lab Teaching & Management Center,
School of Basic Medical Sciences, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing,
400016, China.
(2)Department of Thyroid, Breast and Vascular Surgery, Xi Jing Hospital, Air
Force Medical University, Xi'an, 710032, China.
(3)Pathogen Biology and Immunology Laboratory, Lab Teaching & Management Center,
School of Basic Medical Sciences, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing,
400016, China. Electronic address: cherrychen@cqmu.edu.cn.
(4)Pathogen Biology and Immunology Laboratory, Lab Teaching & Management Center,
School of Basic Medical Sciences, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing,
400016, China. Electronic address: ficus@cqmu.edu.cn.
(5)Pathogen Biology and Immunology Laboratory, Lab Teaching & Management Center,
School of Basic Medical Sciences, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing,
400016, China. Electronic address: sanqinyouthzhang@126.com.

Enterovirus D68 (EV-D68) and enterovirus A71 (EV-A71) are two major types of
enteroviruses that pose emerging challenges to public health and have the
potential to cause outbreaks, yet their pathogenic mechanisms remain largely
unexplored. Arrestin domain containing 3 (ARRDC3) is a vital regulator of
glucose metabolism, cancer development, and inflammation. Whether ARRDC3
contributes to innate antiviral immunity is undefined. Here, we found that
enterovirus infection induces ARRDC3 expression at both the mRNA and protein
levels, thereby inhibiting enterovirus replication. Moreover, we demonstrate
that the expression of Yes-associated protein (YAP), a key effector of the Hippo
pathway, is severely downregulated by ARRDC3 via lysosomal pathway. YAP
facilitates enterovirus replication by suppressing the interferon pathway during
the later stage of enterovirus infection, independent of its transcriptional
activity. Finally, the ARRDC3-YAP pathway exhibits a broad-spectrum antiviral
effect in various viral infections, including those caused by human
parainfluenza virus type 3 (HPIV3) and vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV).
Collectively, our results identify the critical role of ARRDC3 and its negative
regulatory effect on YAP in the innate antiviral response, suggesting a novel
therapeutic strategy against virus infection.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.virs.2025.07.009
PMCID: PMC12414368
PMID: 40701343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare that
there is no conflict of interest in this work.
