---
reference_id: "PMID:31302855"
title: Survival after bilateral risk-reducing mastectomy in healthy BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers.
authors:
- Heemskerk-Gerritsen BAM
- Jager A
- Koppert LB
- Obdeijn AI
- Collée M
- Meijers-Heijboer HEJ
- Jenner DJ
- Oldenburg HSA
- van Engelen K
- de Vries J
- van Asperen CJ
- Devilee P
- Blok MJ
- Kets CM
- Ausems MGEM
- Seynaeve C
- Rookus MA
- Hooning MJ
journal: Breast Cancer Res Treat
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s10549-019-05345-2
keywords:
- BRCA1 Protein/genetics
- BRCA2 Protein/genetics
- "Breast Neoplasms/etiology, mortality, prevention & control, surgery"
- Female
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Mortality
- Mutation
- Netherlands/epidemiology
- Prognosis
- Prophylactic Mastectomy/methods
- Public Health Surveillance
- Risk Reduction Behavior
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Survival after bilateral risk-reducing mastectomy in healthy BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers.
**Authors:** Heemskerk-Gerritsen BAM, Jager A, Koppert LB, Obdeijn AI, Collée M, Meijers-Heijboer HEJ, Jenner DJ, Oldenburg HSA, van Engelen K, de Vries J, van Asperen CJ, Devilee P, Blok MJ, Kets CM, Ausems MGEM, Seynaeve C, Rookus MA, Hooning MJ
**Journal:** Breast Cancer Res Treat (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10549-019-05345-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10549-019-05345-2)

## Content

1. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2019 Oct;177(3):723-733. doi:
10.1007/s10549-019-05345-2. Epub 2019 Jul 13.

Survival after bilateral risk-reducing mastectomy in healthy BRCA1 and BRCA2
mutation carriers.

Heemskerk-Gerritsen BAM(1), Jager A(2), Koppert LB(3), Obdeijn AI(4), Collée
M(5), Meijers-Heijboer HEJ(6), Jenner DJ(7), Oldenburg HSA(8), van Engelen K(9),
de Vries J(10), van Asperen CJ(11), Devilee P(12), Blok MJ(13), Kets CM(14),
Ausems MGEM(15), Seynaeve C(2), Rookus MA(7), Hooning MJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, PO Box 5201,
3008 AE, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. b.heemskerk-gerritsen@erasmusmc.nl.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, PO Box 5201,
3008 AE, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Surgery, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Radiology, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.
(5)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.
(6)Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(7)Department of Epidemiology, Netherlands Cancer Institute-Antoni van
Leeuwenhoek Hospital, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Surgery, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(9)Department of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(10)Department of Surgery, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands.
(11)Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
The Netherlands.
(12)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.
(13)Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Center,
Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(14)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands.
(15)Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Fam Cancer. 2019 Oct;18(4):377-379. doi: 10.1007/s10689-019-00142-8.
    Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2020 Jan;179(1):251-252. doi:
10.1007/s10549-019-05440-4.

BACKGROUND: In healthy BRCA1/2 mutation carriers, bilateral risk-reducing
mastectomy (BRRM) strongly reduces the risk of developing breast cancer (BC);
however, no clear survival benefit of BRRM over BC surveillance has been
reported yet.
METHODS: In this Dutch multicenter cohort study, we used multivariable Cox
models with BRRM as a time-dependent covariable to estimate the associations
between BRRM and the overall and BC-specific mortality rates, separately for
BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers.
RESULTS: During a mean follow-up of 10.3 years, 722 out of 1712 BRCA1 (42%) and
406 out of 1145 BRCA2 (35%) mutation carriers underwent BRRM. For BRCA1 mutation
carriers, we observed 52 deaths (20 from BC) in the surveillance group, and 10
deaths (one from BC) after BRRM. The hazard ratios were 0.40 (95% CI 0.20-0.90)
for overall mortality and 0.06 (95% CI 0.01-0.46) for BC-specific mortality.
BC-specific survival at age 65 was 93% for surveillance and 99.7% for BRRM. For
BRCA2 mutation carriers, we observed 29 deaths (7 from BC) in the surveillance
group, and 4 deaths (no BC) after BRRM. The hazard ratio for overall mortality
was 0.45 (95% CI 0.15-1.36). BC-specific survival at age 65 was 98% for
surveillance and 100% for BRRM.
CONCLUSION: BRRM was associated with lower mortality than surveillance for BRCA1
mutation carriers, but for BRCA2 mutation carriers, BRRM may lead to similar
BC-specific survival as surveillance. Our findings support a more individualized
counseling based on BRCA mutation type.

DOI: 10.1007/s10549-019-05345-2
PMCID: PMC6745043
PMID: 31302855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest.
