---
reference_id: "PMID:17786116"
title: "Midline defects in deletion 18p syndrome: clinical and molecular characterization of three patients."
authors:
- Portnoï MF
- Gruchy N
- Marlin S
- Finkel L
- Denoyelle F
- Dubourg C
- Odent S
- Siffroi JP
- Le Bouc Y
- Houang M
journal: Clin Dysmorphol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1097/MCD.0b013e328235a572
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Adult
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 18/genetics"
- Female
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Infant
- Karyotyping
- Male
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Midline defects in deletion 18p syndrome: clinical and molecular characterization of three patients.
**Authors:** Portnoï MF, Gruchy N, Marlin S, Finkel L, Denoyelle F, Dubourg C, Odent S, Siffroi JP, Le Bouc Y, Houang M
**Journal:** Clin Dysmorphol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MCD.0b013e328235a572](https://doi.org/10.1097/MCD.0b013e328235a572)

## Content

1. Clin Dysmorphol. 2007 Oct;16(4):247-52. doi: 10.1097/MCD.0b013e328235a572.

Midline defects in deletion 18p syndrome: clinical and molecular 
characterization of three patients.

Portnoï MF(1), Gruchy N, Marlin S, Finkel L, Denoyelle F, Dubourg C, Odent S, 
Siffroi JP, Le Bouc Y, Houang M.

Author information:
(1)Cytogenetics Laboratory, AP-HP, Saint-Antoine's Hospital, Pierre and Marie 
Curie University, Paris, France. marie-france.portnoi@sat.aphp.fr

The phenotype of monosomy 18p varies widely, the main clinical manifestations 
being mental and growth retardation, and craniofacial dysmorphism. Clinical 
features also include growth hormone (GH) deficiency, or holoprosencephaly 
(HPE). Haploinsufficiency for TGIF, mapped to 18p11.3, is not generally 
sufficient to cause HPE. To perform a genotype-phenotype correlation, and 
delineate the region involved in GH deficiency, we carried out a molecular 
characterization of the 18p deletions, in three patients with midline defects. 
Two unrelated children, a 7-month-old girl and a 2-month-old boy had del(18p) 
syndrome and GH deficiency. In addition, the boy had HPE. HPE genes, SHH, ZIC2, 
SIX3, and TGIF, were tested by denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography 
and quantitative multiplex of PCR short fluorescent fragments analyses. A 
deletion of TGIF was confirmed, without any associated mutation for the tested 
HPE genes, suggesting the role of other genetic or environmental factors. The 
third patient was his moderately retarded mother. A set of chromosome 
18p-specific BACs clones was used as fluorescence in-situ hybridization probes 
to define the breakpoints. Recently, it was found that there seem to be a 
breakpoint cluster in the centromeric region at 18p11.1, which was not observed 
in our patients. The girl was found to have a deletion of 10.3 Mb, with a 
breakpoint in 18p11.22. The boy and his mother had a smaller deletion (8 Mb), 
with a breakpoint in 18p11.23. These findings suggest that the distal region on 
18p is involved in the main clinical features, and GH deficiency, in 18p 
deletions.

DOI: 10.1097/MCD.0b013e328235a572
PMID: 17786116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]