---
reference_id: "PMID:38662876"
title: CTCF-Related Disorder.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Valverde de Morales HG
- Wang HL
- Garber K
- Corces V
- Li H
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CTCF-Related Disorder.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Valverde de Morales HG, Wang HL, Garber K, Corces V, Li H

## Content

1. CTCF-Related Disorder.

Valverde de Morales HG(1), Wang HL(2), Garber K(2), Corces V(2), Li H(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2024 Apr 25.

Author information:
(1)(Integra Genetics) , (Guatemala City, Guatemala)
(2)(Department of Human Genetics) , (Emory University School of Medicine) ,
(Atlanta, Georgia)
(3)(Departments of Human Genetics and Pediatrics) , (Emory University School of
Medicine) , (Atlanta, Georgia)

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: CTCF-related disorder is characterized by
developmental delay / intellectual disability (ranging from mild to severe),
with both speech and motor delays being common; feeding difficulties, including
dysphagia, and other gastrointestinal issues (gastroesophageal reflux disease
and/or irritable bowel syndrome) that can lead to growth deficiency; hypotonia;
eye anomalies (strabismus and/or refractive errors); scoliosis; nonspecific
dysmorphic features; sleep disturbance; tooth anomalies (crowded teeth and/or
abnormal decay); and, less commonly, other congenital anomalies (cleft palate,
gastrointestinal malrotation, genitourinary anomalies, and congenital heart
defects, including aortic ectasia). Short stature, seizures, hearing loss,
recurrent infections, microcephaly, and autistic features have also been
described in a minority of affected individuals. At least four reported
individuals with CTCF-related disorder developed Wilms tumor, one of whom had
bilateral Wilms tumor. However, there is no clear evidence of a significant
predisposition for the development of cancer in individuals with CTCF-related
disorder at this time.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of CTCF-related disorder is established in a
proband with suggestive findings and a heterozygous pathogenic (or likely
pathogenic) variant in CTCF identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Feeding therapy with a low threshold
for clinical feeding evaluation and/or radiographic swallowing study for those
with clinical signs or symptoms of dysphagia; gastrostomy tube placement may be
required for persistent feeding issues. Stool softeners, prokinetics, osmotic
agents, or laxatives as needed for constipation. Conductive hearing loss may
respond to placement of PET; hearing aids may be helpful per otolaryngologist.
Standard treatment for developmental delay / intellectual disability,
neurobehavioral issues, gastroesophageal reflux disease, strabismus, refractive
errors, ptosis, cleft palate, dental anomalies, scoliosis, hip dysplasia,
ankle/foot anomalies, sleep disturbance, recurrent infections, renal anomalies,
anomalies of the genitalia, congenital heart defects, seizures, and Wilms tumor.
Surveillance: At each visit: measure growth parameters and evaluate nutritional
status and safety of oral intake; monitor for gastroesophageal reflux disease
and/or constipation; assess for new manifestations such as seizures or changes
in tone; monitor developmental progress and educational needs; assess for
behavioral issues or changes in behavior; monitor for signs/symptoms of sleep
disturbance; assess for frequent infections. Assess for signs and symptoms of
scoliosis at least annually until skeletal maturity. Dental and ophthalmology
evaluations at least annually or as clinically indicated. Annual audiology
evaluation through childhood or as clinically indicated. No tumor screening
protocol for individuals with CTCF-related disorder has been developed.
Pregnancy management: In general, women with epilepsy or a seizure disorder of
any cause are at greater risk for mortality during pregnancy than pregnant women
without a seizure disorder; use of anti-seizure medication (ASM) during
pregnancy reduces this risk. However, exposure to ASMs may increase the risk for
adverse fetal outcome (depending on the drug used, the dose, and the stage of
pregnancy at which medication is taken). Discussion of the risks and benefits of
using a given ASM during pregnancy should ideally take place prior to
conception. Transitioning to a lower-risk medication prior to or during
pregnancy may be possible.
GENETIC COUNSELING: CTCF-related disorder is inherited in an autosomal dominant
manner. Approximately 80% of individuals with CTCF-related disorder whose
parents have undergone molecular genetic testing have the disorder as the result
of a de novo CTCF pathogenic variant. If a parent of the proband is known to
have the pathogenic variant identified in the proband, the risk to the sibs of
inheriting the pathogenic variant is 50%. Once the CTCF pathogenic variant has
been identified in an affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation
genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 38662876
