---
reference_id: "PMID:35941721"
title: Immunohistochemical Approach to Genetic Subtyping of Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma.
authors:
- Feldman AL
- Oishi N
- Ketterling RP
- Ansell SM
- Shi M
- Dasari S
journal: Am J Surg Pathol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000001941
keywords:
- Gene Rearrangement
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- "Lymphoma, Large-Cell, Anaplastic/genetics, pathology"
- Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunohistochemical Approach to Genetic Subtyping of Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma.
**Authors:** Feldman AL, Oishi N, Ketterling RP, Ansell SM, Shi M, Dasari S
**Journal:** Am J Surg Pathol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PAS.0000000000001941](https://doi.org/10.1097/PAS.0000000000001941)

## Content

1. Am J Surg Pathol. 2022 Nov 1;46(11):1490-1499. doi:
10.1097/PAS.0000000000001941. Epub 2022 Aug 8.

Immunohistochemical Approach to Genetic Subtyping of Anaplastic Large Cell
Lymphoma.

Feldman AL(1), Oishi N(1)(2), Ketterling RP(1), Ansell SM(3), Shi M(1), Dasari
S(4).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Yamanashi, Chuo, Yamanashi Prefecture,
Japan.
(3)Division of Hematology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(4)Quantitative Health Sciences.

Anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) can be classified genetically based on
rearrangements (R) of the ALK , TP63 , and/or DUSP22 genes. ALK- R defines a
specific entity, ALK-positive ALCL, while DUSP22- R and TP63- R define subgroups
of ALK-negative ALCLs with distinct clinicopathologic features. ALK -R and TP63
-R produce oncogenic fusion proteins that can be detected by
immunohistochemistry. ALK immunohistochemistry is an excellent surrogate for
ALK- R and screening with p63 immunohistochemistry excludes TP63- R in two third
of ALCLs. In contrast, DUSP22 -R does not produce a fusion protein and its
identification requires fluorescence in situ hybridization. However, DUSP22- R
ALCL has a characteristic phenotype including negativity for cytotoxic markers
and phospho-STAT3 Y705 . Recently, we also identified overexpression of the LEF1
transcription factor in DUSP22- R ALCL. Here, we sought to validate this finding
and examine models for predicting DUSP22- R using immunohistochemistry for LEF1
and TIA1 or phospho-STAT3 Y705 . We evaluated these 3 markers in our original
discovery cohort (n=45) and in an independent validation cohort (n=46) of ALCLs.
The correlation between DUSP22- R and LEF1 expression replicated strongly in the
validation cohort ( P <0.0001). In addition, we identified and validated a
strategy using LEF1 and TIA1 immunohistochemistry that predicted DUSP22- R with
positive and negative predictive values of 100% after exclusion of indeterminate
cases and would eliminate the need for fluorescence in situ hybridization in 65%
of ALK-negative ALCLs. This approach had similar results in identifying DUSP22-
R in the related condition, lymphomatoid papulosis. Together with previous data,
these findings support a 4-marker immunohistochemistry algorithm using ALK,
LEF1, TIA1, and p63 for genetic subtyping of ALCL.

Copyright © 2022 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000001941
PMCID: PMC9588576
PMID: 35941721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest and Source of Funding:
Supported by P01 CA229100, P30 CA15083, P50 CA97274, and UL1 TR002377 from the
National Institutes of Health; and by TRP 6574-19 from the Leukemia & Lymphoma
Society. A.L.F. receives research funding from Seattle Genetics, is an inventor
of technology discussed in this manuscript for which Mayo Clinic holds an
unlicensed patent, and has intellectual property licensed to Zeno
Pharmaceuticals. R.P.K. is an inventor of technology discussed in this
manuscript for which Mayo Clinic holds an unlicensed patent. For the remaining
authors none were declared.
