---
reference_id: "PMID:34313550"
title: Dysbiotic microbiota interactions in Crohn's disease.
authors:
- Caparrós E
- Wiest R
- Scharl M
- Rogler G
- Gutiérrez Casbas A
- Yilmaz B
- Wawrzyniak M
- Francés R
journal: Gut Microbes
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/19490976.2021.1949096
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dysbiotic microbiota interactions in Crohn's disease.
**Authors:** Caparrós E, Wiest R, Scharl M, Rogler G, Gutiérrez Casbas A, Yilmaz B, Wawrzyniak M, Francés R
**Journal:** Gut Microbes (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/19490976.2021.1949096](https://doi.org/10.1080/19490976.2021.1949096)

## Content

1. Gut Microbes. 2021 Jan-Dec;13(1):1949096. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2021.1949096.

Dysbiotic microbiota interactions in Crohn's disease.

Caparrós E(1)(2), Wiest R(3), Scharl M(4), Rogler G(4), Gutiérrez Casbas 
A(2)(5), Yilmaz B(3), Wawrzyniak M(4), Francés R(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Dpto Medicina Clínica, Universidad Miguel Hernández, San Juan De Alicante, 
Spain.
(2)Iis Isabial, Hospital General Universitario De Alicante, Alicante, Spain.
(3)Department for Biomedical Research, Department of Visceral Surgery and 
Medicine, Bern University Hospital, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital of Zurich, 
University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(5)CIBERehd, Instituto De Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.

Crohn's disease (CD) is a major form of inflammatory bowel disease characterized 
by transmural inflammation along the alimentary tract. Changes in the microbial 
composition and reduction in species diversity are recognized as pivotal 
hallmarks in disease dynamics, challenging the gut barrier function and shaping 
a pathological immune response in genetically influenced subjects. The purpose 
of this review is to delve into the modification of the gut microbiota cluster 
network during CD progression and to discuss how this shift compromises the gut 
barrier integrity, granting the translocation of microbes and their products. We 
then complete the scope of the review by retracing gut microbiota dysbiosis 
interactions with the main pathophysiologic factors of CD, starting from the 
host's genetic background to the immune inflammatory and fibrotic processes, 
providing a standpoint on the lifestyle/exogenous factors and the potential 
benefits of targeting a specific gut microbiota.

DOI: 10.1080/19490976.2021.1949096
PMCID: PMC8320851
PMID: 34313550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the author(s).