---
reference_id: "PMID:40446022"
title: MTOR signaling regulates the development of airway mucous cell metaplasia associated with severe asthma.
authors:
- Kudrna KM
- Vilches LF
- Eilers EM
- Maurya SK
- Brody SL
- Horani A
- Bailey KL
- Wyatt TA
- Dickinson JD
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.187904
keywords:
- "TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases/metabolism, antagonists & inhibitors"
- Humans
- "Asthma/pathology, metabolism"
- Metaplasia/pathology
- Animals
- Signal Transduction
- Mice
- Interleukin-13/metabolism
- Female
- Male
- "Epithelial Cells/pathology, metabolism"
- "Tuberous Sclerosis Complex 2 Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Mucin 5AC/metabolism
- "Respiratory Mucosa/pathology, metabolism"
- Airway Remodeling
- Goblet Cells/pathology
- Sirolimus/pharmacology
- Hyperplasia
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MTOR signaling regulates the development of airway mucous cell metaplasia associated with severe asthma.
**Authors:** Kudrna KM, Vilches LF, Eilers EM, Maurya SK, Brody SL, Horani A, Bailey KL, Wyatt TA, Dickinson JD
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.187904](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.187904)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2025 May 29;10(13):e187904. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.187904.
eCollection 2025 Jul 8.

MTOR signaling regulates the development of airway mucous cell metaplasia
associated with severe asthma.

Kudrna KM(1), Vilches LF(1), Eilers EM(1), Maurya SK(1), Brody SL(2), Horani
A(3), Bailey KL(1)(4), Wyatt TA(1)(4)(5), Dickinson JD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, &
Sleep, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Washington
University, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(3)Washington University School of Medicine, Division of Pediatric Allergy,
Immunology, and Pulmonary Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(4)Department of Veterans Affairs Nebraska-Western Iowa Health Care System,
Omaha, Nebraska, USA.
(5)Department of Environmental, Agricultural and Occupational Health, College of
Public Health, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.

In asthma, airway epithelial remodeling is characterized by aberrant goblet cell
metaplastic differentiation accompanied by epithelial cell hyperplasia and
hypertrophy. These pathologic features in severe asthma indicate a loss of
control of proliferation, cell size, differentiation, and migration. MTOR is a
highly conserved pathway that regulates protein synthesis, cell size, and
proliferation. We hypothesized that the balance between MTOR and autophagy
regulates mucous cell metaplasia. Airways from individuals with severe asthma
showed increased MTOR signaling by RPS6 phosphorylation, which was reproduced
using an IL-13-activated model of primary human airway epithelial cells (hAEC).
MTOR inhibition by rapamycin led to a decrease of IL-13-mediated cell
hypertrophy, hyperplasia, and MUC5AC mucous metaplasia. BrdU labeling during
IL-13-induced mucous metaplasia confirmed that MTOR was associated with
increased basal-to-apical hAEC migration. MTOR activation by genetic deletion of
Tsc2 in cultured mouse AECs increased IL-13-mediated hyperplasia, hypertrophy,
and mucous metaplasia. Transcriptomic analysis of IL-13-stimulated hAEC
identified MTOR-dependent expression of genes associated with epithelial
migration and cytoskeletal organization. In summary, these findings point to
IL-13-dependent and -independent roles of MTOR signaling in the development of
pathogenic epithelial changes contributing to airway obstruction in severe
asthma.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.187904
PMCID: PMC12288895
PMID: 40446022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared
that no conflict of interest exists.
