---
reference_id: "PMID:38025325"
title: "Pityriasis lichenoides presented with skin rash mimicking Urticaria: A case report."
authors:
- Madawi D
- Mobayed H
journal: Qatar Med J
year: '2023'
doi: 10.5339/qmj.2023.sqac.7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pityriasis lichenoides presented with skin rash mimicking Urticaria: A case report.
**Authors:** Madawi D, Mobayed H
**Journal:** Qatar Med J (2023)
**DOI:** [10.5339/qmj.2023.sqac.7](https://doi.org/10.5339/qmj.2023.sqac.7)

## Content

1. Qatar Med J. 2023 Nov 19;2023(2):7. doi: 10.5339/qmj.2023.sqac.7. eCollection
2023.

Pityriasis lichenoides presented with skin rash mimicking Urticaria: A case
report.

Madawi D(1), Mobayed H(1).

Author information:
(1)Allergy and Immunology Division, Department of Medicine, Hamad Medical
Corporation, Doha, Qatar Email: DMudawi1@hamad.qa.

BACKGROUND: Acute urticaria is urticaria with or without angioedema that is
present for less than six weeks, while chronic urticaria is present for more
than six weeks. Pityriasis lichenoides (PL) is a benign cutaneous inflammatory
disease of unknown etiology. Acute PL typically resolves within a few weeks,
while chronic PL lasts several months. The skin rash of PL may resemble the rash
of other conditions, so the distinction is essential and depends on history and
physical examination and is confirmed by skin biopsy.
CASE REPORT: A 64-year-old gentleman presented with seven days history of
generalized itchy skin (hives). Individual lesions last 24-48 hours and do not
leave pigmentation or scarring. No systemic involvement. No specific triggers,
with two previous similar episodes 30 years and 20 years ago. Levocetirizine, 5
mg tablet, was prescribed, and he was instructed to increase the dose to 4
tablets daily if needed. On reassessing the patient after ten days, he did not
respond well. The rash was different from the initial one, with individual
lesions lasting for five days or more, so he was referred to a dermatologist for
a skin biopsy. Basic investigations were normal. Performing skin biopsy is
needed to exclude other pathologies. Skin biopsy showed pathological changes of
lichenoid dermatitis compatible with pityriasis lichenoides et varioliformis
acuta (PLEVA). He has been treated with azithromycin 250 mg daily for three
weeks with rapid and complete resolution without scaring.
CONCLUSION: Urticarial rash may mimic the skin rash of other conditions.
Detailed serial history and physical examination are warranted to exclude other
diagnoses. Skin biopsy is needed when diagnosing conditions other than urticaria
are suspected.

© 2023 Madawi, Mobayed, licensee HBKU Press.

DOI: 10.5339/qmj.2023.sqac.7
PMCID: PMC10660683
PMID: 38025325
