---
reference_id: "PMID:16135556"
title: Infantile onset spinocerebellar ataxia is caused by recessive mutations in mitochondrial proteins Twinkle and Twinky.
authors:
- Nikali K
- Suomalainen A
- Saharinen J
- Kuokkanen M
- Spelbrink JN
- Lönnqvist T
- Peltonen L
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi328
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- Alleles
- Case-Control Studies
- DNA Helicases
- DNA Primase/metabolism
- "DNA, Mitochondrial"
- "Genome, Human"
- Haplotypes/genetics
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide/genetics"
- Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Infantile onset spinocerebellar ataxia is caused by recessive mutations in mitochondrial proteins Twinkle and Twinky.
**Authors:** Nikali K, Suomalainen A, Saharinen J, Kuokkanen M, Spelbrink JN, Lönnqvist T, Peltonen L
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddi328](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddi328)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Oct 15;14(20):2981-90. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi328. Epub 2005 
Aug 31.

Infantile onset spinocerebellar ataxia is caused by recessive mutations in 
mitochondrial proteins Twinkle and Twinky.

Nikali K(1), Suomalainen A, Saharinen J, Kuokkanen M, Spelbrink JN, Lönnqvist T, 
Peltonen L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, National Public Health Institute, 
University of Helsinki, Finland. kaisu.nikali@tiscali.co.uk

Infantile onset spinocerebellar ataxia (IOSCA) (MIM 271245) is a severe 
autosomal recessively inherited neurodegenerative disorder characterized by 
progressive atrophy of the cerebellum, brain stem and spinal cord and sensory 
axonal neuropathy. We report here the molecular background of this disease based 
on the positional cloning/candidate approach of the defective gene. Having 
established the linkage to chromosome 10q24, we restricted the critical DNA 
region using single nucleotide polymorphism-based haplotypes. After analyzing 
all positional candidate transcripts, we identified two point mutations in the 
gene C10orf2 encoding Twinkle, a mitochondrial deoxyribonucleic acid 
(mtDNA)-specific helicase, and a rarer splice variant Twinky, underlying IOSCA. 
The founder IOSCA mutation, homozygous in all but one of the patients, leads to 
a Y508C amino acid change in the polypeptides. One patient, heterozygous for 
Y508C, carries a silent coding region cytosine to thymine transition mutation in 
his paternal disease chromosome. This allele is expressed at a reduced level, 
causing the preponderance of messenger RNAs encoding Y508C polypeptides and thus 
leads to the IOSCA disease phenotype. Previously, we have shown that different 
mutations in this same gene cause autosomal dominant progressive external 
ophthalmoplegia (adPEO) with multiple mtDNA deletions (MIM 606075), a 
neuromuscular disorder sharing a spectrum of symptoms with IOSCA. IOSCA 
phenotype is the first recessive one due to Twinkle and Twinky mutations, the 
dominant PEO mutations affecting mtDNA maintenance, but in IOSCA, mtDNA stays 
intact. The severe neurological phenotype observed in IOSCA, a result of only a 
single amino acid substitution in Twinkle and Twinky, suggests that these 
proteins play a crucial role in the maintenance and/or function of specific 
affected neuronal subpopulations.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddi328
PMID: 16135556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]