---
reference_id: "PMID:36340711"
title: "Infections and immune dysregulation in ataxia-telangiectasia children with hyper-IgM and non-hyper-IgM phenotypes: A single-center experience."
authors:
- Szczawińska-Popłonyk A
- Tąpolska-Jóźwiak K
- Schwartzmann E
- Pietrucha B
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2022.972952
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Infections and immune dysregulation in ataxia-telangiectasia children with hyper-IgM and non-hyper-IgM phenotypes: A single-center experience.
**Authors:** Szczawińska-Popłonyk A, Tąpolska-Jóźwiak K, Schwartzmann E, Pietrucha B
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2022.972952](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2022.972952)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2022 Oct 20;10:972952. doi: 10.3389/fped.2022.972952.
eCollection  2022.

Infections and immune dysregulation in ataxia-telangiectasia children with
hyper-IgM and non-hyper-IgM phenotypes: A single-center experience.

Szczawińska-Popłonyk A(1), Tąpolska-Jóźwiak K(1), Schwartzmann E(2), Pietrucha
B(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Pneumonology, Allergy and Clinical Immunology,
Institute of Pediatrics, Poznań University of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland.
(2)Poznań University of Medical Sciences, Medical Student, Poznań, Poland.
(3)Department of Immunology, Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw,
Poland.

Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a severe syndromic neurodegenerative inborn error
of immunity characterized by DNA reparation defect, chromosomal instability, and
hypersensitivity to ionizing radiation, thereby predisposing affected
individuals to malignant transformation. While the leading disease
symptomatology is associated with progressively debilitating cerebellar ataxia
accompanied by central and peripheral nervous system dysfunctions, A-T is a
multisystemic disorder manifesting with the heterogeneity of phenotypic
features. These include airway and interstitial lung disease, chronic liver
disease, endocrine abnormalities, and cutaneous and deep-organ granulomatosis.
The impaired thymic T cell production, defective B cell development and antibody
production, as well as bone marrow failure, contribute to a combined
immunodeficiency predisposing to infectious complications, immune dysregulation,
and organ-specific immunopathology, with the A-T hyper-IgM (HIGM) phenotype
determining the more severe disease course. This study aimed to clarify the
immunodeficiency and associated immune dysregulation as well as organ-specific
immunopathology in children with A-T. We also sought to determine whether the
hyper-IgM and non-hyper-IgM phenotypes play a discriminatory role and have
prognostic significance in anticipating the clinical course and outcome of the
disease. We retrospectively reviewed the medical records of twelve A-T patients,
aged from two to eighteen years. The patients' infectious history,
organ-specific symptomatology, and immunological workup including serum
alpha-fetoprotein, immunoglobulin isotypes, IgG subclasses, and lymphocyte
compartments were examined. For further comparative analysis, all the subjects
were divided into two groups, HIGM A-T and non-HIGM A-T. The clinical evaluation
of the study group showed that recurrent respiratory tract infections due to
viral and bacterial pathogens and a chronic obstructive airway disease along
with impaired humoral immunity, in particular complete IgA deficiency, were
noted in all the A-T patients, with both HIGM and non-HIGM phenotypes. The most
important features with the discriminatory role between groups, were autoimmune
disorders, observable four times more frequently in HIGM than in non-HIGM A-T.
Two patients with the HIGM A-T phenotype were deceased due to liver failure and
chronic Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection. It may therefore be assumed that the
HIGM form of A-T is associated with more profound T cell dysfunction, defective
immunoglobulin class switching, chronic EBV expansion, and poorer prognosis.

© 2022 Szczawińska-Popłonyk, Tąpolska-Jóźwiak, Schwartzmann and Pietrucha.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2022.972952
PMCID: PMC9631935
PMID: 36340711

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
