---
reference_id: PMID:30764523
title: "Pediatric Epilepsy Mechanisms: Expanding the Paradigm of Excitation/Inhibition Imbalance."
authors:
- Shao LR
- Habela CW
- Stafstrom CE
journal: Children (Basel)
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3390/children6020023
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric Epilepsy Mechanisms: Expanding the Paradigm of Excitation/Inhibition Imbalance.
**Authors:** Shao LR, Habela CW, Stafstrom CE
**Journal:** Children (Basel) (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3390/children6020023](https://doi.org/10.3390/children6020023)

## Content

1. Children (Basel). 2019 Feb 5;6(2):23. doi: 10.3390/children6020023.

Pediatric Epilepsy Mechanisms: Expanding the Paradigm of Excitation/Inhibition 
Imbalance.

Shao LR(1), Habela CW(2), Stafstrom CE(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. lshao5@jhmi.edu.
(2)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. chabela1@jhmi.edu.
(3)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. cstafst1@jhmi.edu.

Mechanisms underlying seizures and epilepsy have traditionally been considered 
to involve abnormalities of ion channels or synaptic function. Those 
considerations gave rise to the excitation/inhibition (E/I) imbalance theory, 
whereby increased excitation, decreased inhibition, or both favor a 
hyperexcitable state and an increased propensity for seizure generation and 
epileptogenesis. Several recent findings warrant reconsideration and expansion 
of the E/I hypothesis: novel genetic mutations have been identified that do not 
overtly affect E/I balance; neurotransmitters may exert paradoxical effects, 
especially during development; anti-seizure medications do not necessarily work 
by decreasing excitation or increasing inhibition; and metabolic factors 
participate in the regulation of neuronal and network excitability. These novel 
conceptual and experimental advances mandate expansion of the E/I paradigm, with 
the expectation that new and exciting therapies will emerge from this broadened 
understanding of how seizures and epilepsy arise and progress.

DOI: 10.3390/children6020023
PMCID: PMC6406372
PMID: 30764523

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.