---
reference_id: "PMID:29657903"
title: "Obstructive Sleep Apnea as a Risk Factor for Atrial Fibrillation: A Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Youssef I
- Kamran H
- Yacoub M
- Patel N
- Goulbourne C
- Kumar S
- Kane J
- Hoffner H
- Salifu M
- McFarlane SI
journal: J Sleep Disord Ther
year: '2018'
doi: 10.4172/2167-0277.1000282
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Obstructive Sleep Apnea as a Risk Factor for Atrial Fibrillation: A Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Youssef I, Kamran H, Yacoub M, Patel N, Goulbourne C, Kumar S, Kane J, Hoffner H, Salifu M, McFarlane SI
**Journal:** J Sleep Disord Ther (2018)
**DOI:** [10.4172/2167-0277.1000282](https://doi.org/10.4172/2167-0277.1000282)

## Content

1. J Sleep Disord Ther. 2018;7(1):282. doi: 10.4172/2167-0277.1000282. Epub 2018 
Feb 12.

Obstructive Sleep Apnea as a Risk Factor for Atrial Fibrillation: A 
Meta-Analysis.

Youssef I(1), Kamran H(1), Yacoub M(2), Patel N(3), Goulbourne C(1), Kumar S(1), 
Kane J(1), Hoffner H(1), Salifu M(1), McFarlane SI(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Divisions of Endocrinology, Cardiology and Renal 
Medicine, State University of New York, Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn, NY, 
USA.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Northside Hospital, St. Petersburg FL, USA.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Hartford Hospital, Hartford, CT.

OBJECTIVES: To conducted a meta-analysis assessing the relationship between 
Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA) and the risk of Atrial Fibrillation (AF).
METHODS: We searched PUBMED, Medline, and Cochrane Library using the keywords 
"atrial fibrillation", "obstructive sleep apnea" and "sleep disordered breathing 
(SDB)". All subjects included had established diagnosis of OSA/SDB. We then 
compared the occurrence of AF versus no AF. Analysis done with Comprehensive 
Meta-Analysis package V3 (Biostat, USA).
RESULTS: A total of 579 results were generated. Duplicates were removed and 372 
records were excluded based on irrelevant abstracts, titles, study design not 
consistent with the stated outcome, or full-text unavailable. Twelve studies 
meeting the inclusion criteria were reviewed in full-text; 2 of these articles 
were eventually removed due to unconfirmed OSA diagnostic modality, and one was 
also removed based on a control group inconsistent with the other studies. 
Therefore, a total of 9 studies were included (n=19,837). Sample sizes ranged 
from n=160 patients to n=6841 patients. The risk of AF was found to be higher 
among OSA/SDB versus control group (OR; 2.120, C.I: 1.845-2.436, Z; 10.598 p: 
<0.001). The heterogeneity observed for the pooled analysis was Q-value; 22.487 
df (Q); 8 P-value; 0.004, I-squared; 64.424 Tau2; 0.098, suggesting appropriate 
study selection and moderate heterogeneity.
CONCLUSION: OSA/SDB is strongly associated with AFib confirming the notion that 
OSA/SDB populations are high risk for development of AF. Prospective studies are 
needed to ascertain the effect of the treatment of OSA/SDB for the prevention of 
AF, a growing health burden with serious consequences.

DOI: 10.4172/2167-0277.1000282
PMCID: PMC5898401
PMID: 29657903