---
reference_id: "PMID:31347993"
title: "Unexplained fever in a young man with Crohn's disease: a case report and review of literature."
authors:
- Deroo L
- Elewaut A
- Van Moerkercke W
journal: Acta Clin Belg
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/17843286.2019.1646515
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unexplained fever in a young man with Crohn's disease: a case report and review of literature.
**Authors:** Deroo L, Elewaut A, Van Moerkercke W
**Journal:** Acta Clin Belg (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/17843286.2019.1646515](https://doi.org/10.1080/17843286.2019.1646515)

## Content

1. Acta Clin Belg. 2021 Feb;76(1):60-64. doi: 10.1080/17843286.2019.1646515. Epub
 2019 Jul 26.

Unexplained fever in a young man with Crohn's disease: a case report and review 
of literature.

Deroo L(1), Elewaut A(2), Van Moerkercke W(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)University School of Medicine , Gent, Belgium.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, AZ Groeninge, Kortrijk, Belgium.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, UZ Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium.

A 23-year-old man with a known history of Crohn's disease (CD), who underwent an 
ileocaecal resection for localized disease activity three months ago, suffered 
from persistent fever with chills since 10 days. Despite the empirical 
antibiotic therapy that was started, his fever remained. A computed tomography 
(CT) angiography of the thorax and abdomen revealed a thrombosis of the iliacal 
veins bilateral and a pulmonary embolism (PE) in the right lower lobe with 
adjacent infiltrate. Venous thromboembolism (VTE) can be a life-threatening 
extraintestinal manifestation of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). The risk that 
IBD patients develop a VTE is three times higher in comparison with healthy 
controls. They have a higher risk of recurrence and a higher mortality ratio. 
The pathogenesis of VTE in IBD is complex and until now not fully understood. 
More awareness should be raised, given the fact that it can be prevented by 
appropriate thromboprophylaxis.

DOI: 10.1080/17843286.2019.1646515
PMID: 31347993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]