---
reference_id: "PMID:32456656"
title: Consensus guideline for the diagnosis and treatment of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4)) deficiencies.
authors:
- Opladen T
- López-Laso E
- Cortès-Saladelafont E
- Pearson TS
- Sivri HS
- Yildiz Y
- Assmann B
- Kurian MA
- Leuzzi V
- Heales S
- Pope S
- Porta F
- García-Cazorla A
- Honzík T
- Pons R
- Regal L
- Goez H
- Artuch R
- Hoffmann GF
- Horvath G
- Thöny B
- Scholl-Bürgi S
- Burlina A
- Verbeek MM
- Mastrangelo M
- Friedman J
- Wassenberg T
- Jeltsch K
- Kulhánek J
- Kuseyri Hübschmann O
- International Working Group on Neurotransmitter related Disorders (iNTD)
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-020-01379-8
keywords:
- Humans
- "Biopterins/analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use, analogs & derivatives"
- Dystonia
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors"
- "Phenylketonurias/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Consensus guideline for the diagnosis and treatment of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH(4)) deficiencies.
**Authors:** Opladen T, López-Laso E, Cortès-Saladelafont E, Pearson TS, Sivri HS, Yildiz Y, Assmann B, Kurian MA, Leuzzi V, Heales S, Pope S, Porta F, García-Cazorla A, Honzík T, Pons R, Regal L, Goez H, Artuch R, Hoffmann GF, Horvath G, Thöny B, Scholl-Bürgi S, Burlina A, Verbeek MM, Mastrangelo M, Friedman J, Wassenberg T, Jeltsch K, Kulhánek J, Kuseyri Hübschmann O, International Working Group on Neurotransmitter related Disorders (iNTD)
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-020-01379-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-020-01379-8)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2020 May 26;15(1):126. doi: 10.1186/s13023-020-01379-8.

Consensus guideline for the diagnosis and treatment of tetrahydrobiopterin 
(BH(4)) deficiencies.

Opladen T(1), López-Laso E(2), Cortès-Saladelafont E(3)(4), Pearson TS(5), Sivri 
HS(6), Yildiz Y(6), Assmann B(7), Kurian MA(8)(9), Leuzzi V(10), Heales S(11), 
Pope S(11), Porta F(12), García-Cazorla A(3), Honzík T(13), Pons R(14), Regal 
L(15), Goez H(16), Artuch R(17), Hoffmann GF(7), Horvath G(18), Thöny B(19), 
Scholl-Bürgi S(20), Burlina A(21), Verbeek MM(22), Mastrangelo M(10), Friedman 
J(23), Wassenberg T(15), Jeltsch K(7), Kulhánek J(24), Kuseyri Hübschmann O(7); 
International Working Group on Neurotransmitter related Disorders (iNTD).

Author information:
(1)Division of Child Neurology and Metabolic Disorders, University Children's 
Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany. Thomas.Opladen@med.uni-heidelberg.de.
(2)Pediatric Neurology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Reina 
Sofía, IMIBIC and CIBERER, Córdoba, Spain.
(3)Inborn errors of metabolism Unit, Institut de Recerca Sant Joan de Déu and 
CIBERER-ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Unit of Pediatric Neurology and Metabolic Disorders, Department of 
Pediatrics, Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, and Faculty of Medicine, Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona, Badalona, Spain.
(5)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Metabolism, Hacettepe University, 
Faculty of Medicine, 06100, Ankara, Turkey.
(7)Division of Child Neurology and Metabolic Disorders, University Children's 
Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(8)Developmental Neurosciences, UCL Great Ormond Street-Institute of Child 
Health, London, UK.
(9)Department of Neurology, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, UK.
(10)Unit of Child Neurology and Psychiatry, Department of Human Neuroscience, 
Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.
(11)Neurometabolic Unit, National Hospital, Queen Square, London, UK.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, AOU Città della Salute e della Scienza, Torino, 
Italy.
(13)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, First Faculty of 
Medicine, Charles University and General University Hospital in Prague, Prague, 
Czech Republic.
(14)First Department of Pediatrics of the University of Athens, Aghia Sofia 
Hospital, Athens, Greece.
(15)Department of Pediatric, Pediatric Neurology and Metabolism Unit, UZ 
Brussel, Brussels, Belgium.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, University of Alberta Glenrose Rehabilitation 
Hospital, Edmonton, Canada.
(17)Clinical biochemistry department, Institut de Recerca Sant Joan de Déu, 
CIBERER and MetabERN Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain.
(18)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Biochemical Genetics, BC Children's 
Hospital, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(19)Division of Metabolism, University Children's Hospital Zurich, Zürich, 
Switzerland.
(20)Clinic for Pediatrics I, Medical University of Innsbruck, Anichstr 35, 
Innsbruck, Austria.
(21)U.O.C. Malattie Metaboliche Ereditarie, Dipartimento della Salute della 
Donna e del Bambino, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria di Padova - Campus 
Biomedico Pietro d'Abano, Padova, Italy.
(22)Departments of Neurology and Laboratory Medicine, Alzheimer Centre, Radboud 
University Medical Center, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(23)UCSD Departments of Neuroscience and Pediatrics, Rady Children's Hospital 
Division of Neurology; Rady Children's Institute for Genomic Medicine, San 
Diego, USA.
(24)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, First Faculty of 
Medicine, Charles University and General University Hospital in Prague, Prague, 
Czech Republic. Jan.Kulhanek@vfn.cz.

Erratum in
    Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2020 Aug 5;15(1):202. doi: 10.1186/s13023-020-01464-y.

BACKGROUND: Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4) deficiencies comprise a group of six rare 
neurometabolic disorders characterized by insufficient synthesis of the 
monoamine neurotransmitters dopamine and serotonin due to a disturbance of BH4 
biosynthesis or recycling. Hyperphenylalaninemia (HPA) is the first diagnostic 
hallmark for most BH4 deficiencies, apart from autosomal dominant guanosine 
triphosphate cyclohydrolase I deficiency and sepiapterin reductase deficiency. 
Early supplementation of neurotransmitter precursors and where appropriate, 
treatment of HPA results in significant improvement of motor and cognitive 
function. Management approaches differ across the world and therefore these 
guidelines have been developed aiming to harmonize and optimize patient care. 
Representatives of the International Working Group on Neurotransmitter related 
Disorders (iNTD) developed the guidelines according to the SIGN (Scottish 
Intercollegiate Guidelines Network) methodology by evaluating all available 
evidence for the diagnosis and treatment of BH4 deficiencies.
CONCLUSION: Although the total body of evidence in the literature was mainly 
rated as low or very low, these consensus guidelines will help to harmonize 
clinical practice and to standardize and improve care for BH4 deficient 
patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-020-01379-8
PMCID: PMC7251883
PMID: 32456656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.