---
reference_id: "PMID:18415063"
title: "[Histology of cutaneous vasculitides]."
authors:
- Stein A
- Hackert I
- Meurer M
journal: Hautarzt
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1007/s00105-008-1545-8
keywords:
- Blood Vessels/pathology
- Humans
- "Skin/blood supply, pathology"
- "Skin Diseases, Vascular/pathology"
- Vasculitis/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Histology of cutaneous vasculitides].
**Authors:** Stein A, Hackert I, Meurer M
**Journal:** Hautarzt (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00105-008-1545-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00105-008-1545-8)

## Content

1. Hautarzt. 2008 May;59(5):363-4, 366-70, 372-3. doi: 10.1007/s00105-008-1545-8.

[Histology of cutaneous vasculitides].

[Article in German]

Stein A(1), Hackert I, Meurer M.

Author information:
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik für Dermatologie, Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav
Carus an der Technischen Universität Dresden.
Annette.Stein@uniklinikum-dresden.de

Identification of vasculitis by skin biopsy represents the diagnostic gold
standard. Skin biopsies should be taken from fresh lesions or from margin of an
ulceration and should contain all layers of the skin including subcutis.
Classification of vasculitis is based on histological criteria considering the
size of the predominantly affected vessel, the distribution of vasculitis in the
dermis and subcutis, and the predominant inflammatory cell-type. In cutaneous
vasculitis, small and medium-sized vessels of the arterial and/or venous system
are predominant affected. Vasculitis of the larger-sized blood vessels is based
on inflammatory cells within the wall of the vessel; in small vessel vasculitis,
additional features include fibrin within the vessel wall and/or an intraluminal
thrombus and/or perivascular and interstitial infiltrates of neutrophils,
nuclear dust and extravasated erythrocytes are required for the diagnosis of
vasculitis. Leukocytoclastic vasculitis is the most common form of cutaneous
vasculitis. An correct diagnosis requires careful correlation of medical
history, the clinical, serological, imaging and direct immunofluorescence data,
and histologic findings.

DOI: 10.1007/s00105-008-1545-8
PMID: 18415063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
