---
reference_id: "PMID:30051404"
title: The Role of Sex in the Pathophysiology of Pulmonary Hypertension.
authors:
- Docherty CK
- Harvey KY
- Mair KM
- Griffin S
- Denver N
- MacLean MR
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-77932-4_31
keywords:
- Age Factors
- Animals
- Antihypertensive Agents/therapeutic use
- Arterial Pressure/drug effects
- "Bone Morphogenetic Protein Receptors, Type II/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Gonadal Steroid Hormones/metabolism
- Humans
- "Hypertension, Pulmonary/drug therapy, epidemiology, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Male
- "Pulmonary Artery/drug effects, metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Receptors, Estrogen/metabolism"
- Risk Factors
- Sex Characteristics
- Sex Factors
- Signal Transduction
- Treatment Outcome
- Vascular Remodeling/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Role of Sex in the Pathophysiology of Pulmonary Hypertension.
**Authors:** Docherty CK, Harvey KY, Mair KM, Griffin S, Denver N, MacLean MR
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-319-77932-4_31](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-77932-4_31)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2018;1065:511-528. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-77932-4_31.

The Role of Sex in the Pathophysiology of Pulmonary Hypertension.

Docherty CK(1), Harvey KY(1), Mair KM(1), Griffin S(1), Denver N(1), MacLean
MR(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, College of
Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(2)Research Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, College of
Medical, Veterinary and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
mandy.maclean@glasgow.ac.uk.

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a progressive disease characterised by
increased pulmonary vascular resistance and pulmonary artery remodelling as
result of increased vascular tone and vascular cell proliferation, respectively.
Eventually, this leads to right heart failure. Heritable PAH is caused by a
mutation in the bone morphogenetic protein receptor-II (BMPR-II). Female
susceptibility to PAH has been known for some time, and most recent figures show
a female-to-male ratio of 4:1. Variations in the female sex hormone estrogen and
estrogen metabolism modify FPAH risk, and penetrance of the disease in BMPR-II
mutation carriers is increased in females. Several lines of evidence point
towards estrogen being pathogenic in the pulmonary circulation, and thus
increasing the risk of females developing PAH. Recent studies have also
suggested that estrogen metabolism may be crucial in the development and
progression of PAH with studies indicating that downstream metabolites such as
16α-hydroxyestrone are upregulated in several forms of experimental pulmonary
hypertension (PH) and can cause pulmonary artery smooth muscle cell
proliferation and subsequent vascular remodelling. Conversely, other estrogen
metabolites such as 2-methoxyestradiol have been shown to be protective in the
context of PAH. Estrogen may also upregulate the signalling pathways of other
key mediators of PAH such as serotonin.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-77932-4_31
PMID: 30051404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
