---
reference_id: "PMID:16188595"
title: Congenital atrial standstill associated with coinheritance of a novel SCN5A mutation and connexin 40 polymorphisms.
authors:
- Makita N
- Sasaki K
- Groenewegen WA
- Yokota T
- Yokoshiki H
- Murakami T
- Tsutsui H
journal: Heart Rhythm
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2005.06.032
keywords:
- Alleles
- "Atrial Fibrillation/genetics, physiopathology, prevention & control"
- Atrial Function/genetics
- "Bradycardia/genetics, physiopathology, prevention & control"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Connexins/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Electrocardiography
- Family Health
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Genetic Testing
- "Heart Atria/pathology, physiopathology"
- Heart Rate/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Muscle Proteins/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- NAV1.5 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Genetic/genetics"
- Sodium Channels/genetics
- Gap Junction alpha-5 Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital atrial standstill associated with coinheritance of a novel SCN5A mutation and connexin 40 polymorphisms.
**Authors:** Makita N, Sasaki K, Groenewegen WA, Yokota T, Yokoshiki H, Murakami T, Tsutsui H
**Journal:** Heart Rhythm (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hrthm.2005.06.032](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hrthm.2005.06.032)

## Content

1. Heart Rhythm. 2005 Oct;2(10):1128-34. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2005.06.032.

Congenital atrial standstill associated with coinheritance of a novel SCN5A 
mutation and connexin 40 polymorphisms.

Makita N(1), Sasaki K, Groenewegen WA, Yokota T, Yokoshiki H, Murakami T, 
Tsutsui H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Hokkaido University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan. makitan@med.hokudai.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Congenital atrial standstill has been linked to SCN5A. Incomplete 
penetrance observed in atrial standstill has been attributed in part to the 
digenic inheritance of polymorphisms in the atrial-specific gap junction 
connexin 40 (Cx40) in conjunction with an SCN5A mutation.
OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to determine the clinical and 
biophysical characteristics of a novel SCN5A mutation identified in a family 
with atrial standstill.
METHODS: Family members of an apparently sporadic case of atrial standstill 
underwent genetic screening of SCN5A and atrial-specific genes including Cx40. 
Biophysical properties of the wild-type (WT) and mutant SCN5A channels in a 
heterologous expression system were studied using the whole-cell patch clamp 
technique.
RESULTS: The novel SCN5A mutation L212P was identified in the proband (age 11 
years) and his father. The father was in normal sinus rhythm. The proband had no 
P waves on surface ECG, and his right atrium could not be captured by pacing. 
The recombinant L212P Na channel showed a large hyperpolarizing shift in both 
the voltage dependence of activation (WT: -48.1 +/- 0.9 mV; L212P: -63.5 +/- 1.5 
mV; P < .001) and inactivation (WT: -86.6 +/- 0.9 mV; L212P: -95.6 +/- 0.8 mV; P 
< .001) and delayed recovery from inactivation. Further screenings for genetic 
variations that might mitigate L212P dysfunction revealed that the proband, but 
not his father, carries Cx40 polymorphisms inherited from his asymptomatic 
mother.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that genetic defects in SCN5A most likely 
underlie atrial standstill. Coinheritance of Cx40 polymorphisms is a possible 
genetic factor that modifies the clinical manifestation of this inherited 
arrhythmia.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2005.06.032
PMID: 16188595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]