---
reference_id: "PMID:20485712"
title: Meningococcal sepsis.
authors:
- Rajapaksa S
- Starr M
journal: Aust Fam Physician
year: '2010'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Meningococcal sepsis.
**Authors:** Rajapaksa S, Starr M
**Journal:** Aust Fam Physician (2010)

## Content

1. Aust Fam Physician. 2010 May;39(5):276-8.

Meningococcal sepsis.

Rajapaksa S(1), Starr M.

Author information:
(1)Emergency Department, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia. shabnarajapaksa@doctors.net.uk

BACKGROUND: Meningococcal disease remains a significant illness with an overall 
mortality of around 8%. The majority of deaths occur in the first 24 hours, 
before the commencement of specialist care. Missing a diagnosis of meningococcal 
disease is a fear among health care practitioners.
OBJECTIVE: This article presents a guide to identifying the salient features of 
meningococcal sepsis and initial management strategies in the primary care 
setting.
DISCUSSION: Initial presentation is often nonspecific and therefore it is 
important to have a high index of suspicion in children presenting with fever, 
lethargy, myalgia, vomiting and headache. These children should be monitored and 
reviewed carefully. If a nonblanching rash develops, immediate treatment, 
liaison with a paediatric intensive care unit and urgent hospital transfer is 
required. Initial management involves assessment and regular review of airway, 
breathing and circulation. Antibiotics (preferably intravenous cephalosporin) 
should be administered before hospital transfer.

PMID: 20485712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]