---
reference_id: "PMID:29070580"
title: COPD in individuals with the PiMZ alpha-1 antitrypsin genotype.
authors:
- Al Ashry HS
- Strange C
journal: Eur Respir Rev
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1183/16000617.0068-2017
keywords:
- "Asthma/enzymology, epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Disease Progression
- Gene Frequency
- Gene-Environment Interaction
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Heterozygote
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Lung/physiopathology
- Odds Ratio
- Phenotype
- Prevalence
- Prognosis
- "Pulmonary Disease, Chronic Obstructive/enzymology, epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Pulmonary Emphysema/enzymology, epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Risk Factors
- "Smoking/adverse effects, epidemiology"
- alpha 1-Antitrypsin/genetics
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/enzymology, epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# COPD in individuals with the PiMZ alpha-1 antitrypsin genotype.
**Authors:** Al Ashry HS, Strange C
**Journal:** Eur Respir Rev (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1183/16000617.0068-2017](https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0068-2017)

## Content

1. Eur Respir Rev. 2017 Oct 25;26(146):170068. doi: 10.1183/16000617.0068-2017.
Print 2017 Dec 31.

COPD in individuals with the PiMZ alpha-1 antitrypsin genotype.

Al Ashry HS(1), Strange C(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy and Sleep Medicine, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.
(2)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy and Sleep Medicine, Medical
University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA strangec@musc.edu.

Since the discovery of severe alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency as a genetic risk
factor for emphysema, there has been ongoing debate over whether individuals
with intermediate deficiency with one protease inhibitor Z allele (PiMZ, or MZ)
are at some risk for emphysema. This is important, because MZ individuals
comprise 2-5% of the general population. In this review we summarise the
evidence about the risks of the MZ population to develop emphysema or asthma. We
discuss the different study designs that have tried to answer this question. The
risk of emphysema is more pronounced in case-control than in population-based
studies, perhaps due to inadequate power. Carefully designed family studies show
an increased risk of emphysema in MZ smokers. This is supported by the rapid
decline in lung function of MZ individuals when compared to the general
population after massive environmental exposures. The risk of asthma in MZ
subjects is less studied, and more literature is needed before firm conclusions
can be made. Augmentation therapy in MZ individuals is not supported by any
objective studies. MZ smokers are at increased risk for emphysema that is more
pronounced when other environmental challenges are present.

Copyright ©ERS 2017.

DOI: 10.1183/16000617.0068-2017
PMCID: PMC9488576
PMID: 29070580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: Disclosures can be found
alongside this article at err.ersjournals.com
