---
reference_id: "PMID:35868679"
title: "Alagille Syndrome: Current Understanding of Pathogenesis, and Challenges in Diagnosis and Management."
authors:
- Ayoub MD
- Kamath BM
journal: Clin Liver Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.cld.2022.03.002
keywords:
- "Alagille Syndrome/diagnosis, therapy"
- Humans
- Jagged-1 Protein/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Receptor, Notch2/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alagille Syndrome: Current Understanding of Pathogenesis, and Challenges in Diagnosis and Management.
**Authors:** Ayoub MD, Kamath BM
**Journal:** Clin Liver Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cld.2022.03.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cld.2022.03.002)

## Content

1. Clin Liver Dis. 2022 Aug;26(3):355-370. doi: 10.1016/j.cld.2022.03.002. Epub 
2022 Jun 25.

Alagille Syndrome: Current Understanding of Pathogenesis, and Challenges in 
Diagnosis and Management.

Ayoub MD(1), Kamath BM(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, The Hospital for 
Sick Children, University of Toronto, 555 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario 
M5G 1X8, Canada; Department of Pediatrics, Rabigh Branch, King Abdulaziz 
University, PO Box 80205, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, The Hospital for 
Sick Children, University of Toronto, 555 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario 
M5G 1X8, Canada. Electronic address: binita.kamath@sickkids.ca.

Alagille syndrome (ALGS) is a complex heterogenous disease with a wide array of 
clinical manifestations in association with cholestatic liver disease. Major 
clinical and genetic advancements have taken place since its first description 
in 1969. However, clinicians continue to face considerable challenges in the 
management of ALGS, particularly in the absence of targeted molecular therapies. 
In this article, we provide an overview of the broad ALGS phenotype, current 
approaches to diagnosis and with particular focus on key clinical challenges 
encountered in the management of these patients.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cld.2022.03.002
PMID: 35868679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure B.M. Kamath is a Consultant for 
Mirum, Albireo, Audentes and Third Rock Ventures. The author receives 
unrestricted educational grant funding from Mirum and Albireo. The funders had 
no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the article, or in the decision to 
publish the results. M.D. Ayoub has nothing to disclose.