---
reference_id: "PMID:28445194"
title: Successful Treatment of Stable Vitiligo by Low-Density Cultured Autologous Melanocyte Transplantation Combined With Narrowband Ultraviolet B Therapy.
authors:
- Yao L
- Liu Y
- Song Y
- Zhong S
- Li S
journal: Dermatol Surg
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1097/DSS.0000000000001174
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Successful Treatment of Stable Vitiligo by Low-Density Cultured Autologous Melanocyte Transplantation Combined With Narrowband Ultraviolet B Therapy.
**Authors:** Yao L, Liu Y, Song Y, Zhong S, Li S
**Journal:** Dermatol Surg (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1097/DSS.0000000000001174](https://doi.org/10.1097/DSS.0000000000001174)

## Content

1. Dermatol Surg. 2017 Oct;43(10):1281-1287. doi: 10.1097/DSS.0000000000001174.

Successful Treatment of Stable Vitiligo by Low-Density Cultured Autologous 
Melanocyte Transplantation Combined With Narrowband Ultraviolet B Therapy.

Yao L(1), Liu Y, Song Y, Zhong S, Li S.

Author information:
(1)*All authors are affiliated with the Department of Dermatology, The First 
Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, China.

BACKGROUND: Cultured autologous melanocyte transplantation (CMT) is an effective 
treatment for stable vitiligo, but the current method is time consuming and 
expensive because of the requirement of a large number of melanocytes.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the clinical effect of low-density CMT combined with 
narrowband ultraviolet B (NB-UVB) in treating stable vitiligo.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The authors treated 8 patients with CMT at a low cell 
density (less than 2.5 × 10 cells/cm). Among them, 6 patients underwent NB-UVB 
therapy after CMT.
RESULTS: All the 6 patients treated with low-density CMT combined with NB-UVB 
obtained more than 90% repigmentation at the 1-year follow-up.
CONCLUSION: The authors' data suggest that low-density CMT combined with NB-UVB 
can be an effective form of surgical treatment for stable vitiligo.

DOI: 10.1097/DSS.0000000000001174
PMID: 28445194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]