---
reference_id: "PMID:27291884"
title: Assessment of the upper motor neuron in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
authors:
- Huynh W
- Simon NG
- Grosskreutz J
- Turner MR
- Vucic S
- Kiernan MC
journal: Clin Neurophysiol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2016.04.025
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Assessment of the upper motor neuron in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
**Authors:** Huynh W, Simon NG, Grosskreutz J, Turner MR, Vucic S, Kiernan MC
**Journal:** Clin Neurophysiol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clinph.2016.04.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2016.04.025)

## Content

1. Clin Neurophysiol. 2016 Jul;127(7):2643-60. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2016.04.025.
 Epub 2016 May 5.

Assessment of the upper motor neuron in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Huynh W(1), Simon NG(2), Grosskreutz J(3), Turner MR(4), Vucic S(5), Kiernan 
MC(6).

Author information:
(1)Brain and Mind Centre, University of Sydney, NSW, Australia; Prince of Wales 
Clinical School, University of New South Wales, NSW, Australia. Electronic 
address: w.huynh@neura.edu.au.
(2)Department of Neurology, St Vincent's Hospital, Darlinghurst, Australia.
(3)Hans-Berger Department of Neurology, University Hospital Jena, Jena, Germany.
(4)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
UK.
(5)Western Clinical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(6)Brain and Mind Centre, University of Sydney, NSW, Australia.

Clinical signs of upper motor neuron (UMN) involvement are an important 
component in supporting the diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), 
but are often not easily appreciated in a limb that is concurrently affected by 
muscle wasting and lower motor neuron degeneration, particularly in the early 
symptomatic stages of ALS. Whilst recent criteria have been proposed to 
facilitate improved detection of lower motor neuron impairment through 
electrophysiological features that have improved diagnostic sensitivity, 
assessment of upper motor neuron involvement remains essentially clinical. As a 
result, there is often a significant diagnostic delay that in turn may impact 
institution of disease-modifying therapy and access to other optimal patient 
management. Biomarkers of pathological UMN involvement are also required to 
ensure patients with suspected ALS have timely access to appropriate therapeutic 
trials. The present review provides an analysis of current and recently 
developed assessment techniques, including novel imaging and 
electrophysiological approaches used to study corticomotoneuronal pathology in 
ALS.

Copyright © 2016 International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology. Published 
by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinph.2016.04.025
PMID: 27291884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]