---
reference_id: "PMID:30251589"
title: "Mutations in the ENG, ACVRL1, and SMAD4 genes and clinical manifestations of hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia: experience from the Center for Osler's Disease, Uppsala University Hospital."
authors:
- Karlsson T
- Cherif H
journal: Ups J Med Sci
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1080/03009734.2018.1483452
keywords:
- "Activin Receptors, Type II/genetics"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Anemia, Iron-Deficiency/genetics"
- Brain Abscess/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Endoglin/genetics
- Epistaxis/genetics
- Female
- Gastrointestinal Hemorrhage/genetics
- Genotype
- Humans
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Prevalence
- Retrospective Studies
- Smad4 Protein/genetics
- Stroke/genetics
- Sweden
- "Telangiectasia, Hereditary Hemorrhagic/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the ENG, ACVRL1, and SMAD4 genes and clinical manifestations of hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia: experience from the Center for Osler's Disease, Uppsala University Hospital.
**Authors:** Karlsson T, Cherif H
**Journal:** Ups J Med Sci (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1080/03009734.2018.1483452](https://doi.org/10.1080/03009734.2018.1483452)

## Content

1. Ups J Med Sci. 2018 Sep;123(3):153-157. doi: 10.1080/03009734.2018.1483452.
Epub  2018 Sep 25.

Mutations in the ENG, ACVRL1, and SMAD4 genes and clinical manifestations of 
hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia: experience from the Center for Osler's 
Disease, Uppsala University Hospital.

Karlsson T(1)(2)(3), Cherif H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Haematology , Uppsala University Hospital , Uppsala , Sweden.
(2)b Center for Osler's Disease , Uppsala University Hospital , Uppsala , 
Sweden.
(3)c Department of Medicine , Västmanlands Hospital , Västerås , Sweden.

AIM: The aim of this retrospective single-centre study was to evaluate whether 
mutations in the ENG, ACVRL1, and SMAD4 genes were associated with different 
phenotypes in hereditary haemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT).
METHODS: The case records of 21 HHT patients with verified mutations in ENG, 
ACVRL1, or SMAD4 genes were reviewed. The numbers of HHT diagnostic criteria 
fulfilled for the three genotypes were compared, as was the prevalence of 
complications such as iron deficiency anaemia, gastrointestinal haemorrhage, 
stroke, and cerebral abscess.
RESULTS: Our results indicate that mutations in the ENG (HHT1), ACVRL1 (HHT2), 
and SMAD4 genes result in different HHT phenotypes. Epistaxis debuts earlier and 
may be more severe in HHT1 than in HHT2. The prevalence of pulmonary 
arteriovenous malformations (AVM) is higher in HHT type 1, whereas hepatic AVMs 
are more common in HHT2. One patient with mutations in both ENG and ACVRL1 genes 
was identified, as were two SMAD4-mutated patients suffering from the 
overlapping juvenile polyposis-HHT syndrome. Nearly one in five patients in our 
HHT population has been diagnosed with stroke or cerebral abscess, indicating a 
high prevalence of cerebral complications.
CONCLUSION: Our results showing that ENG and ACVRL1 gene mutations result in 
different HHT phenotypes confirm the results from other HHT centres worldwide. 
Cerebral complications of HHT are common, underscoring the importance of regular 
screening for pulmonary AVMs and early intervention against such AVMs. We have 
identified an HHT patient with simultaneous mutations in the ENG and ACVRL1 
genes. Surprisingly, this patient has had a mild course of the disease.

DOI: 10.1080/03009734.2018.1483452
PMCID: PMC6198721
PMID: 30251589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]