---
reference_id: "PMID:36481880"
title: Etiology of Retinitis Pigmentosa.
authors:
- Breazzano MP
- Grewal MR
- Tsang SH
- Chen RWS
journal: Methods Mol Biol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-2651-1_2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Etiology of Retinitis Pigmentosa.
**Authors:** Breazzano MP, Grewal MR, Tsang SH, Chen RWS
**Journal:** Methods Mol Biol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-1-0716-2651-1_2](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-0716-2651-1_2)

## Content

1. Methods Mol Biol. 2023;2560:15-30. doi: 10.1007/978-1-0716-2651-1_2.

Etiology of Retinitis Pigmentosa.

Breazzano MP(1), Grewal MR(2), Tsang SH(3), Chen RWS(4).

Author information:
(1)Wilmer Eye Institute, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Edward S. Harkness Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Columbia 
University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA. mrg2198@cumc.columbia.edu.
(3)Departments of Opthalmology, Pathology & Cell Biology Graduate Programs in 
Nutritional & Metabolic Biology and Neurobiology & Behavior Columbia Stem Cell 
Initiative, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Edward S. Harkness Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Columbia 
University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.

Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a set of symptoms including tunnel vision, night 
blindness, and progressive vision loss, stemming from a very heterogeneous set 
of causes-it can result from a several different kinds of mutations 
(non-syndromic) in conjunction with other symptoms, as part of a larger syndrome 
(syndromic), or secondary to an organ system disease state (secondary RP). This 
chapter explores and elucidates these various causes of RP.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-0716-2651-1_2
PMID: 36481880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]