---
reference_id: PMID:17965051
title: FGF signaling acts upstream of the NOTCH and WNT signaling pathways to control segmentation clock oscillations in mouse somitogenesis.
authors:
- Wahl MB
- Deng C
- Lewandoski M
- Pourquié O
journal: Development
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1242/dev.009167
keywords:
- Animals
- Biological Clocks/genetics
- "Cleavage Stage, Ovum/metabolism, physiology"
- "Embryo, Mammalian"
- Female
- Fibroblast Growth Factors/physiology
- Gene Deletion
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental/drug effects"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Models, Biological"
- Pregnancy
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 1/genetics"
- "Receptors, Notch/metabolism, physiology"
- Signal Transduction/physiology
- "Somites/embryology, metabolism"
- Tretinoin/pharmacology
- "Wnt Proteins/metabolism, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FGF signaling acts upstream of the NOTCH and WNT signaling pathways to control segmentation clock oscillations in mouse somitogenesis.
**Authors:** Wahl MB, Deng C, Lewandoski M, Pourquié O
**Journal:** Development (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dev.009167](https://doi.org/10.1242/dev.009167)

## Content

1. Development. 2007 Nov;134(22):4033-41. doi: 10.1242/dev.009167.

FGF signaling acts upstream of the NOTCH and WNT signaling pathways to control 
segmentation clock oscillations in mouse somitogenesis.

Wahl MB(1), Deng C, Lewandoski M, Pourquié O.

Author information:
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, MO 64110, USA.

Fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signaling plays a crucial role in vertebrate 
segmentation. The FGF pathway establishes a posterior-to-anterior signaling 
gradient in the presomitic mesoderm (PSM), which controls cell maturation and is 
involved in the positioning of segmental boundaries. In addition, FGF signaling 
was shown to be rhythmically activated in the PSM in response to the 
segmentation clock. Here, we show that conditional deletion of the FGF receptor 
gene Fgfr1 abolishes FGF signaling in the mouse PSM, resulting in an arrest of 
the dynamic cyclic gene expression and ultimately leading to an arrest of 
segmentation. Pharmacological treatments disrupting FGF signaling in the PSM 
result in an immediate arrest of periodic WNT activation, whereas 
NOTCH-dependent oscillations stop only during the next oscillatory cycle. 
Together, these experiments provide genetic evidence for the role of FGF 
signaling in segmentation, and identify a signaling hierarchy controlling clock 
oscillations downstream of FGF signaling in the mouse.

DOI: 10.1242/dev.009167
PMID: 17965051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]