---
reference_id: "PMID:35752547"
title: "Syntactic complexity of spoken language in the diagnosis of schizophrenia: A probabilistic Bayes network model."
authors:
- Silva AM
- Limongi R
- MacKinley M
- Ford SD
- Alonso-Sánchez MF
- Palaniyappan L
journal: Schizophr Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2022.06.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Syntactic complexity of spoken language in the diagnosis of schizophrenia: A probabilistic Bayes network model.
**Authors:** Silva AM, Limongi R, MacKinley M, Ford SD, Alonso-Sánchez MF, Palaniyappan L
**Journal:** Schizophr Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.schres.2022.06.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2022.06.011)

## Content

1. Schizophr Res. 2023 Sep;259:88-96. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2022.06.011. Epub
2022  Jun 22.

Syntactic complexity of spoken language in the diagnosis of schizophrenia: A 
probabilistic Bayes network model.

Silva AM(1), Limongi R(2), MacKinley M(3), Ford SD(4), Alonso-Sánchez MF(5), 
Palaniyappan L(6).

Author information:
(1)Robarts Research Institute, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada. 
Electronic address: asilva43@uwo.ca.
(2)Robarts Research Institute, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada; 
Department of Psychology, Western University, London, Canada; Faculty of Human 
and Social Sciences, Wilfred Laurier University, Brantford, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Robarts Research Institute, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada; 
Lawson Health Research Institute, London, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Lawson Health Research Institute, London, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Robarts Research Institute, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Robarts Research Institute, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada; 
Lawson Health Research Institute, London, Ontario, Canada; Douglas Mental Health 
University Institute, Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada; Department of Psychiatry, Schulich School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, Western University, London, Canada; Department of Medical Biophysics, 
Western University, London, Canada.

In the clinical linguistics of schizophrenia, syntactic complexity has received 
much attention. In this study, we address whether syntactic complexity 
deteriorates within the six months following the first episode of psychosis in 
those who develop a diagnosis of schizophrenia. We collected data from a cohort 
of twenty-six first-episode psychosis and 12 healthy control subjects using the 
Thought and Language Index interview in response to three pictures from the 
Thematic Apperception Test at first assessment and after six months (the time of 
consensus diagnosis). An automated labeling (part-of-speech tagging) for 
specific syntactic elements calculated large and granular syntactic complexity 
indices with a focus on clause complexity as a particular case from this spoken 
language data. Probabilistic reasoning leveraging the conditional independence 
properties of Bayes networks revealed that consensus diagnosis of schizophrenia 
predicted a decrease in nominal subjects per clause among individuals with first 
episode psychosis. From the entire sample, we estimate a 95.4 % probability that 
a 50 % decrease in mean nominal subjects per clause after six months is 
explained by the presence of first episode psychosis. Among those with 
psychosis, a 30 % decrease in this clause-complexity index after six months of 
experiencing the first episode predicted with 95 % probability a consensus 
diagnosis of schizophrenia, representing a conditional relationship between a 
longitudinal decrease in syntactic complexity and a diagnosis of schizophrenia. 
We conclude that an early drift towards linguistic 
disorganization/impoverishment of clause complexity-at the granular level of 
nominal subject per clause-is a distinctive feature of schizophrenia that 
decreases longitudinally, thus differentiating schizophrenia from other 
psychotic illnesses with shared phenomenology.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.schres.2022.06.011
PMID: 35752547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest LP reports 
personal fees from Janssen Canada, Otsuka Canada, SPMM Course Limited, UK, 
Canadian Psychiatric Association; book royalties from Oxford University Press; 
investigator-initiated educational grants from Janssen Canada, Sunovion and 
Otsuka Canada outside the submitted work. LP is the convenor of DISCOURSE in 
Psychosis, an international consortium of researchers interested in the study of 
language in psychosis.