---
reference_id: "PMID:35383466"
title: "Evaluating the Feasibility of Screening Relatives of Patients Affected by Nonsyndromic Thoracic Aortic Diseases: The REST Study."
authors:
- Abbasciano RG
- Mariscalco G
- Barwell J
- Owens G
- Zakkar M
- Joel-David L
- Pathak S
- Adebayo A
- Shannon N
- Haines RL
- Aujla H
- Eagle-Hemming B
- Kumar T
- Lai F
- Wozniak M
- Murphy G
journal: J Am Heart Assoc
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1161/JAHA.121.023741
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Aortic Dissection/epidemiology
- "Aortic Aneurysm, Thoracic/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- "Aortic Diseases/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Feasibility Studies
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Quality of Life
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluating the Feasibility of Screening Relatives of Patients Affected by Nonsyndromic Thoracic Aortic Diseases: The REST Study.
**Authors:** Abbasciano RG, Mariscalco G, Barwell J, Owens G, Zakkar M, Joel-David L, Pathak S, Adebayo A, Shannon N, Haines RL, Aujla H, Eagle-Hemming B, Kumar T, Lai F, Wozniak M, Murphy G
**Journal:** J Am Heart Assoc (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1161/JAHA.121.023741](https://doi.org/10.1161/JAHA.121.023741)

## Content

1. J Am Heart Assoc. 2022 Apr 19;11(8):e023741. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.121.023741.
Epub  2022 Apr 6.

Evaluating the Feasibility of Screening Relatives of Patients Affected by 
Nonsyndromic Thoracic Aortic Diseases: The REST Study.

Abbasciano RG(1), Mariscalco G(2), Barwell J(3), Owens G(4), Zakkar M(1), 
Joel-David L(2), Pathak S(1), Adebayo A(1), Shannon N(5), Haines RL(5), Aujla 
H(1), Eagle-Hemming B(1), Kumar T(6), Lai F(1), Wozniak M(1), Murphy G(1).

Author information:
(1)Leicester NIHR Biomedical Research Centre & Department of Cardiovascular 
Sciences University of Leicester UK.
(2)Department of Cardiac Surgery University Hospitals of Leicester NHS Trust 
Leicester UK.
(3)Department of Genetics and Genome Biology University of Leicester UK.
(4)Aortic Dissection Awareness UK & Ireland York UK.
(5)Department of Clinical Genetics Nottingham University Hospitals Nottingham 
UK.
(6)Leicester Clinical Trials Unit University of Leicester Leicester UK.

Comment in
    J Am Heart Assoc. 2022 Apr 19;11(8):e025441. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.122.025441.

Background Diseases of the thoracic aorta are characterized by a familial 
etiology in up to 30% of the cases. Nonsyndromic thoracic aorta diseases 
(NS-TADs) lack overt clinical signs and systemic features, which hinder early 
detection and prompt surgical intervention. We hypothesize that tailored genetic 
testing and imaging of first-degree and second-degree relatives of patients 
affected by NS-TADs may enable early diagnosis and allow appropriate 
surveillance or intervention. Methods and Results We conducted a feasibility 
study involving probands affected by familial or sporadic NS-TADs who had 
undergone surgery, which also offered screening to their relatives. Each 
participant underwent a combined imaging (echocardiogram and magnetic resonance 
imaging) and genetic (whole exome sequencing) evaluation, together with physical 
examination and psychological assessment. The study population included 16 
probands (8 sporadic, 8 familial) and 54 relatives (41 first-degree and 13 
second-degree relatives) with median age 48 years (range: 18-85 years). No 
syndromic physical features were observed. Imaging revealed mild-to-moderate 
aortic dilation in 24% of relatives. A genetic variant of uncertain significance 
was identified in 3 families. Imaging, further phenotyping, or a form of 
secondary prevention was indicated in 68% of the relatives in the familial group 
and 54% in the sporadic group. No participants fulfilled criteria for aortic 
surgery. No differences between baseline and 3-month follow-up scores for 
depression, anxiety, and self-reported quality of life were observed. 
Conclusions In NS-TADs, imaging tests, genetic counseling, and family screening 
yielded positive results in up to 1 out of 4 screened relatives, including those 
in the sporadic NS-TAD group. Registration URL: https://www.clinicaltrials.gov; 
Unique identifier: NCT03861741.

DOI: 10.1161/JAHA.121.023741
PMCID: PMC9238461
PMID: 35383466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]