---
reference_id: "PMID:30482317"
title: Balance, gait, and falls in multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Cameron MH
- Nilsagard Y
journal: Handb Clin Neurol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63916-5.00015-X
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Balance, gait, and falls in multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Cameron MH, Nilsagard Y
**Journal:** Handb Clin Neurol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/B978-0-444-63916-5.00015-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-63916-5.00015-X)

## Content

1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2018;159:237-250. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63916-5.00015-X.

Balance, gait, and falls in multiple sclerosis.

Cameron MH(1), Nilsagard Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR, 
United States. Electronic address: cameromi@ohsu.edu.
(2)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR, 
United States.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic disease of the central nervous system (CNS) 
and the most widespread nontraumatic cause of disability in young adults around 
the world. MS occurs in people of all ages, races, and ethnicities. MS is 
characterized by clinical symptoms resulting from lesions in the brain, spinal 
cord, or optic nerves that can affect balance, gait, and fall risk. Lesions 
accumulate over time and occur in different areas of the CNS causing symptoms 
that include weakness, spasticity, and fatigue, as well as changes in sensation, 
coordination, vision, cognition, and bladder function. Thus, it is not 
surprising that imbalance, gait dysfunction, and falls are common in people with 
MS. The overwhelming majority have abnormalities of postural control and gait 
even early in the disease course. In all, 50-80% have balance and gait 
dysfunction and over 50% fall at least once each year. Balance dysfunction in MS 
is conceptualized as three interrelated problems: decreased ability to maintain 
position, limited and slowed movement towards limits of stability, and delayed 
responses to postural displacements and perturbations. In addition, functional 
balance performance may be affected by impaired dual-task integration. Walking 
changes in MS include reduced gait speed, impaired walking balance, and reduced 
walking-related physical activity. Falls in people with MS are associated with 
injuries, reduced participation, and increased fear of falling. A wide and 
growing range of rehabilitation and medical interventions are available to 
address the changes in balance, gait, and fall risk associated with MS.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63916-5.00015-X
PMID: 30482317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]