---
reference_id: "PMID:27017348"
title: "Life and death of β cells in Type 1 diabetes: A comprehensive review."
authors:
- Wilcox NS
- Rui J
- Hebrok M
- Herold KC
journal: J Autoimmun
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2016.02.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Life and death of β cells in Type 1 diabetes: A comprehensive review.
**Authors:** Wilcox NS, Rui J, Hebrok M, Herold KC
**Journal:** J Autoimmun (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaut.2016.02.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaut.2016.02.001)

## Content

1. J Autoimmun. 2016 Jul;71:51-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2016.02.001. Epub 2016 Mar 
24.

Life and death of β cells in Type 1 diabetes: A comprehensive review.

Wilcox NS(1), Rui J(1), Hebrok M(2), Herold KC(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA; Department 
of Internal Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
(2)Diabetes Center, Department of Medicine, University of California San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA; Department 
of Internal Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. Electronic address: 
kevan.herold@yale.edu.

Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is an autoimmune disorder characterized by the destruction 
of insulin-producing pancreatic β cells. Immune modulators have achieved some 
success in modifying the course of disease progression in T1D. However, there 
are parallel declines in C-peptide levels in treated and control groups after 
initial responses. In this review, we discuss mechanisms of β cell death in T1D 
that involve necrosis and apoptosis. New technologies are being developed to 
enable visualization of insulitis and β cell mass involving positron emission 
transmission that identifies β cell ligands and magnetic resonance imaging that 
can identify vascular leakage. Molecular signatures that identify β cell derived 
insulin DNA that is released from dying cells have been described and applied to 
clinical settings. We also consider changes in β cells that occur during disease 
progression including the induction of DNA methyltransferases that may affect 
the function and differentiation of β cells. Our findings from newer data 
suggest that the model of chronic long standing β cell killing should be 
reconsidered. These studies indicate that the pathophysiology is accelerated in 
the peridiagnosis period and manifest by increased rates of β cell killing and 
insulin secretory impairments over a shorter period than previously thought. 
Finally, we consider cellular explanations to account for the ongoing loss of 
insulin production despite continued immune therapy that may identify potential 
targets for treatment. The progressive decline in β cell function raises the 
question as to whether β cell failure that is independent of immune attack may 
be involved.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaut.2016.02.001
PMCID: PMC4903951
PMID: 27017348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]