---
reference_id: "PMID:15128923"
title: "Mitochondrial acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase (T2) deficiency: T2-deficient patients with \"mild\" mutation(s) were previously misinterpreted as normal by the coupled assay with tiglyl-CoA."
authors:
- Zhang GX
- Fukao T
- Rolland MO
- Zabot MT
- Renom G
- Touma E
- Kondo M
- Matsuo N
- Kondo N
journal: Pediatr Res
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1203/01.PDR.0000129657.48122.52
keywords:
- "Acetyl-CoA C-Acyltransferase/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Acyl Coenzyme A/metabolism
- "Cell Line, Transformed"
- "Child, Preschool"
- "DNA, Complementary"
- Enzyme Activation
- Fibroblasts/cytology
- Humans
- Immunoblotting
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Mitochondria/enzymology
- Point Mutation
- Severity of Illness Index
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase (T2) deficiency: T2-deficient patients with "mild" mutation(s) were previously misinterpreted as normal by the coupled assay with tiglyl-CoA.
**Authors:** Zhang GX, Fukao T, Rolland MO, Zabot MT, Renom G, Touma E, Kondo M, Matsuo N, Kondo N
**Journal:** Pediatr Res (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1203/01.PDR.0000129657.48122.52](https://doi.org/10.1203/01.PDR.0000129657.48122.52)

## Content

1. Pediatr Res. 2004 Jul;56(1):60-4. doi: 10.1203/01.PDR.0000129657.48122.52.
Epub  2004 May 5.

Mitochondrial acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase (T2) deficiency: T2-deficient patients
with "mild" mutation(s) were previously misinterpreted as normal by the coupled
assay with tiglyl-CoA.

Zhang GX(1), Fukao T, Rolland MO, Zabot MT, Renom G, Touma E, Kondo M, Matsuo N,
Kondo N.

Author information:
(1)departmentof Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu University, 1-1
Yanagido, Gifu, Gifu 501-1194, Japan.

Mitochondrial acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase (T2) deficiency is an inborn error of
metabolism that affects the catabolism of isoleucine and ketone bodies. This
disorder is characterized by intermittent ketoacidotic episodes. Recently, we
diagnosed T2 deficiency in two patients (GK45 and GK47) by the absence of
potassium ion-activated acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase activity, whereas these
patients were previously misinterpreted as normal by a coupled assay with
tiglyl-CoA as a substrate. This method has been widely used for the enzymatic
diagnosis of the T2 deficiency in the United States and Europe. We hypothesized
that some residual T2 activity showed normal results in the assay. To prove this
hypothesis, we analyzed these two patients together with three typical
T2-deficient patients (GK46, GK49, and GK50) at the DNA level. Expression
analysis of mutant cDNAs clearly showed that GK45 and GK47 had "mild" mutations
(A132G, D339-V340insD) that retained some residual T2 activity, at least one of
two mutant alleles, whereas the other three patients had null mutations
(c.52-53insC, G152A, H397D, and IVS8+1g>t) in either allele. These results raise
the possibility that T2-deficient patients with mild mutations have been
misinterpreted as normal by the coupled assay with tiglyl-CoA.

DOI: 10.1203/01.PDR.0000129657.48122.52
PMID: 15128923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
