---
reference_id: "PMID:26000096"
title: EWS/FLI utilizes NKX2-2 to repress mesenchymal features of Ewing sarcoma.
authors:
- Fadul J
- Bell R
- Hoffman LM
- Beckerle MC
- Engel ME
- Lessnick SL
journal: Genes Cancer
year: '2015'
doi: 10.18632/genesandcancer.57
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EWS/FLI utilizes NKX2-2 to repress mesenchymal features of Ewing sarcoma.
**Authors:** Fadul J, Bell R, Hoffman LM, Beckerle MC, Engel ME, Lessnick SL
**Journal:** Genes Cancer (2015)
**DOI:** [10.18632/genesandcancer.57](https://doi.org/10.18632/genesandcancer.57)

## Content

1. Genes Cancer. 2015 Mar;6(3-4):129-43. doi: 10.18632/genesandcancer.57.

EWS/FLI utilizes NKX2-2 to repress mesenchymal features of Ewing sarcoma.

Fadul J(1), Bell R(1), Hoffman LM(2), Beckerle MC(3), Engel ME(4), Lessnick 
SL(4).

Author information:
(1)Huntsman Cancer Institute, School of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake 
City, Utah, USA ; Department of Oncological Sciences, School of Medicine, 
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(2)Huntsman Cancer Institute, School of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake 
City, Utah, USA ; Department of Biology, School of Medicine, University of Utah, 
Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(3)Huntsman Cancer Institute, School of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake 
City, Utah, USA ; Department of Oncological Sciences, School of Medicine, 
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA ; Department of Biology, School of 
Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(4)Huntsman Cancer Institute, School of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake 
City, Utah, USA ; Department of Oncological Sciences, School of Medicine, 
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA ; Center for Children's Cancer 
Research, School of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA ; 
Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, School of Medicine, University of 
Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.

In Ewing sarcoma, NKX2-2 is a critical activated target of the oncogenic 
transcription factor EWS/FLI that is required for transformation. However, its 
biological function in this malignancy is unknown. Here we provide evidence that 
NKX2-2 mediates the EWS/FLI-controlled block of mesenchymal features. 
Transcriptome-wide RNA sequencing revealed that NKX2-2 represses cell adhesion 
and extracellular matrix organization genes. NKX2-2-depleted cells form more 
focal adhesions and organized actin stress fibers, and spread over a wider 
area-hallmarks of mesenchymally derived cells. Furthermore, NKX2-2 represses the 
actin-stabilizing protein zyxin, suggesting that these morphological changes are 
attributable to zyxin de-repression. In addition, NKX2-2-knockdown cells display 
marked increases in migration and substrate adhesion. However, only part of the 
EWS/FLI phenotype is NKX2-2-dependent; consequently, NKX2-2 is insufficient to 
rescue EWS/FLI repression of mesenchymalization. Strikingly, we found that 
EWS/FLI-and NKX22-repressed genes are activated by ZEB2, which was previously 
shown to block Ewing sarcoma epithelialization. Together, these data support an 
emerging theme wherein Ewing sarcoma cells highly express transcription factors 
that maintain an undifferentiated state. Importantly, co-opting epithelial and 
mesenchymal traits by Ewing sarcoma cells may explain how the primary tumor 
grows rapidly while also "passively" metastasizing, without the need for 
transitions toward differentiated states, as in carcinomas.

DOI: 10.18632/genesandcancer.57
PMCID: PMC4426950
PMID: 26000096

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors have no 
conflict of interest to disclose.