---
reference_id: "PMID:39063056"
title: Environmental and Genetic Determinants of Ankylosing Spondylitis.
authors:
- Bilski R
- Kamiński P
- Kupczyk D
- Jeka S
- Baszyński J
- Tkaczenko H
- Kurhaluk N
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25147814
keywords:
- "Spondylitis, Ankylosing/genetics, etiology"
- Humans
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Oxidative Stress/genetics
- Environmental Exposure/adverse effects
- Gene-Environment Interaction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Environmental and Genetic Determinants of Ankylosing Spondylitis.
**Authors:** Bilski R, Kamiński P, Kupczyk D, Jeka S, Baszyński J, Tkaczenko H, Kurhaluk N
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25147814](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25147814)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Jul 17;25(14):7814. doi: 10.3390/ijms25147814.

Environmental and Genetic Determinants of Ankylosing Spondylitis.

Bilski R(1), Kamiński P(2)(3), Kupczyk D(1), Jeka S(4), Baszyński J(2), 
Tkaczenko H(5), Kurhaluk N(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biology and Biochemistry, Collegium Medicum in 
Bydgoszcz, Nicholaus Copernicus University, M. Karłowicz St. 24, 85-092 
Bydgoszcz, Poland.
(2)Department of Medical Biology and Biochemistry, Division of Ecology and 
Environmental Protection, Collegium Medicum in Bydgoszcz, Nicolaus Copernicus 
University in Toruń, M. Skłodowska-Curie St. 9, 85-094 Bydgoszcz, Poland.
(3)Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Biological Sciences, Faculty of 
Biological Sciences, University of Zielona Góra, Prof. Z. Szafran St. 1, 65-516 
Zielona Góra, Poland.
(4)Department of Rheumatology and Connective Tissue Diseases, Collegium Medicum, 
Nicolaus Copernicus University, University Hospital No. 2, Ujejski St. 75, 
85-168 Bydgoszcz, Poland.
(5)Institute of Biology, Pomeranian University in Słupsk, Arciszewski St. 22 B, 
76-200 Słupsk, Poland.

Exposure to heavy metals and lifestyle factors like smoking contribute to the 
production of free oxygen radicals. This fact, combined with a lowered total 
antioxidant status, can induce even more damage in the development of ankylosing 
spondylitis (AS). Despite the fact that some researchers are looking for more 
genetic factors underlying AS, most studies focus on polymorphisms within the 
genes encoding the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) system. The biggest challenge 
is finding the effective treatment of the disease. Genetic factors and the 
influence of oxidative stress, mineral metabolism disorders, microbiota, and 
tobacco smoking seem to be of great importance for the development of AS. The 
data contained in this review constitute valuable information and encourage the 
initiation and development of research in this area, showing connections between 
inflammatory disorders leading to the pathogenesis of AS and selected 
environmental and genetic factors.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25147814
PMCID: PMC11277374
PMID: 39063056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.