---
reference_id: "PMID:34246009"
title: "What can we learn about eating disorder mortality from eating disorder diagnoses at initial assessment? A Danish nationwide register follow-up study using record linkage, encompassing 45 years (1970-2014)."
authors:
- Nielsen S
- Vilmar JW
journal: Psychiatry Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2021.114091
keywords:
- Anorexia Nervosa
- Denmark/epidemiology
- "Feeding and Eating Disorders/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Male
- Suicide
content_type: abstract_only
---

# What can we learn about eating disorder mortality from eating disorder diagnoses at initial assessment? A Danish nationwide register follow-up study using record linkage, encompassing 45 years (1970-2014).
**Authors:** Nielsen S, Vilmar JW
**Journal:** Psychiatry Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.psychres.2021.114091](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2021.114091)

## Content

1. Psychiatry Res. 2021 Sep;303:114091. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2021.114091. Epub
 2021 Jun 30.

What can we learn about eating disorder mortality from eating disorder diagnoses
at initial assessment? A Danish nationwide register follow-up study using record
linkage, encompassing 45 years (1970-2014).

Nielsen S(1), Vilmar JW(2).

Author information:
(1)Region Zealand Psychiatric Research Unit, Fælledvej 5, Bygning 3, 4.sal,
DK-4200 Slagelse, Denmark. Electronic address: sniels42@gmail.com.
(2)Roskilde Clinic of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry - Region Zealand, Ny
Østergade 12, DK-4000 Roskilde, Denmark. Electronic address:
jwv@regionsjaelland.dk.

Increased risk for premature mortality is well established for women and girls
diagnosed with anorexia nervosa (AN), but less is known for other types of
eating disorder (ED), and especially the mortality outcome for boys and men is
under-studied. In this registry-based observational epidemiological study, we
included all people appearing in the Danish Psychiatric Central Research
Register with an eating disorder (ED) diagnosis in the time period from Jan
1,1970 to Dec 31, 2014 (N: 22,633). For each patient four controls without ED
were selected, matched for age, sex and place of residence (N: 90486). In all
802 people with ED died over 255762.6 person-years of observation. Standardized
mortality ratio (SMR) for all-cause mortality and suicide mortality was
significantly increased for all ED-diagnoses in women. The SMRs for men were
similar, but only reached significance for the diagnoses AN and unspecified ED.
Mortality by natural causes and accidents was significantly increased in most
ED-diagnoses in women. The unequal female-to-male ratio in this, and most other
studies of ED-patients, suggests that boys and men with ED have unmet needs.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2021.114091
PMID: 34246009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
