---
reference_id: "PMID:36329079"
title: Asplenia and spleen hypofunction.
authors:
- Lenti MV
- Luu S
- Carsetti R
- Osier F
- Ogwang R
- Nnodu OE
- Wiedermann U
- Spencer J
- Locatelli F
- Corazza GR
- Di Sabatino A
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-022-00399-x
keywords:
- Humans
- Bacterial Infections/etiology
- "Splenic Diseases/complications, diagnosis"
- Splenectomy/adverse effects
- Antibiotic Prophylaxis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Asplenia and spleen hypofunction.
**Authors:** Lenti MV, Luu S, Carsetti R, Osier F, Ogwang R, Nnodu OE, Wiedermann U, Spencer J, Locatelli F, Corazza GR, Di Sabatino A
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-022-00399-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-022-00399-x)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2022 Nov 3;8(1):71. doi: 10.1038/s41572-022-00399-x.

Asplenia and spleen hypofunction.

Lenti MV(1)(2), Luu S(3)(4), Carsetti R(5), Osier F(6)(7), Ogwang R(6)(8), Nnodu
OE(9), Wiedermann U(10), Spencer J(11), Locatelli F(12), Corazza GR(1)(2), Di
Sabatino A(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Medical Therapeutics, University of
Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(2)First Department of Internal Medicine, IRCCS San Matteo Hospital Foundation,
Pavia, Italy.
(3)Monash Infectious Diseases, Monash Health, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.
(4)Australian Centre for Blood Diseases, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria,
Australia.
(5)B cell Unit, Immunology Research Area, IRCCS Bambino Gesù Children's
Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(6)KEMRI-Wellcome Trust Research Programme, Centre for Geographic Medicine
Research, Coast, Kilifi, Kenya.
(7)Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, London, UK.
(8)Centre of Tropical Neuroscience, Kitgum, Uganda.
(9)Department of Haematology and Blood Transfusion, College of Health Sciences,
University of Abuja, Abuja, Nigeria.
(10)Institute of Specific Prophylaxis and Tropical Medicine, Center of
Pathophysiology, Infectiology and Immunology, Medical University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria.
(11)Peter Gorer Department of Immunology, School of Immunology and Microbial
Sciences, King's College London, London, UK.
(12)Department of Paediatric Haematology/Oncology and Cell and Gene Therapy,
IRCCS Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart,
Rome, Italy.
(13)Department of Internal Medicine and Medical Therapeutics, University of
Pavia, Pavia, Italy. a.disabatino@smatteo.pv.it.
(14)First Department of Internal Medicine, IRCCS San Matteo Hospital Foundation,
Pavia, Italy. a.disabatino@smatteo.pv.it.

Asplenia (the congenital or acquired absence of the spleen) and hyposplenism
(defective spleen function) are common causes of morbidity and mortality. The
spleen is a secondary lymphoid organ that is responsible for the regulation of
immune responses and blood filtration. Hence, asplenia or hyposplenism increases
susceptibility to severe and invasive infections, especially those sustained by
encapsulated bacteria (namely, Neisseria meningitidis, Streptococcus pneumoniae,
Haemophilus influenzae type b). Asplenia is predominantly due to splenectomy for
either traumatic events or oncohaematological conditions. Hyposplenism can be
caused by several conditions, including haematological, infectious, autoimmune
and gastrointestinal disorders. Anatomical disruption of the spleen and
depletion of immune cells, especially IgM memory B cells, seem to be
predominantly responsible for the clinical manifestations. Early recognition of
hyposplenism and proper management of asplenia are warranted to prevent
overwhelming post-splenectomy infections through vaccination and antibiotic
prophylaxis. Although recommendations are available, the implementation of
vaccination strategies, including more effective and immunogenic vaccines, is
needed. Additionally, screening programmes for early detection of hyposplenism
in high-risk patients and improvement of patient education are warranted.

© 2022. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-022-00399-x
PMID: 36329079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
