---
reference_id: "PMID:28929493"
title: "Pediatric vasculitis: a single center experience."
authors:
- Alexopoulos A
- Dakoutrou M
- Stefanaki K
- Chrousos G
- Kakourou T
journal: Int J Dermatol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/ijd.13749
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Edema/epidemiology
- Female
- Greece/epidemiology
- Hemorrhage/epidemiology
- Humans
- "IgA Vasculitis/complications, epidemiology, pathology"
- Infant
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- Urticaria/epidemiology
- "Vasculitis, Leukocytoclastic, Cutaneous/epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric vasculitis: a single center experience.
**Authors:** Alexopoulos A, Dakoutrou M, Stefanaki K, Chrousos G, Kakourou T
**Journal:** Int J Dermatol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ijd.13749](https://doi.org/10.1111/ijd.13749)

## Content

1. Int J Dermatol. 2017 Nov;56(11):1130-1138. doi: 10.1111/ijd.13749. Epub 2017
Sep  19.

Pediatric vasculitis: a single center experience.

Alexopoulos A(1), Dakoutrou M(1), Stefanaki K(1), Chrousos G(1), Kakourou T(1).

Author information:
(1)First Department of Pediatrics, University of Athens, Aghia Sofia Children's
Hospital, Athens, Greece.

BACKGROUND: Existing studies of children with vasculitis are limited. The aim of
this study was to assess the epidemiology, clinical manifestations, laboratory
findings, course, and outcome of Greek children presenting with vasculitic rash.
METHODS: The relevant data included in the study were collected retrospectively
using a standardized form from children who were admitted into our department
between 2003 and 2013, with the provisional diagnosis of vasculitis of the skin.
RESULTS: The study sample consisted of 95 children (58 boys, 37 girls) with a
mean age of 5.9 years. In total, 76 out of 95 (80%) of the children were
diagnosed with Henoch-Schönlein purpura, 10/95 (10.5%) with hypersensitivity
vasculitis, 6/95 (6.3%) with urticarial vasculitis, and 3/95 (3.1%) with acute
hemorrhagic edema of infancy. The mean age of the children was 5.7 years for
Henoch-Schönlein purpura, 9 years for hypersensitivity vasculitis, 5.1 years for
urticarial vasculitis, and 0.5 years for acute hemorrhagic edema of infancy.
CONCLUSIONS: (i) The most common vasculitis presenting with skin rash in
children is Henoch-Schönlein purpura; (ii) hypersensitivity vasculitis occurs in
older children more often when compared to other types of vasculitis; (iii)
urticarial vasculitis lesions may be a sign of severe underlying disease;
therefore a thorough examination of these patients is warranted; (iv) Despite
relapses, the overall prognosis of patients with pediatric skin vasculitides is
good, with the exception of those with the urticarial vasculitis type.

© 2017 The International Society of Dermatology.

DOI: 10.1111/ijd.13749
PMID: 28929493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
