---
reference_id: "PMID:9372751"
title: "Adult-onset nemaline myopathy: a case report and review of the literature."
authors:
- Gyure KA
- Prayson RA
- Estes ML
journal: Arch Pathol Lab Med
year: '1997'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adult-onset nemaline myopathy: a case report and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Gyure KA, Prayson RA, Estes ML
**Journal:** Arch Pathol Lab Med (1997)

## Content

1. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 1997 Nov;121(11):1210-3.

Adult-onset nemaline myopathy: a case report and review of the literature.

Gyure KA(1), Prayson RA, Estes ML.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, OH 44195, USA.

Nemaline (rod) myopathy is a congenital muscle disease with a wide spectrum of 
phenotypes, ranging from forms with neonatal onset and fatal outcome to 
asymptomatic forms. An adult-onset variant is characterized by large numbers of 
rod-containing myofibers, numerous rods per affected myofiber, and the absence 
of specific structural abnormalities typical of other muscle diseases. Few cases 
fulfilling these criteria have been described in the literature. Rare cases have 
had an associated inflammatory component, and the majority of these have 
occurred in patients with an underlying immunologic disorder. We present an 
unusual case of an immunologically competent 65-year-old man with late-onset 
nemaline myopathy, who was previously diagnosed with an inflammatory myopathy 
based on a muscle biopsy that contained chronic inflammation. His symptoms 
consisted of a 2-year history of progressive proximal muscle weakness; his 
family history was unremarkable. A neurologic examination confirmed the presence 
of bilateral proximal muscle weakness, normal sensation, and decreased upper and 
lower extremity reflexes. Creatine kinase levels were normal, and 
electromyographic findings indicated a myopathic process. A modified trichrome 
stain of the right biceps muscle revealed granular, basophilic, centrally 
located rods in the atrophic myofibers. Ultrastructurally, these myofibers 
contained osmiophilic rectangular structures with a latticelike appearance 
typical of nemaline myopathy. This case illustrates that adult-onset nemaline 
myopathy, although rare, should be considered in the differential diagnosis of 
an inflammatory myopathy.

PMID: 9372751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]