---
reference_id: "PMID:37009076"
title: Serpiginous Choroiditis Presenting in Association With Clostridium difficile Infection and Ulcerative Colitis.
authors:
- Pollmann AS
- Mishra AV
- Betsch DM
- Francisconi CLM
journal: J Vitreoretin Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1177/2474126420946922
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serpiginous Choroiditis Presenting in Association With Clostridium difficile Infection and Ulcerative Colitis.
**Authors:** Pollmann AS, Mishra AV, Betsch DM, Francisconi CLM
**Journal:** J Vitreoretin Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1177/2474126420946922](https://doi.org/10.1177/2474126420946922)

## Content

1. J Vitreoretin Dis. 2020 Sep 2;5(2):177-181. doi: 10.1177/2474126420946922. 
eCollection 2021 Mar-Apr.

Serpiginous Choroiditis Presenting in Association With Clostridium difficile 
Infection and Ulcerative Colitis.

Pollmann AS(1), Mishra AV(1), Betsch DM(1), Francisconi CLM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Dalhousie University, 
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.

PURPOSE: This work reports a case of serpiginous choroiditis (SC) in association 
with ulcerative colitis and Clostridium difficile infection.
METHODS: A case report is discussed.
RESULTS: A 35-year-old man with a history of ulcerative colitis and recently 
treated C difficile infection presented with a rapid decline in central visual 
acuity in both eyes. Examination findings included geographic creamy-white 
lesions extending from the peripapillary region in both eyes. Multimodal imaging 
and negative infectious workup results supported the diagnosis of SC. Visual 
acuity and examination findings improved after initiation of systemic prednisone 
therapy. Adalimumab was initiated as a steroid-sparing treatment. At the last 
follow-up, 5 months after the initial presentation, SC and ulcerative colitis 
both remain in remission.
CONCLUSIONS: SC has been previously described in patients with systemic 
disorders, including autoimmune conditions. This patient developed SC following 
C difficile infection and in the context of active ulcerative colitis. To our 
knowledge, this is the first report of SC in association with these entities.

© The Author(s) 2020.

DOI: 10.1177/2474126420946922
PMCID: PMC9979053
PMID: 37009076

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.