---
reference_id: "PMID:32644728"
title: Transverse Myelitis.
authors:
- Simone CG
- Emmady PD
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transverse Myelitis.
**Authors:** Simone CG, Emmady PD

## Content

1. Transverse Myelitis.

Simone CG(1), Emmady PD(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 
Jan–.
2022 Nov 15.

Author information:
(1)Medstar Georgetown University Medical Center
(2)UNC school of Medicine, Atrium Health

Transverse myelitis (TM) is a rare, acquired focal inflammatory disorder often 
presenting with rapid onset weakness, sensory deficits, and bowel/bladder 
dysfunction. Generally occurring independently, often as a complication of 
infection, it may also exist as part of a continuum of other neuro-inflammatory 
disorders. Some of the included continua are acute disseminated 
encephalomyelitis, multiple sclerosis, neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder, 
and acute flaccid myelitis. TM generally occurs in the spinal cord at any level 
but most commonly affects the thoracic region. The disorder transverses the 
spinal cord, causing bilateral deficiencies. However, there may only be partial 
or asymmetric involvement. The duration of this disease may be as little as 3 to 
6 months or may become permanently debilitating. At peak deficit, 50% of 
patients are completely paraplegic, with virtually all of the patients having a 
degree of bladder/bowel dysfunction. Approximately 33% of patients recover with 
little to no lasting deficits, 33% have a moderate degree of permanent 
disability, and 33% are permanently disabled.

Copyright © 2025, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 32644728

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Christopher Simone declares no 
relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Prabhu 
Emmady declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.