---
reference_id: "PMID:32184353"
title: DHHC7-mediated palmitoylation of the accessory protein barttin critically regulates the functions of ClC-K chloride channels.
authors:
- Gorinski N
- Wojciechowski D
- Guseva D
- Abdel Galil D
- Mueller FE
- Wirth A
- Thiemann S
- Zeug A
- Schmidt S
- Zareba-Kozioł M
- Wlodarczyk J
- Skryabin BV
- Glage S
- Fischer M
- Al-Samir S
- Kerkenberg N
- Hohoff C
- Zhang W
- Endeward V
- Ponimaskin E
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.011049
keywords:
- "Acyltransferases/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- Chloride Channels/metabolism
- Dogs
- Gene Knockout Techniques
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- "Kidney/cytology, metabolism"
- Madin Darby Canine Kidney Cells
- Mice
- Mutation
- Palmitic Acid/metabolism
- Phenotype
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DHHC7-mediated palmitoylation of the accessory protein barttin critically regulates the functions of ClC-K chloride channels.
**Authors:** Gorinski N, Wojciechowski D, Guseva D, Abdel Galil D, Mueller FE, Wirth A, Thiemann S, Zeug A, Schmidt S, Zareba-Kozioł M, Wlodarczyk J, Skryabin BV, Glage S, Fischer M, Al-Samir S, Kerkenberg N, Hohoff C, Zhang W, Endeward V, Ponimaskin E
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.RA119.011049](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.RA119.011049)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2020 May 1;295(18):5970-5983. doi: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.011049. Epub
 2020 Mar 17.

DHHC7-mediated palmitoylation of the accessory protein barttin critically
regulates the functions of ClC-K chloride channels.

Gorinski N(1), Wojciechowski D(2), Guseva D(1), Abdel Galil D(1), Mueller FE(1),
Wirth A(1), Thiemann S(2), Zeug A(1), Schmidt S(1), Zareba-Kozioł M(3),
Wlodarczyk J(3), Skryabin BV(4), Glage S(5), Fischer M(2), Al-Samir S(6),
Kerkenberg N(7), Hohoff C(8), Zhang W(7), Endeward V(6), Ponimaskin E(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular Neurophysiology, Hannover Medical School, 30625
Hannover, Germany.
(2)Institute for Neurophysiology, Hannover Medical School, 30625 Hannover,
Germany.
(3)Laboratory of Cell Biophysics, Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology,
Polish Academy of Sciences, 02-093 Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Medicine, Core Facility Transgenic Animal and Genetic
Engineering Models (TRAM), University of Münster, 48149 Münster, Germany.
(5)Institute for Laboratory Animal Science, Hannover Medical School, 30625
Hannover, Germany.
(6)Institute of Vegetative Physiology, Hannover Medical School, 30625 Hannover,
Germany.
(7)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Laboratory for Molecular
Psychiatry, University of Münster, 48149 Münster, Germany; Otto Creutzfeldt
Center for Cognitive and Behavioral Neuroscience, University of Münster, 48149
Münster, Germany.
(8)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Laboratory for Molecular
Psychiatry, University of Münster, 48149 Münster, Germany.
(9)Department of Cellular Neurophysiology, Hannover Medical School, 30625
Hannover, Germany. Electronic address: Ponimaskin.Evgeni@mh-hannover.de.

Barttin is the accessory subunit of the human ClC-K chloride channels, which are
expressed in both the kidney and inner ear. Barttin promotes trafficking of the
complex it forms with ClC-K to the plasma membrane and is involved in activating
this channel. Barttin undergoes post-translational palmitoylation that is
essential for its functions, but the enzyme(s) catalyzing this
post-translational modification is unknown. Here, we identified zinc finger
DHHC-type containing 7 (DHHC7) protein as an important barttin palmitoyl
acyltransferase, whose depletion affected barttin palmitoylation and
ClC-K-barttin channel activation. We investigated the functional role of barttin
palmitoylation in vivo in Zdhhc7-/- mice. Although palmitoylation of barttin in
kidneys of Zdhhc7-/- animals was significantly decreased, it did not
pathologically alter kidney structure and functions under physiological
conditions. However, when Zdhhc7-/- mice were fed a low-salt diet, they
developed hyponatremia and mild metabolic alkalosis, symptoms characteristic of
human Bartter syndrome (BS) type IV. Of note, we also observed decreased
palmitoylation of the disease-causing R8L barttin variant associated with human
BS type IV. Our results indicate that dysregulated DHHC7-mediated barttin
palmitoylation appears to play an important role in chloride channel dysfunction
in certain BS variants, suggesting that targeting DHHC7 activity may offer a
potential therapeutic strategy for reducing hypertension.

© 2020 Gorinski et al.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.RA119.011049
PMCID: PMC7196637
PMID: 32184353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts
of interest with the contents of this article
