---
reference_id: "PMID:9586151"
title: "[Marfan syndrome: diagnosis of cardiovascular manifestations]."
authors:
- von Kodolitsch Y
- Raghunath M
- Dieckmann C
- Nienaber CA
journal: Z Kardiol
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1007/s003920050168
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Marfan syndrome: diagnosis of cardiovascular manifestations].
**Authors:** von Kodolitsch Y, Raghunath M, Dieckmann C, Nienaber CA
**Journal:** Z Kardiol (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s003920050168](https://doi.org/10.1007/s003920050168)

## Content

1. Z Kardiol. 1998 Mar;87(3):161-72. doi: 10.1007/s003920050168.

[Marfan syndrome: diagnosis of cardiovascular manifestations].

[Article in German]

von Kodolitsch Y(1), Raghunath M, Dieckmann C, Nienaber CA.

Author information:
(1)Universitätskrankenhaus Eppendorf, Innere Medizin II, Abteilung für 
Kardiologie, Hamburg.

With the availability of modern imaging modalities such as magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI), contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT), and transesophageal 
echocardiography (TEE), diagnostic options in the evaluation of Marfan patients 
have been improved profoundly. The most recent diagnostic advances comprise 
noninvasive tissue characterization of the aortic wall, immunofluorescence 
studies or pulse chase analyses of skin and cultured dermal fibroblasts, and 
molecular analysis at the cDNA/DNA level of the fibrillin-1 gene. New diagnostic 
insights have eventually led to revised nosologic criteria for the diagnosis of 
Marfan syndrome. The diagnostic reliability as well as the advantage and 
limitation of these recent diagnostic strategies are discussed; moreover 
diagnostic concepts for patients with neonatal as well as classic Marfan 
syndrome are presented and discussed in the context of the clinical management 
during adolescence, gravidity as well as in the pre- and postoperative patient.

DOI: 10.1007/s003920050168
PMID: 9586151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]