---
reference_id: "PMID:17676042"
title: Mutations in amphiphysin 2 (BIN1) disrupt interaction with dynamin 2 and cause autosomal recessive centronuclear myopathy.
authors:
- Nicot AS
- Toussaint A
- Tosch V
- Kretz C
- Wallgren-Pettersson C
- Iwarsson E
- Kingston H
- Garnier JM
- Biancalana V
- Oldfors A
- Mandel JL
- Laporte J
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1038/ng2086
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Binding Sites/genetics
- COS Cells
- Cell Line
- Cell Nucleus/metabolism
- Chlorocebus aethiops
- "Dynamin II/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- "Green Fluorescent Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Microscopy, Confocal"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Muscular Diseases/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Mutation
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Protein Binding
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Transfection
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in amphiphysin 2 (BIN1) disrupt interaction with dynamin 2 and cause autosomal recessive centronuclear myopathy.
**Authors:** Nicot AS, Toussaint A, Tosch V, Kretz C, Wallgren-Pettersson C, Iwarsson E, Kingston H, Garnier JM, Biancalana V, Oldfors A, Mandel JL, Laporte J
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng2086](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng2086)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2007 Sep;39(9):1134-9. doi: 10.1038/ng2086. Epub 2007 Aug 5.

Mutations in amphiphysin 2 (BIN1) disrupt interaction with dynamin 2 and cause 
autosomal recessive centronuclear myopathy.

Nicot AS(1), Toussaint A, Tosch V, Kretz C, Wallgren-Pettersson C, Iwarsson E, 
Kingston H, Garnier JM, Biancalana V, Oldfors A, Mandel JL, Laporte J.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), 
Department of Molecular Pathology, F-67400 Illkirch, France.

Centronuclear myopathies are characterized by muscle weakness and abnormal 
centralization of nuclei in muscle fibers not secondary to regeneration. The 
severe neonatal X-linked form (myotubular myopathy) is due to mutations in the 
phosphoinositide phosphatase myotubularin (MTM1), whereas mutations in dynamin 2 
(DNM2) have been found in some autosomal dominant cases. By direct sequencing of 
functional candidate genes, we identified homozygous mutations in amphiphysin 2 
(BIN1) in three families with autosomal recessive inheritance. Two missense 
mutations affecting the BAR (Bin1/amphiphysin/RVS167) domain disrupt its 
membrane tubulation properties in transfected cells, and a partial truncation of 
the C-terminal SH3 domain abrogates the interaction with DNM2 and its 
recruitment to the membrane tubules. Our results suggest that mutations in BIN1 
cause centronuclear myopathy by interfering with remodeling of T tubules and/or 
endocytic membranes, and that the functional interaction between BIN1 and DNM2 
is necessary for normal muscle function and positioning of nuclei.

DOI: 10.1038/ng2086
PMID: 17676042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]