---
reference_id: "PMID:30131851"
title: Patient-reported fatigue prior to treatment is prognostic of survival in patients with acute myeloid leukemia.
authors:
- Lacourt TE
- Kavelaars A
- Ohanian M
- Shah ND
- Shelburne SA
- Futreal A
- Kontoyiannis DP
- Heijnen CJ
journal: Oncotarget
year: '2018'
doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.25787
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Patient-reported fatigue prior to treatment is prognostic of survival in patients with acute myeloid leukemia.
**Authors:** Lacourt TE, Kavelaars A, Ohanian M, Shah ND, Shelburne SA, Futreal A, Kontoyiannis DP, Heijnen CJ
**Journal:** Oncotarget (2018)
**DOI:** [10.18632/oncotarget.25787](https://doi.org/10.18632/oncotarget.25787)

## Content

1. Oncotarget. 2018 Jul 27;9(58):31244-31252. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.25787.
eCollection 2018 Jul 27.

Patient-reported fatigue prior to treatment is prognostic of survival in
patients with acute myeloid leukemia.

Lacourt TE(1), Kavelaars A(1), Ohanian M(2), Shah ND(3), Shelburne SA(4)(5),
Futreal A(5), Kontoyiannis DP(4), Heijnen CJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuroimmunology Laboratory, Department of Symptom Research, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(2)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, California, USA.
(4)Department of Infectious Disease, Infection Control, and Employee Health, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.
(5)Department of Genomic Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is associated with poor survival. While clinical
prognostic factors of survival have been identified, the contribution of
patient-reported symptoms has only received marginal attention. Fatigue is one
of the most commonly reported symptoms of AML. There is some evidence that
fatigue is associated with shorter survival in hematological malignancies.
However, the prognostic effects of fatigue in a homogenous cohort of patients
with untreated AML has not been tested. We here report results of a prospective
study on the prognostic value of patient-reported fatigue prior to onset of
treatment, for 2-year survival in 94 AML patients. Cox regression models
controlling for demographic and clinical factors showed that those with severe
fatigue (22%) had decreased survival rates (Hr = 2.255, 95% CI = 1.16-5.60, p =
0.019). Further exploration showed that fatigue was associated with increased
plasma concentrations of IL-6 and TNF-α, but not with demographic or
disease-related factors. In conclusion, we here show for the first time that the
experience of severe fatigue prior to remission induction chemotherapy (IC) is
prognostic for shorter survival in patients with AML of all ages. These findings
point to the importance of interventions aimed at relieving fatigue especially
before or in the early phases of treatment in order to improve survival.

DOI: 10.18632/oncotarget.25787
PMCID: PMC6101294
PMID: 30131851

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST The authors declare no
potential conflicts of interest.
