---
reference_id: "PMID:35758965"
title: Three key genes expression profiling in Egyptian rheumatoid arthritis patients.
authors:
- Abdelnaby MM
- Badran DI
- Anani MM
- Hashem AA
- Moneim NHA
- Eldesouki RE
- Elmedany SH
- Hosny MM
journal: Egypt J Immunol
year: '2022'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Three key genes expression profiling in Egyptian rheumatoid arthritis patients.
**Authors:** Abdelnaby MM, Badran DI, Anani MM, Hashem AA, Moneim NHA, Eldesouki RE, Elmedany SH, Hosny MM
**Journal:** Egypt J Immunol (2022)

## Content

1. Egypt J Immunol. 2022 Jul;29(3):19-28.

Three key genes expression profiling in Egyptian rheumatoid arthritis patients.

Abdelnaby MM(1), Badran DI(2), Anani MM(3), Hashem AA(4), Moneim NHA(1), 
Eldesouki RE(5), Elmedany SH(6), Hosny MM(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Medicine, Rheumatology and Rehabilitation, Faculty of 
Medicine, Suez Canal University, Ismailia, Egypt.
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of 
Medicine, Suez Canal University, Ismailia, Egypt.
(3)Department of Clinical Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Suez Canal University, 
Ismailia, Egypt.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Suez 
Canal University, Ismailia, Egypt.
(5)Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Histology, Faculty of Medicine, Suez 
Canal University, Ismailia, Egypt.
(6)Department of Physical Medicine, Rheumatology and Rehabilitation, Faculty of 
Medicine, Tanta University, Tanta, Egypt.
(7)Oncology Diagnostic Unit lab, Faculty of Medicine, Suez Canal University, 
Ismailia, Egypt.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a multi-system autoimmune disease with synovial 
joints involvement. The triad of autoimmunity, genetics, and environment is the 
key player in RA pathogenesis. We intended to investigate gene expression of C-C 
Chemokine Ligand 2 (CCL2), protein tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor type 22 
(PTPN22), and Cytotoxic T-lymphocyte associated protein 4 (CTLA-4) in RA 
patients versus controls, and its correlation with the activity of the disease. 
The relative expression of PTPN22, CTLA-4, and CCL2 in the peripheral blood of 
59 RA patients and 50 controls was determined using RT-PCR. There was a 
significantly higher median (inter-quartile range) expression of CTLA-4 and CCL2 
in RA patients in comparison to controls (P < 0.05). However, in RA patients, 
PTPN22 expression was significantly lower than in controls (P=0.0001). A weak 
significant correlation was detected between PTPN22 and either CTLA-4 or CCL2. 
Also, on comparing RA patients with moderate to severe disease activity versus 
those who have a mild disease activity, CCL2 was significantly over-expressed (P 
> 0.05). Thus, in Egyptian RA patients, there was a significant PTPN22 
down-expression and greater expression of CTLA-4 and CCL2. Moreover, 
over-expression of CCL2 in RA patients with moderate-to-severe disease activity 
was significant. We conclude that these three key genes could become useful 
diagnostic markers for RA and CCL2 expression as a good prognostic tool for RA 
disease activity.

Copyright© by the Egyptian Association of Immunologists.

PMID: 35758965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]