---
reference_id: "PMID:36533535"
title: "Effect of Intensive Blood Pressure Control on Troponin and Natriuretic Peptide Levels: Findings From SPRINT."
authors:
- Berry JD
- Chen H
- Nambi V
- Ambrosius WT
- Ascher SB
- Shlipak MG
- Ix JH
- Gupta R
- Killeen A
- Toto RD
- Kitzman DW
- Ballantyne CM
- de Lemos JA
journal: Circulation
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.122.059960
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of Intensive Blood Pressure Control on Troponin and Natriuretic Peptide Levels: Findings From SPRINT.
**Authors:** Berry JD, Chen H, Nambi V, Ambrosius WT, Ascher SB, Shlipak MG, Ix JH, Gupta R, Killeen A, Toto RD, Kitzman DW, Ballantyne CM, de Lemos JA
**Journal:** Circulation (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.122.059960](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.122.059960)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2023 Jan 24;147(4):310-323. doi:
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.122.059960.  Epub 2022 Dec 19.

Effect of Intensive Blood Pressure Control on Troponin and Natriuretic Peptide 
Levels: Findings From SPRINT.

Berry JD(1)(2), Chen H(3), Nambi V(4), Ambrosius WT(3), Ascher SB(5)(6), Shlipak 
MG(5), Ix JH(7)(8), Gupta R(9), Killeen A(10), Toto RD(2), Kitzman DW(11), 
Ballantyne CM(12), de Lemos JA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas at Tyler School of 
Medicine (J.D.B.).
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
School, Dallas (J.D.B., R.D.T., J.A.d.).
(3)Department of Biostatistics and Data Science, Division of Public Health 
Sciences (H.C., W.T.A.), Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC.
(4)Michael E DeBakey Veterans Affairs Hospital and Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX (V.N.).
(5)Kidney Health Research Collaborative, Department of Medicine, San Francisco 
Veterans Affairs Health Care System and University of California San Francisco 
(S.B.A., M.G.S.).
(6)Division of Hospital Medicine, University of California Davis, Sacramento 
(S.B.A.).
(7)Division of Nephrology-Hypertension, University of California San Diego 
(J.H.I.).
(8)Nephrology Section, Veterans Affairs San Diego Healthcare System, CA 
(J.H.I.).
(9)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University of Toledo Medical 
Center, OH (R.G.).
(10)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis (A.K.).
(11)Department of Internal Medicine, Sections on Cardiovascular Medicine and 
Geriatrics (D.W.K.), Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC.
(12)Department of Medicine and Center for Cardiometabolic Disease Prevention 
(C.M.B.), Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX.

BACKGROUND: Given the important role of cardiac injury and neurohormonal 
activation in the pathways leading from hypertension to heart failure and strong 
associations observed between hypertension and its sequelae on hs-cTnT 
(high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T) and NT-proBNP (N-terminal pro-B-type 
natriuretic peptide) levels, we hypothesized that intensive systolic blood 
pressure (SBP) lowering would decrease levels of hs-cTnT and NT-proBNP.
METHODS: hs-cTnT and NT-proBNP were measured at baseline and 1 year from stored 
specimens in SPRINT (Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention Trial). Changes in 
biomarkers were evaluated continuously on the log scale and according to 
categories (≥50% increase, ≥50% decrease, or <50% change). The effect of 
intensive SBP lowering on continuous and categorical changes in biomarker levels 
were assessed using linear and multinomial logistic regression models, 
respectively. The association between changes in biomarkers on heart failure and 
death was assessed using multivariable-adjusted Cox proportional hazards models.
RESULTS: Randomization to intensive SBP lowering (versus standard SBP 
management) resulted in a 3% increase in hs-cTnT levels over 1-year follow-up 
(geometric mean ratio, 1.03 [95% CI, 1.01-1.04]) and a higher proportion of 
participants with ≥50% increase (odds ratio, 1.47 [95% CI, 1.13, 1.90]). In 
contrast, randomization to intensive SBP lowering led to a 10% decrease in 
NT-proBNP (geometric mean ratio, 0.90 [95% CI, 0.87-0.93]) and a lower 
probability of ≥50% increase in NT-proBNP (odds ratio, 0.57 [95% CI, 
0.46-0.72]). The association of randomized treatment assignment on change in 
hs-cTnT was completely attenuated after accounting for changes in estimated 
glomerular filtration rate over follow-up, whereas the association of treatment 
with NT-proBNP was completely attenuated after adjusting for change in SBP. 
Increases in hs-cTnT and NT-proBNP from baseline to 1 year were associated with 
higher risk for heart failure and death, with no significant interactions by 
treatment assignment.
CONCLUSIONS: Intensive SBP lowering increased hs-cTnT, mediated by the effect of 
SBP lowering on reduced kidney filtration. In contrast, intensive SBP lowering 
decreased NT-proBNP, a finding that was explained by the decrease in SBP. These 
findings highlight the importance of noncardiac factors influencing variation in 
cardiac biomarkers and raise questions about the potential role of hs-cTnT as a 
surrogate marker for heart failure or death in SBP-lowering studies.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.122.059960
PMID: 36533535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]