---
reference_id: "PMID:34800399"
title: "Safety and efficacy of avalglucosidase alfa versus alglucosidase alfa in patients with late-onset Pompe disease (COMET): a phase 3, randomised, multicentre trial."
authors:
- Diaz-Manera J
- Kishnani PS
- Kushlaf H
- Ladha S
- Mozaffar T
- Straub V
- Toscano A
- van der Ploeg AT
- Berger KI
- Clemens PR
- Chien YH
- Day JW
- Illarioshkin S
- Roberts M
- Attarian S
- Borges JL
- Bouhour F
- Choi YC
- Erdem-Ozdamar S
- Goker-Alpan O
- Kostera-Pruszczyk A
- Haack KA
- Hug C
- Huynh-Ba O
- Johnson J
- Thibault N
- Zhou T
- Dimachkie MM
- Schoser B
- COMET Investigator Group
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00241-6
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- Double-Blind Method
- "Enzyme Replacement Therapy/adverse effects, methods"
- Glycogen Storage Disease Type II/drug therapy
- Humans
- Treatment Outcome
- Walking
- alpha-Glucosidases/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Safety and efficacy of avalglucosidase alfa versus alglucosidase alfa in patients with late-onset Pompe disease (COMET): a phase 3, randomised, multicentre trial.
**Authors:** Diaz-Manera J, Kishnani PS, Kushlaf H, Ladha S, Mozaffar T, Straub V, Toscano A, van der Ploeg AT, Berger KI, Clemens PR, Chien YH, Day JW, Illarioshkin S, Roberts M, Attarian S, Borges JL, Bouhour F, Choi YC, Erdem-Ozdamar S, Goker-Alpan O, Kostera-Pruszczyk A, Haack KA, Hug C, Huynh-Ba O, Johnson J, Thibault N, Zhou T, Dimachkie MM, Schoser B, COMET Investigator Group
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00241-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00241-6)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2021 Dec;20(12):1012-1026. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00241-6.

Safety and efficacy of avalglucosidase alfa versus alglucosidase alfa in
patients with late-onset Pompe disease (COMET): a phase 3, randomised,
multicentre trial.

Diaz-Manera J(1), Kishnani PS(2), Kushlaf H(3), Ladha S(4), Mozaffar T(5),
Straub V(6), Toscano A(7), van der Ploeg AT(8), Berger KI(9), Clemens PR(10),
Chien YH(11), Day JW(12), Illarioshkin S(13), Roberts M(14), Attarian S(15),
Borges JL(16), Bouhour F(17), Choi YC(18), Erdem-Ozdamar S(19), Goker-Alpan
O(20), Kostera-Pruszczyk A(21), Haack KA(22), Hug C(23), Huynh-Ba O(24), Johnson
J(23), Thibault N(23), Zhou T(23), Dimachkie MM(25), Schoser B(26); COMET
Investigator Group.

Collaborators: Behin A, Boentert M, Carvalho G, Chahin N, Charrow J, Deegan P,
Durmus Tekce H, Duval F, Genge A, Gutmann L, Henderson RD, Hennermann JB, Hiwot
T, Hughes D, Karaa A, Karam C, Kautzky-Willer A, Komaki H, Laforet P, Longo N,
Malinova V, Maré R, Maxit C, Mengel E, Moggio MG, Molnár MJ, Mongini TE,
Nadaj-Pakleza A, Nascimento Osorio A, Noury JB, Oliveira ASB, Parman Y, Pena L,
Remiche G, Sciacco M, Shieh PB, Smith C, Stulnig T, Taithe F, Tard C,
Tarnopolsky M, Vorgerd M, Whitley C, Young P, Alonso-Pérez J, Altemus P,
Aubé-Nathier AC, Avelar JB, Bailey C, Bekircan-Kurt CE, Billy J, Boschi S, Brown
KE, Carrera Garcia L, Chase L, Cirne H, Danjoux L, Davion JB, DeArmey S,
Fedotova E, Gandolfo E, Grosz Z, Guellec D, Guettsches AK, Guglieri M, Hatcher
E, Helms S, Hufgard-Leitner M, Klyushnikov SA, Langton J, Linková L, Mavroudakis
N, Mazurová S, Mori M, Müller-Miny L, Musumeci O, Nance CS, Natera-de Benito D,
Neel R, Niizawa GA, Noll L, Ortega E, Pasnoor M, Pautot V, Potulska-Chromik A,
Pugliese A, Questienne C, Ramos Lopes M, Reyes-Leiva D, Riedl M, Rugiero MF,
Salort-Campana E, Sgobbi Souza PV, Sole G, Solera L, Souto Lopes S, Specht S,
Statland J, Swenson A, Tan CY, Tizon S, van der Beek NAME, van Kooten HA, Wencel
M, Wenninger S, Zagnoli F.

Author information:
(1)John Walton Muscular Dystrophy Research Centre, Newcastle University Centre
for Life, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK; Neuromuscular Diseases Unit, Neurology
Department, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain; Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red en Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Spain.
Electronic address: jordi.diaz-manera@newcastle.ac.uk.
(2)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology and Rehabilitation Medicine, and Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH,
USA.
(4)Gregory W Fulton ALS and Neuromuscular Center, Barrow Neurological Institute,
Phoenix, AZ, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of California, Irvine, Orange, CA, USA.
(6)John Walton Muscular Dystrophy Research Centre, Newcastle University Centre
for Life, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(7)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Reference Centre for Rare
Neuromuscular Disorders, University of Messina, Messina, Italy.
(8)Center for Lysosomal and Metabolic Diseases, Erasmus MC, University Medical
Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(9)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, New York University
Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA; André Cournand Pulmonary
Physiology Laboratory, Bellevue Hospital, New York, NY, USA.
(10)Department of Neurology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA;
Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(11)Department of Medical Genetics and Pediatrics, National Taiwan University
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(12)Department of Neurology, and Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA, USA.
(13)Research Center of Neurology, Moscow, Russia.
(14)Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, Salford, UK.
(15)Referral Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases and ALS, Hôpital La Timone,
Marseille, France.
(16)Clinical Research Centre of Brazil, Brasilia, Brazil.
(17)Referral Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases, Hopîtal Neurologique, Lyon-Bron,
France.
(18)Gangnam Severance Hospital, Yonsei University, College of Medicine, Seoul,
South Korea.
(19)Hacettepe University Department of Neurology, Ankara, Turkey.
(20)Lysosomal and Rare Disorders Research and Treatment Center (LDRTC), Fairfax,
VA, USA.
(21)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, ERN
EURO-NMD.
(22)Sanofi Genzyme, Shanghai, China.
(23)Sanofi Genzyme, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(24)Sanofi Genzyme, Chilly-Mazarin, France.
(25)University of Kansas Medical Center, Department of Neurology, Kansas City,
KS, USA.
(26)Friedrich-Baur-Institute, Department of Neurology, LMU Klinikum München,
Munich, Germany.

Erratum in
    Lancet Neurol. 2022 Apr;21(4):e4. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(22)00088-6.

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2021 Dec;20(12):973-975. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00358-6.

BACKGROUND: Pompe disease is a rare, progressive neuromuscular disorder caused
by deficiency of acid α-glucosidase (GAA) and accumulation of lysosomal
glycogen. We assessed the safety and efficacy of avalglucosidase alfa, a
recombinant human GAA enzyme replacement therapy specifically designed for
enhanced mannose-6-phosphate-receptor targeting and enzyme uptake aimed at
increased glycogen clearance, compared with the current approved standard of
care, alglucosidase alfa, in patients with late-onset Pompe disease.
METHODS: We did a randomised, double-blind, phase 3 trial at 55 sites in 20
countries. We enrolled individuals (aged ≥3 years) with enzymatically confirmed
late-onset Pompe disease who had never received treatment. We used a centralised
treatment allocation system to randomly allocate participants to either
avalglucosidase alfa or alglucosidase alfa. Participants and investigators were
unaware of their treatment allocation. The primary outcome measure was change
from baseline to week 49 in upright forced vital capacity percent (FVC%)
predicted. We used a hierarchical fixed sequential testing strategy, whereby
non-inferiority of avalglucosidase alfa compared with alglucosidase alfa was
assessed first, with a non-inferiority margin of 1·1. If non-inferiority was
seen, then superiority was tested with a 5% significance level. The key
secondary objective was effect on functional endurance, measured by the 6-minute
walk test (6MWT). Safety was assessed, including treatment-emergent adverse
events and infusion-associated reactions. The modified intent-to-treat
population was the primary analysis population for all efficacy analyses. The
safety population was the analysis population for safety analyses. This trial is
registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT02782741. We report results of the
49-week primary analysis period.
FINDINGS: Between Nov 2, 2016, and March 29, 2019, 100 participants were
randomly allocated avalglucosidase alfa (n=51) or alglucosidase alfa (n=49).
Treatment with avalglucosidase alfa resulted in a least-squares mean improvement
in upright FVC% predicted of 2·89% (SE 0·88) compared with 0·46% (0·93) with
alglucosidase alfa at week 49 (difference 2·43% [95% CI -0·13 to 4·99]).
Non-inferiority was shown because the lower bound of the 95% CI for the
difference far exceeded the predefined non-inferiority margin but did not
exclude 0 (p=0·0074). Superiority was not reached (p=0·063), so formal testing
was stopped, as per the testing hierarchy. Improvements were also seen in the
6MWT with avalglucosidase alfa compared with alglucosidase alfa, with greater
increases in distance covered (difference 30·01 m [95% CI 1·33 to 58·69]) and
percent predicted (4·71% [0·25 to 9·17]). Treatment-emergent adverse events
potentially related to treatment were reported in 23 (45%) of 51 participants in
the avalglucosidase alfa group and in 24 (49%) of 49 in the alglucosidase alfa
group, and infusion-associated reactions were reported in 13 (26%) participants
in the avalglucosidase alfa group and 16 (33%) in the alglucosidase alfa group.
Of the five trial withdrawals, all in the alglucosidase alfa group, four were
due to adverse events, including two infusion-associated reactions. Serious
treatment-emergent adverse events were reported in eight (16%) participants who
received avalglucosidase alfa and in 12 (25%) who received alglucosidase alfa.
One participant treated with alglucosidase alfa died because of acute myocardial
infarction determined to be unrelated to treatment. Antidrug antibody responses
were similar in both groups. High and persistent titres (≥12 800) and
neutralising antibodies were more common with alglucosidase alfa (in 16 [33%]
participants) than with avalglucosidase alfa (ten [20%]).
INTERPRETATION: We consider that this study provides evidence of clinically
meaningful improvement with avalglucosidase alfa therapy over alglucosidase alfa
in respiratory function, ambulation, and functional endurance, with no new
safety signals reported. An open-label extended-treatment period is ongoing to
confirm the long-term safety and efficacy of avalglucosidase alfa, with the aim
for this therapy to become the new standard treatment in late-onset Pompe
disease.
FUNDING: Sanofi Genzyme.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(21)00241-6
PMID: 34800399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests SA received
reimbursement for attending symposia and other expenses. KB has served on
advisory boards for Sanofi Genzyme, AskBio, Spark Therapeutics, and Takeda; and
received consultant fees from Sanofi Genzyme, Amicus Therapeutics, AskBio, Spark
Therapeutics, Takeda and Valerion. Y-HC has received research support,
consulting fees, reimbursement for attending symposium and other expenses, and
fees for non-continuing medical education or continuing education services from
Sanofi Genzyme. PRC has served as a member of the Pompe Registry North American
Advisory Board and undertaken contracted research for Amicus, Sanofi Genzyme,
Spark, ReveraGen Biopharma, and NS Pharma. She has been a consultant for Roche
and Epirium. She has received travel funding from Roche, Spark, and NS Pharma.
JWD has received consulting fees from Audentes, Biogen;, Ionis Pharmaceuticals,
Cytokinetics, Pfizer, AveXis, Roche/Genentech Pharmaceuticals, AMO
Pharmaceuticals, and Sarepta Therapeutics; and has undertaken contracted
research for Biogen, Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Cytokinetics, Roche Pharmaceuticals,
AveXis, Sanofi- Genzyme, Sarepta Therapeutics, and Scholar Rock. JD-M has served
as a consultant or speaker for Sanofi Genzyme, Lupin, Sarepta, and PTC
Therapeutics; and received research support from Boehringer Ingelheim and Sanofi
Genzyme. MMD has served as a consultant forArgenX, Catalyst, Cello, CSL Behring,
EcoR1, Kezar, Momenta, NuFactor, Octapharma, RaPharma/UCB, RMS Medical, Sanofi
Genzyme, Shire Takeda, Spark Therapeutics, and UCB Biopharma; and has received
grants from Alexion, Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Amicus, BioMarin, Bristol-Myers
Squibb, Catalyst, Corbus, CSL Behring, US Food and Drug Administration/Office of
Orphan Products Development, Genentech, GlaxoSmithKline, Grifols, Kezar,
Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma, Muscular Dystrophy Association, US National Institutes
of Health (NIH), Novartis, Octapharma, Orphazyme, Ra Pharma/UCB, Sanofi Genzyme,
Sarepta Therapeutics, Shire Takeda, Spark Therapeutics, UCB Biopharma,
Viromed/Healixmith, and TMA. SE-O has served on advisory boards for Sanofi
Genzyme. OG-A has served on advisory boards for Amicus, BioMarin, Sanofi, and
Takeda; served on speaker's bureau for Sanofi and Takeda; received consulting
fees from Amicus, BioMarin, Sanofi Genzyme, Shire Human Genetics Therapies, and
Takeda; and undertaken contracted research for Amicus, Freeline, Genentech,
Protalix, Sangamo, Sanofi, and Takeda. SI has received honoraria from Actelion,
Boehringher Ingelheim, Ever Pharma, Merz Pharma, Servier, Takeda, and Teva. PSK
has served on advisory boards for Amicus, Baebies, and Sanofi Genzyme; received
consulting fees from Amicus, AskBio, Sanofi Genzyme, and Vertex; undertaken
contracted research for Amicus, Sanofi Genzyme, and Valerion; received honoraria
from Amicus, AskBio, Sanofi Genzyme, and Vertex; received travel expenses from
Amicus and Sanofi Genzyme; and has ownership interests in AskBio and Baebies. HK
has served on advisory boards for Alexion, Catalyst Pharmaceuticals, PTC
therapeutics, and Sanofi Genzyme; and is on the speaker's bureau of Akcea,
Catalyst Pharmaceuticals, and Sanofi Genzyme. SL has served on advisory boards
and speaker's bureau, received consulting fees, and undertaken contracted
research for Sanofi Genzyme. TM has served on advisory boards for Amicus,
Biomarin, Idera, Novartis, Sanofi Genzyme, Ultragenyx, and received travel
subsidies and honoraria for related activities; has served as a consultant to
NuFactor, Sarepta Therapeutics, and Walgreens, and received travel subsidies and
honoraria; served on the speaker's bureau for Sanofi Genzyme and Grifols and
received travel subsidies and honoraria for these; and received research funding
from Alexion, Alnylam, Amicus, Baxter, Bio-Blast, Biogen, Biomarin, CSL Behring,
Sanofi Genzyme, Grifols, GlaxoSmithKline, Idera, ISIS Pharmaceuticals, NIH,
Novartis, and Ultragenyx. MR has received research support from Amicus; received
consulting fees, honoraria, and travel reimbursement from Sanofi Genzyme,
BioMarin, and Amicus; has received royalties from NIH; is a member of a
speaker's bureau for NIH; and is a member of the Pompe Registry Scientific
Advisory Board. BS has served within the last 3 years on advisory boards for
Amicus Therapeutics, Audentes Therapeutics, Dyne, Lupin, Nexien, Sanofi Genzyme,
Spark, and UCB; undertaken contracted research for Amicus, Greenovation
Biopharm, and Sanofi Genzyme; received honoraria from Alexion and Kedrion; and
travel expenses from Kedrion and Sanofi Genzyme. VS has received consulting fees
from AveXis, Exonics Therapeutic, Roche, Sanofi Genzyme, and Sarepta
Therapeutics; received honoraria from Sanofi Genzyme; and undertaken contracted
research from Sanofi Genzyme and Ultragenyx. AT has received reimbursement for
participation either as a speaker for lectures and symposia or as a Pompe
Registry board member from Sanofi Genzyme. ATvdP provided consulting services,
participated in advisory board meetings, and received grants for pre-marketing
studies and research from industries (eg, Sanofi Genzyme, Biomarin, and Amicus,
etc) via agreements between Erasmus MC and the industries. KAH and her spouse,
CH, OH-B, JJ, NT, and TZ are employees of Sanofi Genzyme. All other authors
declare no competing interests.
