---
reference_id: PMID:24176881
title: "Characterization of the APP/PS1 mouse model of Alzheimer's disease in senescence accelerated background."
authors:
- Lok K
- Zhao H
- Shen H
- Wang Z
- Gao X
- Zhao W
- Yin M
journal: Neurosci Lett
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.10.051
keywords:
- Aging/pathology
- "Alzheimer Disease/metabolism, pathology"
- Amyloid beta-Protein Precursor/genetics
- Animals
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Immunohistochemistry
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Presenilin-1/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of the APP/PS1 mouse model of Alzheimer's disease in senescence accelerated background.
**Authors:** Lok K, Zhao H, Shen H, Wang Z, Gao X, Zhao W, Yin M
**Journal:** Neurosci Lett (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neulet.2013.10.051](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2013.10.051)

## Content

1. Neurosci Lett. 2013 Dec 17;557 Pt B:84-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.10.051. 
Epub 2013 Oct 28.

Characterization of the APP/PS1 mouse model of Alzheimer's disease in senescence 
accelerated background.

Lok K(1), Zhao H, Shen H, Wang Z, Gao X, Zhao W, Yin M.

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China.

The APP/PS1 mouse model of Alzheimer's disease (AD) exhibits remarkable 
elevation of β-amyloid production associated with certain behavioral 
abnormalities, while the senescence accelerated mouse prone 8 (SAMP8) is 
characterized by early and age-related deterioration of learning and memory. In 
order to obtain an AD model that develops earlier pathological changes and 
cognitive impairment, we generated SAMP8-APP/PS1, a novel senescence accelerated 
APP/PS1 transgenic mouse model of AD. Standard histological staining and 
immunohistochemistry using an amyloid beta (Aβ) antibody showed an age, genotype 
and strain-dependent progression of amyloid deposition and neuron loss in the 
cerebral cortex and hippocampus of SAMP8-APP/PS1 mice. Results from the 
cognitive behavioral tests revealed early deficits in learning and memory in 
SAMP8-APP/PS1 mice in the two way active avoidance and Morris water maze tests 
compared with C57-APP/PS1, SAMP8 wild-type and control mice. These results 
suggest that accelerated senescence exacerbates amyloid deposition and cognitive 
dysfunction in APP/PS1 mice and the senescence accelerated-APP/PS1 
(SAMP8-APP/PS1) mouse model might be a valuable tool to study AD progression and 
to evaluate the effect of drugs on AD.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.10.051
PMID: 24176881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]