---
reference_id: "PMID:23652265"
title: "An updated definition of stroke for the 21st century: a statement for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association."
authors:
- Sacco RL
- Kasner SE
- Broderick JP
- Caplan LR
- Connors JJ
- Culebras A
- Elkind MS
- George MG
- Hamdan AD
- Higashida RT
- Hoh BL
- Janis LS
- Kase CS
- Kleindorfer DO
- Lee JM
- Moseley ME
- Peterson ED
- Turan TN
- Valderrama AL
- Vinters HV
- "American Heart Association Stroke Council, Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia"
- Council on Cardiovascular Radiology and Intervention
- Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing
- Council on Epidemiology and Prevention
- Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease
- "Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity and Metabolism"
journal: Stroke
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1161/STR.0b013e318296aeca
keywords:
- American Heart Association/history
- "History, 21st Century"
- Humans
- Neurology/history
- "Stroke/classification, epidemiology, history"
- United States
- "Voluntary Health Agencies/history, standards"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An updated definition of stroke for the 21st century: a statement for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association.
**Authors:** Sacco RL, Kasner SE, Broderick JP, Caplan LR, Connors JJ, Culebras A, Elkind MS, George MG, Hamdan AD, Higashida RT, Hoh BL, Janis LS, Kase CS, Kleindorfer DO, Lee JM, Moseley ME, Peterson ED, Turan TN, Valderrama AL, Vinters HV, American Heart Association Stroke Council, Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia, Council on Cardiovascular Radiology and Intervention, Council on Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing, Council on Epidemiology and Prevention, Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease, Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity and Metabolism
**Journal:** Stroke (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1161/STR.0b013e318296aeca](https://doi.org/10.1161/STR.0b013e318296aeca)

## Content

1. Stroke. 2013 Jul;44(7):2064-89. doi: 10.1161/STR.0b013e318296aeca. Epub 2013
May  7.

An updated definition of stroke for the 21st century: a statement for healthcare
professionals from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association.

Sacco RL, Kasner SE, Broderick JP, Caplan LR, Connors JJ, Culebras A, Elkind MS,
George MG, Hamdan AD, Higashida RT, Hoh BL, Janis LS, Kase CS, Kleindorfer DO,
Lee JM, Moseley ME, Peterson ED, Turan TN, Valderrama AL, Vinters HV; American
Heart Association Stroke Council, Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and
Anesthesia; Council on Cardiovascular Radiology and Intervention; Council on
Cardiovascular and Stroke Nursing; Council on Epidemiology and Prevention;
Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease; Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity
and Metabolism.

Erratum in
    Stroke. 2019 Aug;50(8):e239. doi: 10.1161/STR.0000000000000205.

Despite the global impact and advances in understanding the pathophysiology of
cerebrovascular diseases, the term "stroke" is not consistently defined in
clinical practice, in clinical research, or in assessments of the public health.
The classic definition is mainly clinical and does not account for advances in
science and technology. The Stroke Council of the American Heart
Association/American Stroke Association convened a writing group to develop an
expert consensus document for an updated definition of stroke for the 21st
century. Central nervous system infarction is defined as brain, spinal cord, or
retinal cell death attributable to ischemia, based on neuropathological,
neuroimaging, and/or clinical evidence of permanent injury. Central nervous
system infarction occurs over a clinical spectrum: Ischemic stroke specifically
refers to central nervous system infarction accompanied by overt symptoms, while
silent infarction by definition causes no known symptoms. Stroke also broadly
includes intracerebral hemorrhage and subarachnoid hemorrhage. The updated
definition of stroke incorporates clinical and tissue criteria and can be
incorporated into practice, research, and assessments of the public health.

DOI: 10.1161/STR.0b013e318296aeca
PMCID: PMC11078537
PMID: 23652265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The American Heart Association makes every
effort to avoid any actual or potential conflicts of interest that may arise as
a result of an outside relationship or a personal, professional, or business
interest of a member of the writing panel. Specifically, all members of the
writing group are required to complete and submit a Disclosure Questionnaire
showing all such relationships that might be perceived as real or potential
conflicts of interest.