---
reference_id: "PMID:14699613"
title: "Longterm follow-up in chondrodysplasia punctata, tibia-metacarpal type, demonstrating natural history."
authors:
- Savarirayan R
- Boyle RJ
- Masel J
- Rogers JG
- Sheffield LJ
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.20383
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Arylsulfatases/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chondrodysplasia Punctata/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Infant
- Karyotyping
- Male
- Metacarpus/diagnostic imaging
- Radiography
- Sterols/blood
- Tibia/diagnostic imaging
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Longterm follow-up in chondrodysplasia punctata, tibia-metacarpal type, demonstrating natural history.
**Authors:** Savarirayan R, Boyle RJ, Masel J, Rogers JG, Sheffield LJ
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.20383](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.20383)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Jan 15;124A(2):148-57. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.20383.

Longterm follow-up in chondrodysplasia punctata, tibia-metacarpal type, 
demonstrating natural history.

Savarirayan R(1), Boyle RJ, Masel J, Rogers JG, Sheffield LJ.

Author information:
(1)Genetic Health Services Victoria and Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, 
Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia. 
savarirr@cryptic.rch.unimelb.edu.au

We report the longterm clinical and radiological progression in three unrelated 
patients with the tibia-metacarpal form of chondrodysplasia punctata (CDP-TM). 
The patients were followed for 37, 25, and 32 years, respectively. At follow-up 
intellectual function was normal, and physical function was well preserved. 
There was also marked resolution of several significant early radiographic 
features. The patients attained adult heights of 152, 138, and 148 cm. Two 
patients had chronic serous otitis media requiring tympanostomy tubes during 
childhood. One patient suffered persisting back pain related to spinal stenosis 
and required lumbar laminectomy at the age of 26 years. One patient had hip 
dysplasia requiring orthopedic surgical intervention. All patients had recurrent 
patella dislocation. Sterol and very long chain fatty acid profiles, FISH 
analysis for SHOX gene deletions, blood lymphocyte karyotype, and phytanic acid 
levels were normal in those tested, and no mutations in arylsulfatase D and E 
genes were detected. These data suggest that the longterm clinical and 
functional prognosis in this condition appears to be better than that expected 
based on initial clinical and radiological findings.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.20383
PMID: 14699613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]