---
reference_id: "PMID:21921472"
title: "[SCA6: From gene identification to recent progress on pathogenesis]."
authors:
- Watase K
- Ishikawa K
- Mizusawa H
journal: Rinsho Shinkeigaku
year: '2010'
doi: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.50.858
keywords:
- Animals
- Calcium Channels/genetics
- "Calcium Channels, N-Type"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- Mice
- Mutation
- Peptides
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, pathology"
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [SCA6: From gene identification to recent progress on pathogenesis].
**Authors:** Watase K, Ishikawa K, Mizusawa H
**Journal:** Rinsho Shinkeigaku (2010)
**DOI:** [10.5692/clinicalneurol.50.858](https://doi.org/10.5692/clinicalneurol.50.858)

## Content

1. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2010 Nov;50(11):858-60. doi:
10.5692/clinicalneurol.50.858.

[SCA6: From gene identification to recent progress on pathogenesis].

[Article in Japanese]

Watase K(1), Ishikawa K, Mizusawa H.

Author information:
(1)Center for Brain Integration Research, Tokyo Medical and Dental University.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 (SCA6) is one of the common dominantly inherited
ataxias in Japan, featuring late-onset ataxia and selective Purkinje cell (PC)
degeneration. Molecular pathogenesis of SCA6 has been attracting considerable
attention since it is caused by small CAG repeat expansions within the Ca(v)2.1
voltage-gated Ca(++) channel gene (CACNA1A). During the past 9 years, efforts
have been made to generate and analyze a precise SCA6 model in order to disclose
its molecular pathogenesis in vivo. Evidence indicates that the SCA6 mutation
does not directly change the basic properties of the channel but rather exerts
neurotoxicity through a mechanism associated with age-dependent accumulation of
the expanded polyglutamine protein. We envisage further analysis on a knockin
model developing PC degeneration at their young age will lead to elucidation of
the molecular pathways involved in SCA6 and thus be useful for developing
therapeutic strategies against the disease.

DOI: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.50.858
PMID: 21921472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
