---
reference_id: "PMID:30253962"
title: Adeno-associated viral gene therapy corrects a mouse model of argininosuccinic aciduria.
authors:
- Ashley SN
- Nordin JML
- Buza EL
- Greig JA
- Wilson JM
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.08.013
keywords:
- Animals
- "Argininosuccinate Lyase/administration & dosage, genetics"
- "Argininosuccinic Aciduria/genetics, therapy"
- Dependovirus/genetics
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Genetic Therapy
- Humans
- "Hyperammonemia/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Mice
- Urea/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adeno-associated viral gene therapy corrects a mouse model of argininosuccinic aciduria.
**Authors:** Ashley SN, Nordin JML, Buza EL, Greig JA, Wilson JM
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.08.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.08.013)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2018 Nov;125(3):241-250. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.08.013.
Epub  2018 Aug 28.

Adeno-associated viral gene therapy corrects a mouse model of argininosuccinic
aciduria.

Ashley SN(1), Nordin JML(1), Buza EL(1), Greig JA(1), Wilson JM(2).

Author information:
(1)Gene Therapy Program, Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Gene Therapy Program, Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. Electronic address: wilsonjm@upenn.edu.

Argininosuccinic aciduria (ASA) is the second most common genetic disorder
affecting the urea cycle. The disease is caused by deleterious mutations in the
gene encoding argininosuccinate lyase (ASL); total loss of ASL activity results
in severe neonatal onset of the disease, which is characterized by
hyperammonemia within a few days of birth that can rapidly progress to coma and
death. The long-term complications of ASA, such as hypertension and
neurocognitive deficits, appear to be resistant to the current treatment options
of dietary restriction, arginine supplementation, and nitrogen scavenging drugs.
Treatment-resistant disease is currently being managed by orthotopic liver
transplant, which shows variable improvement and requires lifetime
immunosuppression. Here, we developed a gene therapy strategy for ASA aimed at
alleviating the symptoms associated with urea cycle disruption by providing
stable expression of ASL protein in the liver. We designed a codon-optimized
human ASL gene packaged within adeno-associated virus serotype 8 (AAV8) as a
vector for targeted delivery to the liver. To evaluate the therapeutic efficacy
of this approach, we utilized a murine hypomorphic model of ASA. Neonatal
administration of AAV8 via the temporal facial vein extended survival in ASA
hypomorphic mice, although not to wild-type levels. Intravenous injection into
adolescent hypomorphic mice led to increased survival and body weight and
correction of metabolites associated with the disease. Our results demonstrate
that AAV8 gene therapy is a viable approach for the treatment of ASA.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2018.08.013
PMID: 30253962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
