---
reference_id: "PMID:30253142"
title: "Clinical, biochemical and genetic analysis of Chinese patients with isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency."
authors:
- Lin Y
- Peng W
- Jiang M
- Lin C
- Lin W
- Zheng Z
- Li M
- Fu Q
journal: Clin Chim Acta
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2018.09.033
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical, biochemical and genetic analysis of Chinese patients with isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency.
**Authors:** Lin Y, Peng W, Jiang M, Lin C, Lin W, Zheng Z, Li M, Fu Q
**Journal:** Clin Chim Acta (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cca.2018.09.033](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cca.2018.09.033)

## Content

1. Clin Chim Acta. 2018 Dec;487:133-138. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2018.09.033. Epub
2018  Sep 22.

Clinical, biochemical and genetic analysis of Chinese patients with 
isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency.

Lin Y(1), Peng W(1), Jiang M(2), Lin C(1), Lin W(1), Zheng Z(1), Li M(3), Fu 
Q(4).

Author information:
(1)Neonatal Disease Screening Center of Quanzhou, Quanzhou Maternal and 
Children's Hospital, 700 Fengze Street, Quanzhou, Fujian Province 362000, China.
(2)Genuine Diagnostics Company Limited, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province 310007, 
China.
(3)Genuine Diagnostics Company Limited, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province 310007, 
China. Electronic address: limin@biosan.cn.
(4)Neonatal Disease Screening Center of Quanzhou, Quanzhou Maternal and 
Children's Hospital, 700 Fengze Street, Quanzhou, Fujian Province 362000, China. 
Electronic address: wrightlym@sina.com.

Isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (IBDHD) is a rare autosomal recessive 
metabolic disorder related to valine catabolism and results from variants in 
ACAD8. Here, we present the clinical, biochemical, and genotypes of seven 
patients with IBDHD in China for the first time. Five patients remained 
asymptomatic during follow-up, whereas one juvenile had speech delay and one 
newborn exhibited clinical symptoms. All patients showed remarkably increased 
concentrations of C4-aclycarnitine with elevated C4/C2 and C4/C3 ratios. In 
urine organic acid tests, only one patient presented with an increased 
concentration of isobutyrylglycine excretion. Genetic testing was performed to 
detect the causative variants. Five previously unreported variants, c.235C > G, 
c.286G > A, c.444G > T c.1092 + 1G > A, and c.1176G > T, and one known variant, 
c.1000C > T, in ACAD8 were identified. These previously unreported variants in 
ACAD8 were predicted to be disease-causing and the c.1092 + 1G > A variant was 
confirmed to cause skipping of exon 9 by reverse transcription PCR. The most 
common variant was c.286G > A, which showed an allelic frequency of 50% (7/14), 
and thus may be a prevalent variant among Chinese patients. Our results broaden 
the mutational spectrum of ACAD8 and improve the understanding of the clinical 
phenotype of IBDHD.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2018.09.033
PMID: 30253142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]