---
reference_id: "PMID:15042511"
title: Mutations in AXIN2 cause familial tooth agenesis and predispose to colorectal cancer.
authors:
- Lammi L
- Arte S
- Somer M
- Jarvinen H
- Lahermo P
- Thesleff I
- Pirinen S
- Nieminen P
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1086/386293
keywords:
- "Anodontia/diagnosis, genetics"
- Axin Protein
- "Codon, Nonsense/genetics"
- "Colorectal Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Cytoskeletal Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Frameshift Mutation/genetics
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Lod Score
- Male
- Pedigree
- Signal Transduction/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in AXIN2 cause familial tooth agenesis and predispose to colorectal cancer.
**Authors:** Lammi L, Arte S, Somer M, Jarvinen H, Lahermo P, Thesleff I, Pirinen S, Nieminen P
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1086/386293](https://doi.org/10.1086/386293)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2004 May;74(5):1043-50. doi: 10.1086/386293. Epub 2004 Mar 23.

Mutations in AXIN2 cause familial tooth agenesis and predispose to colorectal 
cancer.

Lammi L(1), Arte S, Somer M, Jarvinen H, Lahermo P, Thesleff I, Pirinen S, 
Nieminen P.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Dentistry, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Wnt signaling regulates embryonic pattern formation and morphogenesis of most 
organs. Aberrations of regulation of Wnt signaling may lead to cancer. Here, we 
have used positional cloning to identify the causative mutation in a Finnish 
family in which severe permanent tooth agenesis (oligodontia) and colorectal 
neoplasia segregate with dominant inheritance. Eleven members of the family 
lacked at least eight permanent teeth, two of whom developed only three 
permanent teeth. Colorectal cancer or precancerous lesions of variable types 
were found in eight of the patients with oligodontia. We show that oligodontia 
and predisposition to cancer are caused by a nonsense mutation, Arg656Stop, in 
the Wnt-signaling regulator AXIN2. In addition, we identified a de novo 
frameshift mutation 1994-1995insG in AXIN2 in an unrelated young patient with 
severe tooth agenesis. Both mutations are expected to activate Wnt signaling. 
The results provide the first evidence of the importance of Wnt signaling for 
the development of dentition in humans and suggest that an intricate control of 
Wnt-signal activity is necessary for normal tooth development, since both 
inhibition and stimulation of Wnt signaling may lead to tooth agenesis. Our 
findings introduce a new gene for hereditary colorectal cancer and suggest that 
tooth agenesis may be an indicator of cancer susceptibility.

DOI: 10.1086/386293
PMCID: PMC1181967
PMID: 15042511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]