---
reference_id: "PMID:16764984"
title: Mutations in fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 cause Kallmann syndrome with a wide spectrum of reproductive phenotypes.
authors:
- Pitteloud N
- Meysing A
- Quinton R
- Acierno JS Jr
- Dwyer AA
- Plummer L
- Fliers E
- Boepple P
- Hayes F
- Seminara S
- Hughes VA
- Ma J
- Bouloux P
- Mohammadi M
- Crowley WF Jr
journal: Mol Cell Endocrinol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2006.04.021
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- Cleft Palate/genetics
- Cohort Studies
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Gene Frequency
- Genetic Variation
- Humans
- Hypogonadism/genetics
- Kallmann Syndrome/genetics
- Male
- "Models, Molecular"
- Mutation
- Olfaction Disorders/genetics
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Puberty, Delayed/genetics"
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 1/genetics, physiology"
- "Reproduction/genetics, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 cause Kallmann syndrome with a wide spectrum of reproductive phenotypes.
**Authors:** Pitteloud N, Meysing A, Quinton R, Acierno JS Jr, Dwyer AA, Plummer L, Fliers E, Boepple P, Hayes F, Seminara S, Hughes VA, Ma J, Bouloux P, Mohammadi M, Crowley WF Jr
**Journal:** Mol Cell Endocrinol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mce.2006.04.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mce.2006.04.021)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2006 Jul 25;254-255:60-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2006.04.021.
 Epub 2006 Jun 9.

Mutations in fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 cause Kallmann syndrome with a
wide spectrum of reproductive phenotypes.

Pitteloud N(1), Meysing A, Quinton R, Acierno JS Jr, Dwyer AA, Plummer L, Fliers
E, Boepple P, Hayes F, Seminara S, Hughes VA, Ma J, Bouloux P, Mohammadi M,
Crowley WF Jr.

Author information:
(1)Reproductive Endocrine Unit of the Department of Medicine & National Center
for Infertility Research, Bartlett Hall Extension 5, Massachusetts General
Hospital, 55 Fruit St., Boston, MA 02114, United States. npitteloud@partners.org

BACKGROUND: Kallmann's syndrome (KS) is a clinically and genetically
heterogeneous disorder consisting of idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
(IHH) and anosmia. Mutations in KAL1 causing the X-linked form of KS have been
identified in 10% of all KS patients and consistently result in a severe
reproductive phenotype. KAL1 gene encodes for anosmin-1, a key protein involved
in olfactory and GnRH neuronal migration through a putative interaction with
FGFR1. Heterozygous mutations in the FGFR1 gene accompanied by a high frequency
of cleft palate and other facial dysmorphisms were recently identified in 8% of
a large KS cohort, yet the reproductive phenotype of KS patients harboring FGFR1
mutations has not been described.
RESULTS: One hundred and fifty probands with KS (130 males and 20 females) were
studied to determine the frequency and distribution of FGFR1 mutations and their
detailed reproductive phenotypes. Fifteen heterozygous mutations in unrelated
probands were identified. Twelve missense mutations (p.R78C, p.V102I, p.D224H,
p.G237D, p.R254Q, p.V273M, p.E274G, p.Y339C, p.S346C, p.I538V, p.G703S and
p.G703R) were distributed among the first, second and third immunoglobulin-like
domains (D1-D3), as well as the tyrosine kinase domain (TKD). The mutations
Y339C and S346C are located in exon 8B and code for the isoform FGFR1c.
Additionally, two nonsense mutations (p.T585X and p.R622X) were documented in
the TKD of the protein. A wide spectrum of reproductive function was observed
among KS probands including: (1) a severe phenotype demonstrated by
microphallus, cryptorchidism, no pubertal development, undetectable serum
gonadotropins and low serum testosterone (T) and inhibin B; (2) partial pubertal
development; (3) the fertile eunuch variant of IHH with normal testicular size
and active spermatogenesis with a reversal of HH after T therapy. In addition,
we found an even wider spectrum of reproductive function within pedigrees
carrying an FGFR1 mutation ranging from IHH to delayed puberty to normal
reproductive function (anosmia only or asymptomatic carriers). These
observations strongly suggest a role for other genes that modify the phenotype
of FGFR1 mutations.
CONCLUSION: KS patients and family members carrying an FGFR1 mutation present a
broad spectrum of pubertal development in contrast to the almost uniform severe
clinical phenotype described in KS subjects with a KAL1 mutation. Additionally,
this report implicates the isoform FGFR1c in the pathogenesis of KS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mce.2006.04.021
PMID: 16764984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
