---
reference_id: "PMID:36550821"
title: An assessment of serum vitamin B12 and folate in patients with Crohn's disease.
authors:
- Akbulut S
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000031892
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An assessment of serum vitamin B12 and folate in patients with Crohn's disease.
**Authors:** Akbulut S
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000031892](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000031892)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2022 Dec 16;101(50):e31892. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000031892.

An assessment of serum vitamin B12 and folate in patients with Crohn's disease.

Akbulut S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, University of Health Sciences, Kartal 
Koşuyolu High Specialty Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey.

Crohn's disease is a chronic inflammatory condition that can involve any area in 
the gastrointestinal tract often involving the distal ileum where vitamin B12 is 
specifically absorbed. The aim of this study was to ascertain serum vitamin B12 
and folate levels in order to investigate the correlation among these vitamin 
levels and disease activation, localization, duration and age at the onset of 
the disease. Study population included 103 patients with Crohn's disease and a 
healthy control group of 114 individuals. C-reactive protein, vitamin B12, 
folate levels were studied along with hemogram analyses. The results were 
evaluated in statistical comparisons. While serum vitamin B12 levels and serum 
folate levels were 161.9 ± 63.2(73-496) pg/mL and 4.9 ± 1.4(1.2-9.4) ng/mL in 
the Crohn's patient group respectively, they were 321.7 ± 126.3(85-680) pg/mL 
and 7.6 ± 3.8(3-25.1) ng/mL in the control group respectively. Vitamin B12 and 
folate levels were distinctly lower in patients with Chron's disease than those 
of the control group (P < .001). The intragroup analysis of the patient group 
revealed that low vitamin B12 levels were significantly lower in the moderate 
group classified according to the Crohn's Disease Activity Index (P < .001), 
along with those in the L1 group with terminal/distal ileal involvement 
(P < .001). Vitamin B12 and folate deficiencies are quite prevalent in patients 
with Crohn's disease while this condition can lead to various complications and 
they prove to be important risk factors associated especially with thrombosis 
and its complications. Patients must be regularly followed-up for vitamin B12 
and folate levels to supplement them where needed.

Copyright © 2022 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000031892
PMCID: PMC9771213
PMID: 36550821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no funding and conflicts of 
interest to disclose.