---
reference_id: "PMID:39075718"
title: "Biomarkers in Pemphigus Vulgaris: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Geng RSQ
- Wilken B
- Sood S
- Sibbald RG
- Sibbald C
journal: J Cutan Med Surg
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1177/12034754241266136
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biomarkers in Pemphigus Vulgaris: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Geng RSQ, Wilken B, Sood S, Sibbald RG, Sibbald C
**Journal:** J Cutan Med Surg (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1177/12034754241266136](https://doi.org/10.1177/12034754241266136)

## Content

1. J Cutan Med Surg. 2024 Sep-Oct;28(5):458-462. doi: 10.1177/12034754241266136. 
Epub 2024 Jul 29.

Biomarkers in Pemphigus Vulgaris: A Systematic Review.

Geng RSQ(1), Wilken B(2), Sood S(1), Sibbald RG(3), Sibbald C(4).

Author information:
(1)Temerty School of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada.
(3)Dalla Lana School of Public Health & Division of Dermatology, Department of 
Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(4)Division of Pediatric Dermatology, The Hospital for Sick Children, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Erratum in
    J Cutan Med Surg. 2025 Mar-Apr;29(2):212. doi: 10.1177/12034754241311342.

INTRODUCTION: Pemphigus vulgaris (PV) is a rare intraepidermal blistering 
disease that is potentially life-threatening due to risk of infection and 
failure of skin barrier function. The identification of biomarkers has the 
potential to provide diagnostic utility and identify new therapeutic targets. 
The objective of this systematic review is to identify all potentially relevant 
PV biomarkers, categorize them, and identify trends to determine the involvement 
of T-cell-mediated, B-cell-1mediated, and innate immune-mediated pathways in PV 
pathogenesis.
METHODS/RESULTS: Medline and Embase databases were searched according to 
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses guidelines, 
resulting in the inclusion of 66 studies that reported on a total of 2463 
patients and 146 unique biomarkers. Biomarkers were categorized into 
T-cell-mediated, B-cell-mediated, and innate immune system pathways. The most 
notable biomarkers trends include elevations in IL-4, IL-6, IL-17A, anti-Dsg1/3 
autoantibodies, and a reduction in Treg cells and FOXP3.
CONCLUSION: The results of this review support current theories of PV 
pathogenesis, with increased Th2 activity, increased Th17 activity, decreased 
Treg activity, and production of anti-Dsg1/3 autoantibodies being observed. 
Targeting of IL-4 and IL-6 may provide therapeutic benefit. However, more 
research is required to validate biomarkers for clinical utility and assess 
viability as therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.1177/12034754241266136
PMCID: PMC11528842
PMID: 39075718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting InterestsThe 
author(s) declared the following potential conflicts of interest with respect to 
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: CS has received 
honoraria from Abbvie, Leo, Pfizer, Miravo, Novartis, UCB, Sanofi/Regeneron 
unrelated to this work. RGS has received honoraria from Perfuse, Quart Medical, 
Novartis, Medexus Pharmaceuticals Canada along with Ontario Gov’t (Project ECHO 
Ontario Skin & Wound—Ministry of Health and Micro-credentials—through Ministry 
of Colleges and Universities and Sault College all unrelated to this work. RSQG, 
BW, and SS have no conflicts of interest to disclose.