---
reference_id: "PMID:32861505"
title: "The prevalence and clinical features of spasmodic dysphonia: A review of epidemiological surveys conducted in Japan."
authors:
- Hyodo M
- Hisa Y
- Nishizawa N
- Omori K
- Shiromoto O
- Yumoto E
- Sanuki T
- Nagao A
- Hirose K
- Kobayashi T
- Asano K
- Sakaguchi M
journal: Auris Nasus Larynx
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.anl.2020.08.013
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Child
- "Dysphonia/diagnosis, epidemiology, surgery"
- Europe/epidemiology
- Female
- Humans
- Japan/epidemiology
- "Laryngoplasty/statistics & numerical data"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- New York/epidemiology
- Prevalence
- Sex Distribution
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The prevalence and clinical features of spasmodic dysphonia: A review of epidemiological surveys conducted in Japan.
**Authors:** Hyodo M, Hisa Y, Nishizawa N, Omori K, Shiromoto O, Yumoto E, Sanuki T, Nagao A, Hirose K, Kobayashi T, Asano K, Sakaguchi M
**Journal:** Auris Nasus Larynx (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.anl.2020.08.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anl.2020.08.013)

## Content

1. Auris Nasus Larynx. 2021 Apr;48(2):179-184. doi: 10.1016/j.anl.2020.08.013.
Epub  2020 Aug 26.

The prevalence and clinical features of spasmodic dysphonia: A review of 
epidemiological surveys conducted in Japan.

Hyodo M(1), Hisa Y(2), Nishizawa N(3), Omori K(4), Shiromoto O(5), Yumoto E(6), 
Sanuki T(7), Nagao A(8), Hirose K(8), Kobayashi T(8), Asano K(9), Sakaguchi 
M(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Kochi Medical School, Kohasu, Okou-cho, 
Nankoku, 783-8505 Kochi, Japan. Electronic address: hyodoma@kochi-u.ac.jp.
(2)Kyoto University of Advanced Science, Japan.
(3)School of Rehabilitation Sciences, Health Sciences University of Hokkaido, 
Japan.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology, Kyoto University, Japan.
(5)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Prefectural University of 
Hiroshima, Japan.
(6)Department of Otolaryngology, Kumamoto University, Japan.
(7)Department of Otolaryngology, Nagoya City University, Japan.
(8)Department of Otolaryngology, Kochi Medical School, Kohasu, Okou-cho, 
Nankoku, 783-8505 Kochi, Japan.
(9)Integrated Center for Advanced Medical Technologies, Kochi Medical School 
Hospital, Japan; Academic Clinical Research Center, Department of Medical 
Innovation, Osaka University Hospital, Japan.
(10)Integrated Center for Advanced Medical Technologies, Kochi Medical School 
Hospital, Japan; Department of Engineering Informatics, Osaka 
Electro-Communication University, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: Spasmodic dysphonia (SD) is a rare disease and its epidemiological 
status is unclear. This review aimed to explore the current prevalence and 
clinical features of SD in Japan.
METHODS: We reviewed Japanese surveys of SD and compared them to surveys 
reported from other countries. We focused on SD prevalence, clinical features 
(SD type, sex and age), and treatment modalities.
RESULTS: The SD prevalence in Japan was 3.5-7.0/100,000, similar to that in 
Rochester (NY, USA) and Iceland. Adductor SD predominated (90-95%) and females 
were four-fold more likely to be affected than males. Mean age at onset was 
approximately 30 years in Japan. Several years elapsed from onset to diagnosis. 
The most frequent treatment was botulinum toxin injection, and surgical 
intervention, particularly type 2 thyroplasty is becoming more popular.
CONCLUSIONS: Our review demonstrated some differences of clinical features of SD 
in Japan compared with other countries, such as a greater female predominance 
and younger age of onset. Many physicians and patients may be unfamiliar with 
the clinical features of SD leading to delayed of diagnosis. Therefore, we 
proposed diagnostic criteria to facilitate early diagnosis and an appropriate 
choice of treatment modalities.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anl.2020.08.013
PMID: 32861505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
have no conflict of interest relevant to the content of this article.