---
reference_id: "PMID:36275026"
title: "The oral-gut axis: Salivary and fecal microbiome dysbiosis in patients with inflammatory bowel disease."
authors:
- Abdelbary MMH
- Hatting M
- Bott A
- Dahlhausen A
- Keller D
- Trautwein C
- Conrads G
journal: Front Cell Infect Microbiol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2022.1010853
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The oral-gut axis: Salivary and fecal microbiome dysbiosis in patients with inflammatory bowel disease.
**Authors:** Abdelbary MMH, Hatting M, Bott A, Dahlhausen A, Keller D, Trautwein C, Conrads G
**Journal:** Front Cell Infect Microbiol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcimb.2022.1010853](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcimb.2022.1010853)

## Content

1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2022 Oct 7;12:1010853. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2022.1010853. eCollection 2022.

The oral-gut axis: Salivary and fecal microbiome dysbiosis in patients with 
inflammatory bowel disease.

Abdelbary MMH(1), Hatting M(2), Bott A(1), Dahlhausen A(3), Keller D(3), 
Trautwein C(2), Conrads G(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Oral Microbiology and Immunology, Department of Operative 
Dentistry, Periodontology and Preventive Dentistry, Rheinisch-Westfälische 
Technische Hochschule (RWTH) University Hospital, Aachen, Germany.
(2)Department of Medicine III, RWTH University Hospital, Aachen, Germany.
(3)University Medical Center for Occupational Medicine, RWTH University, Aachen, 
Germany.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a group of chronic inflammatory disorders 
that fall into two main categories: Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis 
(UC). The gastrointestinal tract extends from the mouth to the anus and harbors 
diverse bacterial communities. Several sequencing-based studies have identified 
an intestinal enrichment of oral-associated bacteria and demonstrated their 
ability to induce intestinal inflammation in mice, suggesting that intestinal 
pathobionts originate from the oral cavity, particularly members of the genus 
Streptococcus. This study aimed to investigate the composition of the salivary 
and fecal microbiome of IBD patients (n = 14) compared to healthy controls (n = 
12) and to determine the abundance of common bacterial taxa in both niches. 
Metagenomic DNA was extracted from saliva and fecal samples, and the 16S rRNA 
gene was targeted for sequencing. Our results revealed that the overall 
microbial composition of saliva was significantly altered in the IBD patients 
compared to the control subjects (p = 0.038). At the genus level, Veillonella 
and Prevotella were highly abundant in IBD (median: 25.4% and 22.2%, 
respectively) compared to the control group (17.9% and 13.4%, respectively). In 
contrast, Neisseria, Streptococcus, Haemophilus, and Fusobacterium were 
associated with a healthy gut state. Regarding the fecal microbiome, the IBD 
group had a significantly higher abundance of Clostridium sensu stricto 1 and 
Escherichia-Shigella (both comprising pathogenic bacteria) compared with the 
control group. Members of both bacterial groups have previously been shown to 
positively correlate with intestinal inflammation and high expression of 
pro-inflammatory cytokines that disrupt intestinal barrier integrity. In 
addition, we demonstrate that the increased abundance of Clostridium sensu 
stricto 1 and Escherichia-Shigella has also been associated with significant 
upregulation of certain metabolic pathways in the feces of the IBD group, 
including bacterial invasion of epithelial cells. Streptococcus was the only 
common genus detected in both the salivary and fecal microbiome and represented 
the oral-gut axis in our study. Using culture-based methods, we isolated 57 and 
91 Streptococcus strains from saliva as well as 40 and 31 strains from fecal 
samples of the controls and IBD patients, respectively. The phylogenetic tree of 
streptococci based on sodA sequences revealed several patient-specific clusters 
comprising salivary and fecal streptococcal isolates from the same patient and 
belonging to the same species, suggesting that the oral cavity is an endogenous 
reservoir for intestinal strains.

Copyright © 2022 Abdelbary, Hatting, Bott, Dahlhausen, Keller, Trautwein and 
Conrads.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2022.1010853
PMCID: PMC9585322
PMID: 36275026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.