---
reference_id: "PMID:10866096"
title: The family history of patients with primary or secondary antiphospholipid syndrome (APS).
authors:
- Weber M
- Hayem G
- DeBandt M
- Palazzo E
- Roux S
- Kahn MF
- Meyer O
journal: Lupus
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1191/096120300680198971
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The family history of patients with primary or secondary antiphospholipid syndrome (APS).
**Authors:** Weber M, Hayem G, DeBandt M, Palazzo E, Roux S, Kahn MF, Meyer O
**Journal:** Lupus (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1191/096120300680198971](https://doi.org/10.1191/096120300680198971)

## Content

1. Lupus. 2000;9(4):258-63. doi: 10.1191/096120300680198971.

The family history of patients with primary or secondary antiphospholipid 
syndrome (APS).

Weber M(1), Hayem G, DeBandt M, Palazzo E, Roux S, Kahn MF, Meyer O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Bichat-Claude Bernard University Hospital, Paris, 
France.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate familial history for evidence of antiphospholipid 
syndrome (APS) and autoimmune disease in rheumatology department patients with 
primary or secondary APS.
METHODS: We retrospectively studied patients with APS and systemic lupus 
erythematosus (SLE) managed at the Rheumatology Department of the Bichat 
University Hospital, Paris, between 1987 and 1996. Data were collected by chart 
review and by a 1997 standardized telephone interview.
RESULTS: We identified 108 patients with APS managed during the ten-year study 
period. According to classical classification criteria, 39 patients had primary 
antiphospholipid syndrome (PAPS) and 69 secondary antiphospholipid syndrome 
(SAPS). Family history data were obtained for 29 (74%) and 55 (80%) PAPS and 
SAPS patients. respectively (78% of the 108 patients). Twelve PAPS (41% and 19 
SAPS (35%) patients had one or more relatives with evidence of at least one 
clinical feature of APS such as thrombosis or recurrent fetal loss; of these 
patients, seven in the PAPS (24%) and 11 in the SAPS (20%) group had two or more 
relatives with evidence of a clinical feature of APS. Three PAPS (10%) and 14 
SAPS (25%) patients had one or more family members with an autoimmune disease.
CONCLUSION: A positive family history for autoimmune disease and/or 
antiphospholipid syndrome is common in patients with PAPS or SAPS. This finding 
supports a genetic contribution to APS. The percentage of a positive family 
history for autoimmune disease tend to be higher in patients with SAPS than in 
those with PAPS.

DOI: 10.1191/096120300680198971
PMID: 10866096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]