---
reference_id: "PMID:19682572"
title: "Cytochrome c oxidase deficiency: patients and animal models."
authors:
- Diaz F
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2009.07.013
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cytochrome-c Oxidase Deficiency/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Leigh Disease/enzymology, metabolism"
- "Mitochondria/enzymology, metabolism"
- Mitochondrial Diseases/genetics
- "Models, Animal"
- Neurons/metabolism
- Oxidative Phosphorylation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cytochrome c oxidase deficiency: patients and animal models.
**Authors:** Diaz F
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbadis.2009.07.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbadis.2009.07.013)

## Content

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Jan;1802(1):100-10. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbadis.2009.07.013. Epub 2009 Aug 11.

Cytochrome c oxidase deficiency: patients and animal models.

Diaz F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 1095 
NW 14th Terrace, Miami, Florida 33136, USA. fdiaz1@med.miami.edu

Cytochrome c oxidase (COX) deficiencies are one of the most common defects of 
the respiratory chain found in mitochondrial diseases. COX is a multimeric inner 
mitochondrial membrane enzyme formed by subunits encoded by both the nuclear and 
the mitochondrial genome. COX biosynthesis requires numerous assembly factors 
that do not form part of the final complex but participate in prosthetic group 
synthesis and metal delivery in addition to membrane insertion and maturation of 
COX subunits. Human diseases associated with COX deficiency including 
encephalomyopathies, Leigh syndrome, hypertrophic cardiomyopathies, and fatal 
lactic acidosis are caused by mutations in COX subunits or assembly factors. In 
the last decade, numerous animal models have been created to understand the 
pathophysiology of COX deficiencies and the function of assembly factors. These 
animal models, ranging from invertebrates to mammals, in most cases mimic the 
pathological features of the human diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2009.07.013
PMID: 19682572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]