---
reference_id: "PMID:9582336"
title: Fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 mutations promote apoptosis but do not alter chondrocyte proliferation in thanatophoric dysplasia.
authors:
- Legeai-Mallet L
- Benoist-Lasselin C
- Delezoide AL
- Munnich A
- Bonaventure J
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.21.13007
keywords:
- Apoptosis/genetics
- Calcium-Calmodulin-Dependent Protein Kinases/metabolism
- Cell Division/genetics
- "Cells, Cultured"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- Enzyme Activation
- Fetal Diseases/pathology
- Genotype
- "Growth Plate/cytology, enzymology"
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3"
- "Receptors, Fibroblast Growth Factor/genetics, metabolism"
- STAT1 Transcription Factor
- Thanatophoric Dysplasia/pathology
- Trans-Activators/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 mutations promote apoptosis but do not alter chondrocyte proliferation in thanatophoric dysplasia.
**Authors:** Legeai-Mallet L, Benoist-Lasselin C, Delezoide AL, Munnich A, Bonaventure J
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.273.21.13007](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.21.13007)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 1998 May 22;273(21):13007-14. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.21.13007.

Fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 mutations promote apoptosis but do not alter 
chondrocyte proliferation in thanatophoric dysplasia.

Legeai-Mallet L(1), Benoist-Lasselin C, Delezoide AL, Munnich A, Bonaventure J.

Author information:
(1)Unité de Recherches sur les Handicaps Génétiques de l'Enfant, INSERM U393, 
Institut Necker, 75743 Paris Cedex 15, France.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem 1998 Jul 24;273(30):19358.

Thanatophoric dysplasia (TD) is a lethal skeletal disorder caused by recurrent 
mutations in the fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR 3) gene. The 
mitogenic response of fetal TD I chondrocytes in primary cultures upon 
stimulation by either FGF 2 or FGF 9 did not significantly differ from controls. 
Although the levels of FGFR 3 mRNAs in cultured TD chondrocytes were similar to 
controls, an abundant immunoreactive material was observed at the perinuclear 
level using an anti-FGFR 3 antibody in TD cells. Transduction signaling via the 
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway was assessed by measuring extracellular 
signal-regulated kinase activity (ERK 1 and ERK 2). Early ERKs activation 
following FGF 9 supplementation was observed in TD chondrocytes (2 min) as 
compared with controls (5 min) but no signal was detected in the absence of 
ligand. By contrast ligand-independent activation of the STAT signaling pathway 
was demonstrated in cultured TD cells and confirmed by immunodetection of Stat 1 
in the nuclei of hypertrophic TD chondrocytes. Moreover, the presence of an 
increased number of apoptotic chondrocytes in TD fetuses was associated with a 
higher expression of Bax and the simultaneous decrease of Bcl-2 levels. Taken 
together, these results indicate that FGFR 3 mutations in TD I fetuses do not 
hamper chondrocyte proliferation but rather alter their differentiation by 
triggering premature apoptosis through activation of the STAT signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.21.13007
PMID: 9582336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]