---
reference_id: "PMID:37137502"
title: "Obsessive-compulsive disorder: Etiology, neuropathology, and cognitive dysfunction."
authors:
- Jalal B
- Chamberlain SR
- Sahakian BJ
journal: Brain Behav
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/brb3.3000
keywords:
- Humans
- Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
- Mental Processes
- Glutamic Acid
- Cognitive Dysfunction/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Obsessive-compulsive disorder: Etiology, neuropathology, and cognitive dysfunction.
**Authors:** Jalal B, Chamberlain SR, Sahakian BJ
**Journal:** Brain Behav (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/brb3.3000](https://doi.org/10.1002/brb3.3000)

## Content

1. Brain Behav. 2023 Jun;13(6):e3000. doi: 10.1002/brb3.3000. Epub 2023 May 3.

Obsessive-compulsive disorder: Etiology, neuropathology, and cognitive 
dysfunction.

Jalal B(1)(2), Chamberlain SR(3)(4), Sahakian BJ(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge School of Clinical 
Medicine, Cambridge, UK.
(2)Behavioural and Clinical Neuroscience Institute, Department of Psychology, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, University of Southampton, 
Southampton, UK.
(4)Specialist Clinic for Impulsive and Compulsive Disorders, and the Southern 
Gambling Service, Southern Health NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton, UK.

BACKGROUND: This review provides an overview of obsessive-compulsive disorder 
(OCD) symptoms, including the four partially distinct subtypes of the disorder, 
current diagnostic criteria, and common comorbidities. Critically, it focuses on 
the etiology of OCD, including its underlying neuropathology, and examines 
cognitive dysfunction in OCD.
METHODS: This review study was conducted by library method.
RESULTS: We show how dysfunction in cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical (CSTC) 
circuits may underpin symptoms; and shed light on the putative neurochemistry 
within these loops such as the role of serotonin, dopamine, and glutamate 
systems. We also show how OCD is characterized by cognitive dysfunction 
including problems in cognitive flexibility, visuospatial memory, response 
inhibition, and goal-directed behavior, linked to aberrant activity within CSTC 
circuits.
CONCLUSIONS: In brief, research questions we shed light on include (1) what are 
the symptoms in OCD; (2) what is the etiology of the disorder and do existing 
models explain OCD; and (3) what are key cognitive deficits in OCD and do these 
improve with treatment?

© 2023 The Authors. Brain and Behavior published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/brb3.3000
PMCID: PMC10275553
PMID: 37137502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: BJ has no competing interests to declare. SRC 
receives honoraria for editorial work at Elsevier in his role as associate 
editor at NBBR and Comprehensive Psychiatry journals. SRC previously consulted 
for Promentis (past 3 years). BJS consults for Cambridge Cognition. Authors 
report no other potential conflicts of interest.