---
reference_id: "PMID:27210825"
title: Is Adrenal Insufficiency a Rare Disease?
authors:
- Dahlqvist P
- Isaksson M
- Bensing S
journal: Front Horm Res
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1159/000443870
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Is Adrenal Insufficiency a Rare Disease?
**Authors:** Dahlqvist P, Isaksson M, Bensing S
**Journal:** Front Horm Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000443870](https://doi.org/10.1159/000443870)

## Content

1. Front Horm Res. 2016;46:106-14. doi: 10.1159/000443870. Epub 2016 May 17.

Is Adrenal Insufficiency a Rare Disease?

Dahlqvist P, Isaksson M, Bensing S.

Adrenal insufficiency (AI) is a potentially life-threatening condition and it is 
of utmost importance to identify and adequately manage affected individuals. 
Diagnosis is often delayed, probably partly because diseases of the adrenal or 
pituitary region that cause primary AI (PAI) or central AI are relatively rare 
conditions. However, iatrogenic AI, i.e. the physiological downregulation of the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and adrenal atrophy caused by glucocorticoid 
treatment for different inflammatory conditions is likely to be considerably 
more common. The type of glucocorticoid, dose and duration of treatment are 
factors to consider when trying to predict the risk of developing symptoms of 
AI. However, the considerable individual variation in the sensitivity for 
developing iatrogenic AI impedes prediction. In industrialized countries, 
autoimmune adrenalitis accounts for the majority of cases of PAI. Among 
children, genetic conditions - in particular congenital adrenal hyperplasia - 
need to be considered. Important risk groups for central AI are patients with 
tumours in the hypothalamic-pituitary region, moderate-to-severe traumatic head 
injury and patients who receive cranial radiotherapy or cytotoxic T-lymphocyte 
antigen 4 blockade treatment. Structured endocrine follow-up is essential in 
these groups. Health workers need to be attentive to these potentially fatal 
conditions and at-risk populations should be carefully informed about symptoms 
and signs of AI.

© 2016 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000443870
PMID: 27210825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]