---
reference_id: "PMID:37060744"
title: "Three Klebsiella species as potential pathobionts generating endogenous ethanol in a clinical cohort of patients with auto-brewery syndrome: a case control study."
authors:
- Xue G
- Feng J
- Zhang R
- Du B
- Sun Y
- Liu S
- Yan C
- Liu X
- Du S
- Feng Y
- Cui J
- Gan L
- Zhao H
- Fan Z
- Cui X
- Xu Z
- Fu T
- Li C
- Huang L
- Zhang T
- Wang J
- Yang R
- Yuan J
journal: EBioMedicine
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2023.104560
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Three Klebsiella species as potential pathobionts generating endogenous ethanol in a clinical cohort of patients with auto-brewery syndrome: a case control study.
**Authors:** Xue G, Feng J, Zhang R, Du B, Sun Y, Liu S, Yan C, Liu X, Du S, Feng Y, Cui J, Gan L, Zhao H, Fan Z, Cui X, Xu Z, Fu T, Li C, Huang L, Zhang T, Wang J, Yang R, Yuan J
**Journal:** EBioMedicine (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ebiom.2023.104560](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2023.104560)

## Content

1. EBioMedicine. 2023 May;91:104560. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2023.104560. Epub 2023 
Apr 13.

Three Klebsiella species as potential pathobionts generating endogenous ethanol 
in a clinical cohort of patients with auto-brewery syndrome: a case control 
study.

Xue G(1), Feng J(2), Zhang R(1), Du B(2), Sun Y(3), Liu S(2), Yan C(2), Liu 
X(4), Du S(2), Feng Y(2), Cui J(2), Gan L(2), Zhao H(2), Fan Z(2), Cui X(2), Xu 
Z(2), Fu T(2), Li C(4), Huang L(5), Zhang T(6), Wang J(7), Yang R(8), Yuan J(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bacteriology, Capital Institute of Pediatrics, Beijing, China; 
Children's Hospital Capital Institute of Pediatrics, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Bacteriology, Capital Institute of Pediatrics, Beijing, China.
(3)The Department of Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Capital 
Medical University, Beijing, China.
(4)Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100020, China.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, The Fifth Medical Center of Chinese PLA 
General Hospital, National Clinical Research Center for Infectious Diseases, 
Beijing, China.
(6)Children's Hospital Capital Institute of Pediatrics, Chinese Academy of 
Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China; Beijing 
Municipal Key Laboratory of Child Development and Nutriomics, Capital Institute 
of Pediatrics, Beijing, China.
(7)Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing 100020, China. 
Electronic address: kyc6636@126.com.
(8)Beijing Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, Academy of Military 
Medical Sciences, Beijing, China. Electronic address: ruifuyang@gmail.com.
(9)Department of Bacteriology, Capital Institute of Pediatrics, Beijing, China; 
Children's Hospital Capital Institute of Pediatrics, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China. Electronic address: 
yuanjing6216@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Patients with auto-brewery syndrome (ABS) become inebriated after 
the ingestion of an alcohol-free, high-carbohydrate diet. Our previous work has 
shown that high-alcohol-producing (HiAlc) Klebsiella pneumoniae can generate 
excessive endogenous ethanol and cause non-alcoholic fatty liver disease 
(NAFLD). Therefore, it is reasonable to speculate that such bacteria might play 
an important role in the pathogenesis of ABS.
METHODS: The characteristics and metabolites of the intestinal flora from a 
clinical cohort of patients with ABS were analysed during different stages of 
disease and compared to a group of healthy controls. An in vitro culture system 
of relevant samples was used for screening drug sensitivity and ABS-inducing 
factors. Rabbit intestinal and murine models were established to verify if the 
isolated strains could induce ABS in vivo.
FINDINGS: We observed intestinal dysbiosis with decreased abundance of 
Firmicutes and increased of Proteobacteria in patients with ABS compared with 
healthy controls. The abundance of the genus Klebsiella in Enterobacteriaceae 
was strongly associated with fluctuations of patient's blood alcohol 
concentration. We isolated three species of HiAlc Klebsiella from ABS patients, 
which were able to induce ABS in mice. Monosaccharide content was identified as 
a potential food-related inducing factor for alcohol production. Treatments with 
antibiotics, a complex probiotic preparation and a low-carbohydrate diet not 
only alleviated ABS, but also erased ABS relapse during the follow-up 
observation of one of the patients.
INTERPRETATION: Excessive endogenous alcohol produced by HiAlc Klebsiella 
species was an underlying cause of bacterial ABS. Combined prescription of 
appropriate antibiotics, complex probiotic preparation and a controlled diet 
could be sufficient for treatment of bacteria-caused ABS.
FUNDING: The funders are listed in the acknowledgement.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2023.104560
PMCID: PMC10139882
PMID: 37060744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare 
that they have no competing interests.