---
reference_id: "PMID:26771056"
title: A non-sense MCM9 mutation in a familial case of primary ovarian insufficiency.
authors:
- Fauchereau F
- Shalev S
- Chervinsky E
- Beck-Fruchter R
- Legois B
- Fellous M
- Caburet S
- Veitia RA
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1111/cge.12736
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Consanguinity
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Family Health
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Genotype
- Humans
- INDEL Mutation
- Male
- Minichromosome Maintenance Proteins/genetics
- Pedigree
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Primary Ovarian Insufficiency/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A non-sense MCM9 mutation in a familial case of primary ovarian insufficiency.
**Authors:** Fauchereau F, Shalev S, Chervinsky E, Beck-Fruchter R, Legois B, Fellous M, Caburet S, Veitia RA
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.12736](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.12736)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2016 May;89(5):603-7. doi: 10.1111/cge.12736. Epub 2016 Feb 10.

A non-sense MCM9 mutation in a familial case of primary ovarian insufficiency.

Fauchereau F(1)(2), Shalev S(3)(4), Chervinsky E(3)(4), Beck-Fruchter R(5), 
Legois B(1)(2), Fellous M(6)(7), Caburet S(1)(2), Veitia RA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institut Jacques Monod, Paris, France.
(2)Department of Biology, Université Paris Diderot-Paris VII, Paris Cedex, 
France.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, 
Haifa, Israel.
(4)Genetic Institute, Haemek Medical Center, Afula, Israel.
(5)OBGYN Department, Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel.
(6)Department of Genetics and Development, Institut Cochin, Paris, France.
(7)Faculty of Medicine, Université Paris Descartes-Paris V, Paris, France.

Primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) results in an early loss of ovarian 
function, and remains idiopathic in about 80% of cases. Here, we have performed 
a complete genetic study of a consanguineous family with two POI cases. Linkage 
analysis and homozygosity mapping identified 12 homozygous regions with linkage, 
totalling 84 Mb. Whole-exome sequencing of the two patients and a non-affected 
sister allowed us to detect a homozygous causal variant in the MCM9 gene. The 
variant c.1483G>T [p.E495*], confirmed using Sanger sequencing, introduced a 
premature stop codon in coding exon 8 and is expected to lead to the loss of a 
functional protein. MCM9 belongs to a complex required for DNA repair by 
homologous recombination, and its impairment in mouse is known to induce meiotic 
recombination defects and oocyte degeneration. A previous study recently 
described two consanguineous families in which homozygous mutations of MCM9 were 
responsible for POI and short stature. Interestingly, the affected sisters in 
the family described here had a normal height. Altogether, our results provide 
the confirmation of the implication of MCM9 variants in POI and expand their 
phenotypic spectrum.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.12736
PMID: 26771056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]