---
reference_id: "PMID:16684962"
title: Abnormal disulfide-linked oligomerization results in ER retention and altered signaling by TNFR1 mutants in TNFR1-associated periodic fever syndrome (TRAPS).
authors:
- Lobito AA
- Kimberley FC
- Muppidi JR
- Komarow H
- Jackson AJ
- Hull KM
- Kastner DL
- Screaton GR
- Siegel RM
journal: Blood
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2005-11-006783
keywords:
- Animals
- Apoptosis/genetics
- COS Cells
- Chlorocebus aethiops
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Endoplasmic Reticulum/genetics, metabolism"
- "Familial Mediterranean Fever/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- NF-kappa B/metabolism
- Point Mutation
- Protein Folding
- Protein Transport/genetics
- "Receptors, Tumor Necrosis Factor, Type I/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abnormal disulfide-linked oligomerization results in ER retention and altered signaling by TNFR1 mutants in TNFR1-associated periodic fever syndrome (TRAPS).
**Authors:** Lobito AA, Kimberley FC, Muppidi JR, Komarow H, Jackson AJ, Hull KM, Kastner DL, Screaton GR, Siegel RM
**Journal:** Blood (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2005-11-006783](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2005-11-006783)

## Content

1. Blood. 2006 Aug 15;108(4):1320-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2005-11-006783. Epub 2006
 May 9.

Abnormal disulfide-linked oligomerization results in ER retention and altered 
signaling by TNFR1 mutants in TNFR1-associated periodic fever syndrome (TRAPS).

Lobito AA(1), Kimberley FC, Muppidi JR, Komarow H, Jackson AJ, Hull KM, Kastner 
DL, Screaton GR, Siegel RM.

Author information:
(1)Immunoregulation Unit, Autoimmunity Branch, National Institute of Arthritis 
and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda 
MD 20892, USA.

Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor-associated periodic syndrome (TRAPS) is an 
autosomal dominant systemic autoinflammatory disease associated with 
heterozygous mutations in TNF receptor 1 (TNFR1). Here we examined the 
structural and functional alterations caused by 9 distinct TRAPS-associated 
TNFR1 mutations in transfected cells and a mouse "knock-in" model of TRAPS. We 
found that these TNFR1 mutants did not generate soluble versions of the 
receptor, either through membrane cleavage or in exosomes. Mutant receptors did 
not bind TNF and failed to function as dominant-negative inhibitors of 
TNFR1-induced apoptosis. Instead, TRAPS mutant TNFR1 formed abnormal 
disulfide-linked oligomers that failed to interact with wild-type TNFR1 
molecules through the preligand assembly domain (PLAD) that normally governs 
receptor self-association. TRAPS mutant TNFR1 molecules were retained 
intracellularly and colocalized with endoplasmic reticulum (ER) markers. The 
capacity of mutant receptors to spontaneously induce both apoptosis and nuclear 
factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) activity was reduced. In contrast, the R92Q variant of 
TNFR1 behaved like the wild-type receptor in all of these assays. The 
inflammatory phenotype of TRAPS may be due to consequences of mutant TNFR1 
protein misfolding and ER retention.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2005-11-006783
PMCID: PMC1895878
PMID: 16684962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]