---
reference_id: "PMID:30986316"
title: Review of Cystic Fibrosis.
authors:
- Goetz D
- Ren CL
journal: Pediatr Ann
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3928/19382359-20190327-01
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Review of Cystic Fibrosis.
**Authors:** Goetz D, Ren CL
**Journal:** Pediatr Ann (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3928/19382359-20190327-01](https://doi.org/10.3928/19382359-20190327-01)

## Content

1. Pediatr Ann. 2019 Apr 1;48(4):e154-e161. doi: 10.3928/19382359-20190327-01.

Review of Cystic Fibrosis.

Goetz D, Ren CL.

Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessive disease characterized by 
pancreatic insufficiency and chronic endobronchial airway infection. This latter 
feature results in progressive bronchiectasis and ultimately respiratory 
failure, which is the leading cause of death in patients with CF. Other 
complications include sinusitis, diabetes mellitus, bowel obstruction, 
hepatobiliary disease, hyponatremic dehydration, and infertility. Diagnosis of 
CF is confirmed by demonstration of elevated sweat chloride. Most cases of CF 
are identified through newborn screening (NBS). There are also infants with 
positive NBS but inconclusive diagnostic testing; a small proportion of these 
infants may go on to develop CF. CF is a lifelong, life-limiting disease, but an 
organized care center network with multidisciplinary approach, quality 
improvement initiatives, and research has led to markedly increased survival and 
development of adult CF care programs. In the past few years, medications that 
directly target the underlying CF defect have been developed, which should 
result in even greater survival benefits. [Pediatr Ann. 2019;48(4):e154-e161.].

Copyright 2019, SLACK Incorporated.

DOI: 10.3928/19382359-20190327-01
PMID: 30986316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]