---
reference_id: "PMID:31036756"
title: "Genomic testing, tumor microenvironment and targeted therapy of Hedgehog-related human cancers."
authors:
- Katoh M
journal: Clin Sci (Lond)
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1042/CS20180845
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antineoplastic Agents/administration & dosage"
- Genetic Testing
- "Hedgehog Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- "Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- Tumor Microenvironment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genomic testing, tumor microenvironment and targeted therapy of Hedgehog-related human cancers.
**Authors:** Katoh M
**Journal:** Clin Sci (Lond) (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1042/CS20180845](https://doi.org/10.1042/CS20180845)

## Content

1. Clin Sci (Lond). 2019 Apr 29;133(8):953-970. doi: 10.1042/CS20180845. Print
2019  Apr 30.

Genomic testing, tumor microenvironment and targeted therapy of Hedgehog-related 
human cancers.

Katoh M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Omics Network, National Cancer Center, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, 
Chuo-ward, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan mkatoh-kkr@umin.ac.jp.

Hedgehog signals are transduced through Patched receptors to the Smoothened 
(SMO)-SUFU-GLI and SMO-Gi-RhoA signaling cascades. MTOR-S6K1 and MEK-ERK signals 
are also transduced to GLI activators through post-translational modifications. 
The GLI transcription network up-regulates target genes, such as BCL2, FOXA2, 
FOXE1, FOXF1, FOXL1, FOXM1, GLI1, HHIP, PTCH1 and WNT2B, in a cellular 
context-dependent manner. Aberrant Hedgehog signaling in tumor cells leads to 
self-renewal, survival, proliferation and invasion. Paracrine Hedgehog signaling 
in the tumor microenvironment (TME), which harbors cancer-associated 
fibroblasts, leads to angiogenesis, fibrosis, immune evasion and neuropathic 
pain. Hedgehog-related genetic alterations occur frequently in basal cell 
carcinoma (BCC) (85%) and Sonic Hedgehog (SHH)-subgroup medulloblastoma (87%) 
and less frequently in breast cancer, colorectal cancer, gastric cancer, 
pancreatic cancer, non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and ovarian cancer. Among 
investigational SMO inhibitors, vismodegib and sonidegib are approved for the 
treatment of patients with BCC, and glasdegib is approved for the treatment of 
patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Resistance to SMO inhibitors is 
caused by acquired SMO mutations, SUFU deletions, GLI2 amplification, other 
by-passing mechanisms of GLI activation and WNT/β-catenin signaling activation. 
GLI-DNA-interaction inhibitors (glabrescione B and GANT61), GLI2 destabilizers 
(arsenic trioxide and pirfenidone) and a GLI-deacetylation inhibitor (4SC-202) 
were shown to block GLI-dependent transcription and tumorigenesis in preclinical 
studies. By contrast, SMO inhibitors can remodel the immunosuppressive TME that 
is dominated by M2-like tumor-associated macrophages (M2-TAMs), myeloid-derived 
suppressor cells and regulatory T cells, and thus, a Phase I/II clinical trial 
of the immune checkpoint inhibitor pembrolizumab with or without vismodegib in 
BCC patients is ongoing.

© 2019 The Author(s). Published by Portland Press Limited on behalf of the 
Biochemical Society.

DOI: 10.1042/CS20180845
PMID: 31036756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]