---
reference_id: "PMID:9930336"
title: Adenovirus-mediated gene transfer results in decreased lysosomal storage in brain and total correction in liver of aspartylglucosaminuria (AGU) mouse.
authors:
- Peltola M
- Kyttälä A
- Heinonen O
- Rapola J
- Paunio T
- Revah F
- Peltonen L
- Jalanko A
journal: Gene Ther
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1038/sj.gt.3300740
keywords:
- Adenoviridae
- Animals
- Aspartylglucosaminuria
- "Aspartylglucosylaminase/genetics, metabolism"
- "Blotting, Western"
- Brain/pathology
- Genetic Therapy/methods
- Genetic Vectors
- Immunohistochemistry
- Liver/enzymology
- "Lysosomal Storage Diseases/enzymology, pathology, therapy"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Transfection/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adenovirus-mediated gene transfer results in decreased lysosomal storage in brain and total correction in liver of aspartylglucosaminuria (AGU) mouse.
**Authors:** Peltola M, Kyttälä A, Heinonen O, Rapola J, Paunio T, Revah F, Peltonen L, Jalanko A
**Journal:** Gene Ther (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.gt.3300740](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.gt.3300740)

## Content

1. Gene Ther. 1998 Oct;5(10):1314-21. doi: 10.1038/sj.gt.3300740.

Adenovirus-mediated gene transfer results in decreased lysosomal storage in
brain and total correction in liver of aspartylglucosaminuria (AGU) mouse.

Peltola M(1), Kyttälä A, Heinonen O, Rapola J, Paunio T, Revah F, Peltonen L,
Jalanko A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, University of Helsinki, Finland.

Aspartylglucosaminuria (AGU) is a lysosomal storage disease leading to mental
retardation, which is caused by deficiency of aspartylglucosaminidase (AGA). AGU
is strongly enriched in the Finnish population in which one major mutation
called AGU(Fin) has been identified. The molecular pathogenesis of AGU as well
as the biology of the AGA enzyme have been extensively studied, thus giving a
profound basis for therapeutic interventions. In this study we have performed
adenovirus-mediated gene transfer to the recently produced mouse model of AGU,
which exhibits similar pathophysiology as that in humans. Recombinant adenovirus
vectors encoding for the human AGA and AGU(Fin) polypeptides were first applied
in primary neurons of AGU mouse to demonstrate wild-type and mutant AGA
expression in vitro. In vivo, both of the adenovirus vectors were injected into
the tail vein of AGU mice and the expression of AGA was demonstrated in the
liver. The adenovirus vectors were also injected intraventricularly into the
brain of AGU mice resulting in AGA expression in the ependymal cells lining the
ventricles and further, diffusion of AGA into the neighbouring neurons. Also,
AGA enzyme injected intraventricularly was shown to transfer across the
ependymal cell layer. One month after administration of the wild-type Ad-AGA, a
total correction of lysosomal storage in the liver and a partial correction in
brain tissue surrounding the ventricles was observed. After administration of
the Ad-AGU virus the lysosomal storage vacuoles in liver or brain remained
unchanged. These data demonstrate that the lysosomal storage in AGU can be
biologically corrected and furthermore, in the brain a limited number of
transduced cells can distribute AGA enzyme to the surrounding areas.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.gt.3300740
PMID: 9930336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
