---
reference_id: "PMID:17847012"
title: Deleterious mutation in the mitochondrial arginyl-transfer RNA synthetase gene is associated with pontocerebellar hypoplasia.
authors:
- Edvardson S
- Shaag A
- Kolesnikova O
- Gomori JM
- Tarassov I
- Einbinder T
- Saada A
- Elpeleg O
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1086/521227
keywords:
- Arginine-tRNA Ligase/genetics
- Base Sequence
- "Cerebellum/abnormalities, enzymology"
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 6/genetics"
- Consanguinity
- "DNA, Complementary/genetics"
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/genetics"
- Female
- "Genes, Mitochondrial"
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Jews/genetics
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Mitochondria/enzymology
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Pons/abnormalities, enzymology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deleterious mutation in the mitochondrial arginyl-transfer RNA synthetase gene is associated with pontocerebellar hypoplasia.
**Authors:** Edvardson S, Shaag A, Kolesnikova O, Gomori JM, Tarassov I, Einbinder T, Saada A, Elpeleg O
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1086/521227](https://doi.org/10.1086/521227)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Oct;81(4):857-62. doi: 10.1086/521227. Epub 2007 Aug 24.

Deleterious mutation in the mitochondrial arginyl-transfer RNA synthetase gene
is associated with pontocerebellar hypoplasia.

Edvardson S(1), Shaag A, Kolesnikova O, Gomori JM, Tarassov I, Einbinder T,
Saada A, Elpeleg O.

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Neurology Unit, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center,
Jerusalem, 91120, Israel.

Homozygosity mapping was performed in a consanguineous Sephardic Jewish family
with three patients who presented with severe infantile encephalopathy
associated with pontocerebellar hypoplasia and multiple mitochondrial
respiratory-chain defects. This resulted in the identification of an intronic
mutation in RARS2, the gene encoding mitochondrial arginine-transfer RNA (tRNA)
synthetase. The mutation was associated with the production of an abnormally
short RARS2 transcript and a marked reduction of the mitochondrial tRNA(Arg)
transcript in the patients' fibroblasts. We speculate that missplicing mutations
in mitochondrial aminoacyl-tRNA synthethase genes preferentially affect the
brain because of a tissue-specific vulnerability of the splicing machinery.

DOI: 10.1086/521227
PMCID: PMC2227936
PMID: 17847012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
