---
reference_id: "PMID:31587581"
title: Fertility management of Klinefelter syndrome.
authors:
- Fainberg J
- Hayden RP
- Schlegel PN
journal: Expert Rev Endocrinol Metab
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1080/17446651.2019.1671821
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fertility management of Klinefelter syndrome.
**Authors:** Fainberg J, Hayden RP, Schlegel PN
**Journal:** Expert Rev Endocrinol Metab (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1080/17446651.2019.1671821](https://doi.org/10.1080/17446651.2019.1671821)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Endocrinol Metab. 2019 Nov;14(6):369-380. doi: 
10.1080/17446651.2019.1671821. Epub 2019 Oct 7.

Fertility management of Klinefelter syndrome.

Fainberg J(1), Hayden RP(1), Schlegel PN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

Introduction: Klinefelter syndrome (KS) represents the most common chromosomal 
abnormality in the general population, and one of the most common genetic 
etiologies of nonobstructive azoospermia (NOA) and in severe oligospermia. Once 
considered untreatable, men with KS and NOA now have a variety of treatment 
options to obtain paternity.Areas covered: The cornerstone of treatment for both 
KS and NOA patients remains the surgical retrieval of viable sperm, which can be 
used for intracytoplasmic sperm injection to obtain pregnancy. Although the 
field has advanced significantly since the early 1990s, approximately half of 
men with KS will ultimately fail fertility treatments. Presented is a critical 
review of the available evidence that has attempted to identify predictive 
factors for successful sperm recovery. To optimize surgical success, a variety 
of treatment modalities have also been suggested and evaluated, including 
hormonal manipulation and timing of retrieval.Expert opinion: Individuals with 
KS have a relatively good prognosis for sperm recovery compared to other men 
with idiopathic NOA. Surgical success is heavily dependent upon surgical 
technique and the experience of the andrology/embryology team tasked with the 
identification and use of testicular sperm.

DOI: 10.1080/17446651.2019.1671821
PMID: 31587581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]