---
reference_id: "PMID:39768444"
title: "Nociplastic Pain in Endometriosis: A Scoping Review."
authors:
- Gentles A
- Goodwin E
- Bedaiwy Y
- Marshall N
- Yong PJ
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/jcm13247521
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nociplastic Pain in Endometriosis: A Scoping Review.
**Authors:** Gentles A, Goodwin E, Bedaiwy Y, Marshall N, Yong PJ
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm13247521](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm13247521)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2024 Dec 10;13(24):7521. doi: 10.3390/jcm13247521.

Nociplastic Pain in Endometriosis: A Scoping Review.

Gentles A(1)(2), Goodwin E(2), Bedaiwy Y(2), Marshall N(1), Yong PJ(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC V6H 3N1, Canada.
(2)BC Women's Center for Pelvic Pain and Endometriosis, Vancouver, BC V6H 3N1,
Canada.
(3)Women's Health Research Institute, Vancouver, BC V6H 3N1, Canada.

Endometriosis is an inflammatory chronic condition associated with nociceptive,
neuropathic, and nociplastic pain. Central sensitization (CS) is the primary
nociplastic pain mechanism. However, there are currently no standardized methods
for detecting CS or nociplastic pain. This review aims to identify available
tools for characterizing CS/nociplastic pain in endometriosis-related chronic
pelvic pain. Following the PRISMA-P protocol, MEDLINE, Embase, Scopus, and
PsychINFO databases were searched on 23 April 2024, for the terms
"endometriosis", "central sensitization", "nociplastic pain", "widespread pain",
and "assessment tools". Publications were selected if they mentioned tool(s) for
detecting nociplastic pain or CS in endometriosis patients. Information was
extracted on study demographics, assessment types, and the tools used for
detection. Of the 379 citations retrieved, 30 papers met the inclusion criteria.
When working to identify CS and nociplastic pain, fourteen studies exclusively
used patient-reported questionnaires, six used quantitative sensory testing
(QST), two used clinical assessments, and eight used multiple approaches
combining patient-reported questionnaires and clinical assessment. This review
illustrates the diversity of tools currently used to identify CS and nociplastic
pain in endometriosis patients. Further research is needed to evaluate their
validity and to standardize methods in order to improve the accuracy of
nociplastic pain identification and guide treatment.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm13247521
PMCID: PMC11727753
PMID: 39768444

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
