---
reference_id: "PMID:6227635"
title: Heterogeneity of the molecular lesions in inherited phosphofructokinase deficiency.
authors:
- Vora S
- Davidson M
- Seaman C
- Miranda AF
- Noble NA
- Tanaka KR
- Frenkel EP
- Dimauro S
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1983'
doi: 10.1172/JCI111164
keywords:
- Adult
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Erythrocyte Aging
- Erythrocytes/enzymology
- Glycogen Storage Disease/enzymology
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type VII/enzymology, genetics"
- Humans
- "Isoenzymes/deficiency, genetics"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Muscles/enzymology
- Oxygen/blood
- "Phosphofructokinase-1/deficiency, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heterogeneity of the molecular lesions in inherited phosphofructokinase deficiency.
**Authors:** Vora S, Davidson M, Seaman C, Miranda AF, Noble NA, Tanaka KR, Frenkel EP, Dimauro S
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1983)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI111164](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI111164)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 1983 Dec;72(6):1995-2006. doi: 10.1172/JCI111164.

Heterogeneity of the molecular lesions in inherited phosphofructokinase
deficiency.

Vora S, Davidson M, Seaman C, Miranda AF, Noble NA, Tanaka KR, Frenkel EP,
Dimauro S.

Human phosphofructokinase (PFK; EC 2.7.1.11) exists in tetrameric isozymic
forms. Muscle and liver contain the homotetramers M4 and L4, whereas
erythrocytes contain five isozymes composed of M (muscle) and L (liver)
subunits, i.e., M4, M3L, M2L2, ML3, and L4. Inherited defects of erythrocyte PFK
are usually partial and are described in association with heterogeneous clinical
syndromes. To define the molecular basis and pathogenesis of this enzymopathy,
we investigated four unrelated individuals manifesting myopathy and hemolysis
(glycogenosis type VII), isolated hemolysis, or no symptoms at all. The three
symptomatic patients showed high-normal hemoglobin levels, despite hemolysis and
early-onset hyperuricemia. They showed total lack of muscle-type PFK and
suffered from exertional myopathy of varying severity. In the erythrocytes, a
metabolic crossover was evident at the PFK step: the levels of hexose
monophosphates were elevated and those of 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG) were
depressed, causing strikingly increased hemoglobin-oxygen affinity. In all
cases, the residual erythrocyte PFK consisted exclusively of L4 isozyme,
indicating homozygosity for the deficiency of the catalytically active M
subunit. However, presence of immunoreactive M subunit was shown in cultured
fibroblasts by indirect immunofluorescence with monoclonal anti-M antibody. The
fourth individual was completely asymptomatic, had normal erythrocyte
metabolism, and had no evidence of hemolysis. His residual erythrocyte PFK
showed a striking decrease of the L4, ML3, and M2L2 isozymes, secondary to a
mutant unstable L subunit. Identical alterations of erythrocyte PFK were found
in his asymptomatic son, indicating heterozygosity for the mutant unstable L
subunit in this kindred. These studies show that, except for the varying
severity of the myopathic symptoms, glycogenosis type VII has highly uniform
clinical and biochemical features and results from homozygosity for mutant
inactive M subunit(s). The absence of anemia despite hemolysis may be explained
by the low 2,3-DPG levels. The hyperuricemia may result from hyperactivity of
the hexose monophosphate shunt. In contrast, the clinically silent carrier state
results from heterozygosity for mutant M or L subunit. Of the two, the M subunit
appears to be more critical for adequate glycolytic flux in the erythrocyte,
since its absence is correlated with hemolysis.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI111164
PMCID: PMC437040
PMID: 6227635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
