---
reference_id: "PMID:35173827"
title: Renal calcium and magnesium handling in Gitelman syndrome.
authors:
- Reyes JV
- Medina PMB
journal: Am J Transl Res
year: '2022'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Renal calcium and magnesium handling in Gitelman syndrome.
**Authors:** Reyes JV, Medina PMB
**Journal:** Am J Transl Res (2022)

## Content

1. Am J Transl Res. 2022 Jan 15;14(1):1-19. eCollection 2022.

Renal calcium and magnesium handling in Gitelman syndrome.

Reyes JV(1), Medina PMB(1).

Author information:
(1)Biological Models Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, College of Medicine, University of the Philippines Manila Ermita,
Manila 1000, Philippines.

Gitelman syndrome (GS) is an autosomal recessive salt-losing tubulopathy caused
by biallelic inactivating mutations in the SLC12A3 gene. This gene encodes the
thiazide-sensitive sodium-chloride cotransporter (NCC) which is exclusively
expressed in the distal convoluted tubules (DCT). GS patients classically
present with hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis with hypocalciuria and
hypomagnesemia. While hypokalemia and metabolic alkalosis are easily explained
by effects of the genotypic defect in GS, the mechanisms by which hypomagnesemia
and hypocalciuria develop in GS are poorly understood. In this review, we aim to
achieve three major objectives. First, present a concise discussion about
current understanding on physiologic calcium and magnesium handling in the DCT.
Second, integrate expression data from studies on calciotropic and
magnesiotropic proteins relevant to the GS disease state. Lastly, provide
insights into the possible mechanisms of calcium-magnesium crosstalk relating to
the co-occurrence of hypocalciuria and hypomagnesemia in GS models. Our analyses
highlight specific areas of study that are valuable in elucidating possible
molecular pathways of hypocalciuria and hypomagnesemia in GS.

AJTR Copyright © 2022.

PMCID: PMC8829599
PMID: 35173827

Conflict of interest statement: None.
