---
reference_id: "PMID:38828518"
title: "Immunoglobulin A vasculitis: The clinical features and pathophysiology."
authors:
- Hu YC
- Yang YH
- Chiang BL
journal: Kaohsiung J Med Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/kjm2.12852
keywords:
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin A/immunology
- "COVID-19/immunology, physiopathology, virology, complications"
- "Vasculitis/immunology, physiopathology"
- SARS-CoV-2/immunology
- "IgA Vasculitis/immunology, physiopathology, diagnosis"
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- Neutrophils/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunoglobulin A vasculitis: The clinical features and pathophysiology.
**Authors:** Hu YC, Yang YH, Chiang BL
**Journal:** Kaohsiung J Med Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/kjm2.12852](https://doi.org/10.1002/kjm2.12852)

## Content

1. Kaohsiung J Med Sci. 2024 Jul;40(7):612-620. doi: 10.1002/kjm2.12852. Epub
2024  Jun 3.

Immunoglobulin A vasculitis: The clinical features and pathophysiology.

Hu YC(1)(2), Yang YH(1), Chiang BL(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, 
Taiwan.
(2)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Genome and Systems Biology Degree Program, College of Life Science, National 
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Medical Research, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

Palpable purpura, gastrointestinal symptoms, joint involvement, and renal 
disease characterize immunoglobulin A vasculitis (IgAV). Renal involvement 
ranging from mild proteinuria to severe nephritic or nephrotic syndrome 
highlights the importance of monitoring kidney function in patients with IgAV. 
Recognizing these key features is crucial for early diagnosis and appropriate 
management to prevent long-term complications related to kidney disease. 
However, the pathogenesis of IgAV remains unclear. Disease mechanisms involve 
various factors, including the interplay of aberrantly glycosylated IgA, 
anti-endothelial cell antibodies, and neutrophils following infection triggers, 
which are the main pathogenic mechanisms of IgAV. Insights from cases of IgAV 
related to Coronavirus disease 2019 have offered additional understanding of the 
connection between infection and IgAV pathogenesis. This review provides a 
valuable resource for healthcare professionals and rheumatology researchers 
seeking a better understanding of the clinical features and pathophysiology of 
IgAV.

© 2024 The Authors. The Kaohsiung Journal of Medical Sciences published by John 
Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Kaohsiung Medical University.

DOI: 10.1002/kjm2.12852
PMCID: PMC11895584
PMID: 38828518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no conflict of interest.