---
reference_id: "PMID:39558053"
title: Airway ciliary microenvironment responses in mice with primary ciliary dyskinesia and central pair apparatus defects.
authors:
- McKenzie CW
- Wilcox RM
- Isaiah OJ
- Kareta MS
- Lee L
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-79877-z
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cilia/metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- Mutation
- "Epithelial Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- "Kartagener Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- "Trachea/metabolism, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Mucociliary Clearance/genetics
- Single-Cell Analysis
- "Ciliary Motility Disorders/genetics, pathology"
- Cellular Microenvironment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Airway ciliary microenvironment responses in mice with primary ciliary dyskinesia and central pair apparatus defects.
**Authors:** McKenzie CW, Wilcox RM, Isaiah OJ, Kareta MS, Lee L
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-024-79877-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-79877-z)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Nov 18;14(1):28437. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-79877-z.

Airway ciliary microenvironment responses in mice with primary ciliary
dyskinesia and central pair apparatus defects.

McKenzie CW(1), Wilcox RM(1), Isaiah OJ(2), Kareta MS(3)(4), Lee L(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Pediatrics and Rare Diseases Group, Sanford Research, 2301 E. 60th St. N.,
Sioux Falls, Sioux Falls, SD, 57104, USA.
(2)Functional Genomics and Bioinformatics Core, Sanford Research, 2301 E. 60th
St. N., Sioux Falls, SD, 57104, USA.
(3)Genetics and Genomics Group, Sanford Research, 2301 E. 60th St. N., Sioux
Falls, SD, 57104, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Sanford School of Medicine of the University of
South Dakota, 1400 W. 22nd Street, Sioux Falls, SD, 57105, USA.
(5)Pediatrics and Rare Diseases Group, Sanford Research, 2301 E. 60th St. N.,
Sioux Falls, Sioux Falls, SD, 57104, USA. lance.lee@sanfordhealth.org.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Sanford School of Medicine of the University of
South Dakota, 1400 W. 22nd Street, Sioux Falls, SD, 57105, USA.
lance.lee@sanfordhealth.org.

Dysfunction of motile cilia can impair mucociliary clearance in the airway and
result in primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD). We previously showed that mutations
in central pair apparatus (CPA) genes perturb ciliary motility and result in PCD
in mouse models. However, little is known about how epithelial cell types in the
ciliary microenvironment of the upper airway respond to defects in ciliary
motility and mucociliary clearance. Here, we have used single-cell RNA
sequencing to investigate responses in tracheal epithelial cells from mice with
mutations in CPA genes Cfap221/ Pcdp1, Cfap54, and Spef2. Expected cell types
were identified, along with an unidentified cell type not expressing markers of
typical airway cells. Deuterosomal cells were found to exist in two states that
differ largely in expression of genes involved in differentiation into ciliated
cells. Functional enrichment analysis of differentially expressed genes (DEGs)
revealed important cellular functions and molecular pathways for each cell type
that are altered in mutant mice. Overlapping DEGs shed light on general
responses to cilia dysfunction, while unique DEGs indicate that some responses
may be specific to the individual mutation and ciliary defect.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-79877-z
PMCID: PMC11574124
PMID: 39558053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Competing interests The authors
declare no competing interests.
