---
reference_id: "PMID:17236799"
title: "Kinetic and expression analyses of seven novel mutations in mitochondrial acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase (T2): identification of a Km mutant and an analysis of the mutational sites in the structure."
authors:
- Sakurai S
- Fukao T
- Haapalainen AM
- Zhang G
- Yamada K
- Lilliu F
- Yano S
- Robinson P
- Gibson MK
- Wanders RJ
- Mitchell GA
- Wierenga RK
- Kondo N
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2006.12.002
keywords:
- "Acetyl-CoA C-Acetyltransferase/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Adolescent
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Child
- Female
- Fibroblasts/enzymology
- Humans
- Kinetics
- Male
- "Mitochondrial Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Models, Molecular"
- Mutation
- Protein Folding
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- Temperature
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kinetic and expression analyses of seven novel mutations in mitochondrial acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase (T2): identification of a Km mutant and an analysis of the mutational sites in the structure.
**Authors:** Sakurai S, Fukao T, Haapalainen AM, Zhang G, Yamada K, Lilliu F, Yano S, Robinson P, Gibson MK, Wanders RJ, Mitchell GA, Wierenga RK, Kondo N
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2006.12.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2006.12.002)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2007 Apr;90(4):370-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2006.12.002. Epub
2007 Jan 22.

Kinetic and expression analyses of seven novel mutations in mitochondrial
acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase (T2): identification of a Km mutant and an analysis of
the mutational sites in the structure.

Sakurai S(1), Fukao T, Haapalainen AM, Zhang G, Yamada K, Lilliu F, Yano S,
Robinson P, Gibson MK, Wanders RJ, Mitchell GA, Wierenga RK, Kondo N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu University, Gifu,
Gifu, Japan.

Mitochondrial acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase (T2) deficiency is an inborn error of
metabolism that affects isoleucine catabolism and ketone body metabolism. We
identified 7 novel and 2 previously reported mutations in six T2-deficient
patients. Transient expression analysis of wild-type and eight mutant cDNAs was
performed at 40, 37 and 30 degrees C. Although no significant residual activity
was detected, mutant proteins were detected in the N158D, N158S, R208Q, Y219H
and N282H mutants. Accumulation of these mutant proteins was
temperature-sensitive with the highest expression levels at lower temperatures.
Expression of Q73P and N353K cDNAs yielded neither residual T2 protein nor
enzyme activity. An E252del mutant T2 was detected with a relative protein
amount and enzyme activity of 30% and 25%, respectively, in comparison to the
wild-type at 37 degrees C. The E252del mutant protein was more stable at 30
degrees C expression than 37 degrees C, but was essentially undetectable at 40
degrees C, indicating its temperature-sensitive instability. Kinetic studies
revealed a twofold K(m) elevation for substrates coenzyme A and acetoacetyl-CoA
in the E252del mutant, while V(max) was comparable to the wild-type. We conclude
that the E252del is a temperature-sensitive K(m) mutant. This correlates well
with the effect predicted from the T2 tertiary structure analysis, using the
crystal structure of the human T2 homotetramer. The probable effect of the other
mutations on the T2 tertiary structure was also evaluated.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2006.12.002
PMID: 17236799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
