---
reference_id: "PMID:28019679"
title: Inflammasome activation and innate immunity in Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Heneka MT
journal: Brain Pathol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/bpa.12483
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inflammasome activation and innate immunity in Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Heneka MT
**Journal:** Brain Pathol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bpa.12483](https://doi.org/10.1111/bpa.12483)

## Content

1. Brain Pathol. 2017 Mar;27(2):220-222. doi: 10.1111/bpa.12483.

Inflammasome activation and innate immunity in Alzheimer's disease.

Heneka MT(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(2)German Center for Neurodegenerative Disease, Bonn, Germany.

Activation of innate immunity and the assembly of microglial cells at sites of 
Alzheimer disease pathology has long been regarded as bystander phenomenon, 
which does not actively contribute to disease pathogenesis and progression. 
Recent data emerging from genetics, clinical imaging and animal experimentation 
point to an intimate and mutual interaction of innate immune mechanisms and 
neurodegenerative processes. NOD-like receptor (NLR) family, pyrin domain 
containing 3 and 1 inflammasomes, present in myeloid cells and neurons, 
respectively, represent key components of the innate immune reaction observed in 
Alzheimer patient brains. Inhibition of inflammasome activation just begins to 
prove beneficial and protective from cognitive deficits and neuronal death in 
cell culture and animal models of Alzheimer's disease, thereby opening a new 
avenue for therapeutic intervention.

© 2016 International Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/bpa.12483
PMCID: PMC8029274
PMID: 28019679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]