---
reference_id: "PMID:30755107"
title: "The use of folic acid in dengue: has it any value?"
authors:
- Ali Syed A
- Bin Zafar S
- Ali Shah A
- Awan S
journal: Trop Doct
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1177/0049475519827110
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The use of folic acid in dengue: has it any value?
**Authors:** Ali Syed A, Bin Zafar S, Ali Shah A, Awan S
**Journal:** Trop Doct (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0049475519827110](https://doi.org/10.1177/0049475519827110)

## Content

1. Trop Doct. 2019 Apr;49(2):85-87. doi: 10.1177/0049475519827110. Epub 2019 Feb 
12.

The use of folic acid in dengue: has it any value?

Ali Syed A(1), Bin Zafar S(2), Ali Shah A(3), Awan S(4).

Author information:
(1)1 Assistant Professor, Department of Medicine, The Aga Khan University 
Hospital, Karachi, Pakistan.
(2)2 Resident, Department of Medicine, The Aga Khan University Hospital, 
Karachi, Pakistan.
(3)3 Resident, Department of Medicine, The Aga Khan University Hospital, 
Karachi, Pakistan.
(4)4 Senior Instructor, Department of Medicine, The Aga Khan University 
Hospital, Karachi, Pakistan.

Folic acid is used in dengue patients. Our study aims to compare the duration of 
recovery of thrombocytopenia in patients with dengue infection who received 
folic acid and those who did not. We retrospectively reviewed the medical 
records of adult patients admitted over six years with a diagnosis of dengue. Of 
2216 patients, 1464 fulfilled the inclusion criteria. Group A were those 
patients who received folic acid and group B were those who did not. A total of 
1322 (90.3%) patients received folic acid. The mean time period required for 
platelets to double the nadir was 1.7 (±2.2) days in both groups A and B ( 
P = 0.89). In conclusion, there is no significant difference in the recovery of 
thrombocytopenia in patients with dengue fever who received folic and those who 
did not receive folic acid.

DOI: 10.1177/0049475519827110
PMID: 30755107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]