---
reference_id: "PMID:40228085"
title: MED13L Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Campbell AN
- Bain J
- Doyle SJ
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MED13L Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Campbell AN, Bain J, Doyle SJ

## Content

1. MED13L Syndrome.

Campbell AN(1), Bain J(2), Doyle SJ(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2025 Apr 10.

Author information:
(1)Virtua Health College of Medicine & Life Sciences, Rowan University, 
Glassboro, New Jersey
(2)Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, New York

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: MED13L syndrome is characterized by mild-to-profound 
developmental delay, intellectual disability, and hypotonia. Neurobehavioral 
manifestations (autistic features, agitation/aggression, restlessness, 
self-harm, tantrums, frustration, overfriendliness, and/or hyperactivity) are 
also reported. Some individuals have abnormal findings on brain imaging 
(ventriculomegaly, delayed or lack of myelination, thin or absent corpus 
callosum, periventricular foci, and/or subcortical white matter abnormalities). 
Dysmorphic facial features, including depressed nasal bridge, bulbous nose, and 
hypotonic open mouth, are present in most individuals. Distal limb and/or digit 
anomalies, ocular manifestations and vision issues, and congenital heart defects 
have been reported. Other reported features include seizures and/or hearing 
impairment.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of MED13L syndrome is established in a proband 
with a heterozygous pathogenic variant in MED13L identified by molecular genetic 
testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Standardized treatment for 
developmental, intellectual, and behavioral issues and seizures; treatment of 
orthopedic manifestations, congenital heart disease, and ocular manifestations 
per relevant specialist; hearing aids may be helpful per otolaryngologist; 
community hearing services through early intervention or the school district; 
treatment of neonatal respiratory issues per intensivist and/or pulmonologist; 
feeding therapy; gastrostomy tube placement as needed; social work and family 
support. Surveillance: Monitor developmental progress, educational needs, 
behavior issues, and development of or changes in seizures at each visit; 
assessment of mobility and self-help skills at each visit; clinical assessment 
for scoliosis at each visit with radiographs as needed; assess for changes in 
visual acuity and strabismus per treating ophthalmologist; audiology evaluation 
annually or as needed; monitor for evidence of aspiration and/or respiratory 
insufficiency, nutritional status, safety of oral intake, and family needs at 
each visit.
GENETIC COUNSELING: MED13L syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder. The 
majority of probands reported to date whose parents have undergone molecular 
genetic testing have the disorder as the result of a pathogenic variant that 
occurred as a de novo event in the proband. Rarely, individuals diagnosed with 
MED13L syndrome have the disorder as the result of a pathogenic variant 
inherited from a mosaic, apparently unaffected parent. Once the MED13L 
pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, prenatal 
and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 40228085