---
reference_id: "PMID:41400833"
title: "Nonparaneoplastic Autoimmune Retinopathy: Scoping Review and Suggested Reporting Guidelines."
authors:
- Adamkiewicz D
- Arepalli S
- Sarici K
- Hossain HA
- Jain N
journal: Ocul Immunol Inflamm
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1080/09273948.2025.2593460
keywords:
- Humans
- "Autoimmune Diseases/diagnosis, immunology"
- "Retinal Diseases/diagnosis, immunology"
- Electroretinography
- "Autoantibodies/immunology, blood"
- Fluorescein Angiography
- Retina/immunology
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nonparaneoplastic Autoimmune Retinopathy: Scoping Review and Suggested Reporting Guidelines.
**Authors:** Adamkiewicz D, Arepalli S, Sarici K, Hossain HA, Jain N
**Journal:** Ocul Immunol Inflamm (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1080/09273948.2025.2593460](https://doi.org/10.1080/09273948.2025.2593460)

## Content

1. Ocul Immunol Inflamm. 2026 Feb;34(2):284-291. doi: 
10.1080/09273948.2025.2593460. Epub 2025 Dec 16.

Nonparaneoplastic Autoimmune Retinopathy: Scoping Review and Suggested Reporting 
Guidelines.

Adamkiewicz D(1), Arepalli S(1), Sarici K(1), Hossain HA(1), Jain N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
Georgia, USA.

PURPOSE: To investigate trends in the diagnostic approach to nonparaneoplastic 
autoimmune retinopathy (npAIR).
METHODS: We queried PubMed for clinical reports on npAIR published between 
January 2016 and September 2025. Articles were assessed to determine criteria 
used to establish diagnosis of npAIR using a standardized grading system. 
Articles were categorized as case reports (≤3 patients) or case series (>3 
patients).
RESULTS: 36 case reports and 41 case series met eligibility criteria (755 total 
cases). Author subspecialty included 34% uveitis, 20% inherited retinal disease 
(IRD), 16% general retina, 10% miscellaneous, and 19% unknown specialty. Over 
80% of publications reported electroretinography and anti-retinal antibody 
testing for diagnosis of npAIR. Fundus autofluorescence (FAF) was performed in 
67% of case reports and at least one patient in 51% of case series. Widefield 
FAF was used in 19% of case reports and in at least one patient in 20% of case 
series. Genetic testing was reported in 22% of case reports and in at least one 
patient in 27% of case series. Studies with an IRD specialist as first or last 
author most commonly used genetic testing (35%).
CONCLUSIONS: Literature on npAIR is hampered by variability in classification 
schemes and incomplete reporting. Nonspecific electroretinography testing and 
antiretinal antibody testing are widely employed while widefield 
autofluorescence testing and genetic testing are not commonly used. Expanded 
access to these tools provides an opportunity to update diagnostic criteria of 
npAIR. Improved classification will permit us to better understand the natural 
history of disease.

DOI: 10.1080/09273948.2025.2593460
PMID: 41400833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]