---
reference_id: "PMID:36583899"
title: "Duodenal Dieulafoy lesion: a rare pathogeny of gastrointestinal bleeding in children."
authors:
- Chao L
- Lei Z
- Xiang L
journal: Turk J Pediatr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.24953/turkjped.2022.428
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Duodenal Dieulafoy lesion: a rare pathogeny of gastrointestinal bleeding in children.
**Authors:** Chao L, Lei Z, Xiang L
**Journal:** Turk J Pediatr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.24953/turkjped.2022.428](https://doi.org/10.24953/turkjped.2022.428)

## Content

1. Turk J Pediatr. 2022;64(6):1151-1155. doi: 10.24953/turkjped.2022.428.

Duodenal Dieulafoy lesion: a rare pathogeny of gastrointestinal bleeding in 
children.

Chao L(1), Lei Z(1), Xiang L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Shibei 
District, Qingdao, Shandong Province, China.

BACKGROUND: Dieulafoy lesion is a calibre persistent submucosal artery 
associated with a minuter mucosal defect. Dieulafoy lesion has been reported to 
account for 1-5.8% of acute nonvariceal upper gastrointestinal bleeding in 
adults, but it is rarely reported in children.
CASE: Here we report a case of duodenal Dieulafoy lesion in a 13-year-old boy. 
After endoscopy and laparotomy, he still had no definite diagnosis and effective 
treatment. The duodenal Dieulafoy lesion was finally identified by selective 
angiography and was effectively treated by intravascular embolization.
CONCLUSIONS: For unexplained upper gastrointestinal bleeding, the possibility of 
duodenal Dieulafoy lesion should be considered. A combination of multiple 
diagnosis and treatment methods can improve the success rate of diagnosis and 
treatment when a single test or treatment method cannot provide definitive 
diagnosis or effective treatment.

DOI: 10.24953/turkjped.2022.428
PMID: 36583899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]