---
reference_id: "PMID:3422645"
title: Quantification of immunoglobulin on electrophoretic immunoblot strips as a tool for human immunodeficiency virus serodiagnosis.
authors:
- Blomberg J
- Klasse PJ
journal: J Clin Microbiol
year: '1988'
doi: 10.1128/jcm.26.1.111-115.1988
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Quantification of immunoglobulin on electrophoretic immunoblot strips as a tool for human immunodeficiency virus serodiagnosis.
**Authors:** Blomberg J, Klasse PJ
**Journal:** J Clin Microbiol (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jcm.26.1.111-115.1988](https://doi.org/10.1128/jcm.26.1.111-115.1988)

## Content

1. J Clin Microbiol. 1988 Jan;26(1):111-5. doi: 10.1128/jcm.26.1.111-115.1988.

Quantification of immunoglobulin on electrophoretic immunoblot strips as a tool 
for human immunodeficiency virus serodiagnosis.

Blomberg J(1), Klasse PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Lund, Sweden.

Electrophoretic immunoblotting (EIB [Western blotting]), the main method for 
verification of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) seropositivity, needs 
thorough characterization and standardization. We explored the possibilities of 
quantifying immunoglobulin G (IgG) bound to EIB strips both by densitometry of 
the peroxidase-stained bands and by measurement of radioactivity with labeled 
anti-HIV IgG. The radioactivity method is inherently more exact but was more 
cumbersome. However, despite saturation phenomena at high IgG densities, the 
densitometric method was more convenient and yielded reproducible estimates of 
the amount of bound IgG. We found it useful primarily for documentation of 
changes in the relative abundance of antibodies to different HIV proteins from 
individual patients over time. To explore the potential usefulness of the 
method, we studied a small set of HIV-seropositive persons. The average p24/gp41 
color yield ratios and standard deviations in 3 persons with recent 
seroconversion, 15 healthy subjects, and 6 diseased HIV-seropositive persons 
were 6.6 +/- 0.9, 2.3 +/- 1.9, and 1.3 +/- 0.5, respectively. These data are in 
accord with previous qualitative or semiquantitative observations but are too 
limited for any conclusions regarding the use of quantitative EIB for prognostic 
use with individual patients. Quantitative EIB is a valuable tool for 
comparative methodological studies and for research on the protective role of 
anti-HIV antibodies in acquired immunodeficiency syndrome pathogenesis. Its 
possible use in prognostication for individual patients must be evaluated in 
long-term studies.

DOI: 10.1128/jcm.26.1.111-115.1988
PMCID: PMC266207
PMID: 3422645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]