---
reference_id: PMID:24285494
title: "The coupling of bone and cartilage turnover in osteoarthritis: opportunities for bone antiresorptives and anabolics as potential treatments?"
authors:
- Karsdal MA
- Bay-Jensen AC
- Lories RJ
- Abramson S
- Spector T
- Pastoureau P
- Christiansen C
- Attur M
- Henriksen K
- Goldring SR
- Kraus V
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204111
keywords:
- "Anabolic Agents/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Bone Density Conservation Agents/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Bone Remodeling/drug effects, physiology"
- "Cartilage, Articular/drug effects, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Osteoarthritis/drug therapy, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Osteoblasts/metabolism, pathology"
- "Osteoclasts/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The coupling of bone and cartilage turnover in osteoarthritis: opportunities for bone antiresorptives and anabolics as potential treatments?
**Authors:** Karsdal MA, Bay-Jensen AC, Lories RJ, Abramson S, Spector T, Pastoureau P, Christiansen C, Attur M, Henriksen K, Goldring SR, Kraus V
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204111](https://doi.org/10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204111)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2014 Feb;73(2):336-48. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204111.
Epub  2013 Nov 27.

The coupling of bone and cartilage turnover in osteoarthritis: opportunities for 
bone antiresorptives and anabolics as potential treatments?

Karsdal MA(1), Bay-Jensen AC, Lories RJ, Abramson S, Spector T, Pastoureau P, 
Christiansen C, Attur M, Henriksen K, Goldring SR, Kraus V.

Author information:
(1)Nordic Bioscience, , Herlev, Denmark.

Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common form of arthritic disease, and a major 
cause of disability and impaired quality of life in the elderly. OA is a complex 
disease of the entire joint, affecting bone, cartilage and synovium that thereby 
presents multiple targets for treatment. This manuscript will summarise emerging 
observations from cell biology, preclinical and preliminary clinical trials that 
elucidate interactions between the bone and cartilage components in particular. 
Bone and cartilage health are tightly associated. Ample evidence has been found 
for bone changes during progression of OA including, but not limited to, 
increased turnover in the subchondral bone, undermineralisation of the 
trabecular structure, osteophyte formation, bone marrow lesions and sclerosis of 
the subchondral plate. Meanwhile, a range of investigations has shown positive 
effects on cartilage health when bone resorption is suppressed, or deterioration 
of the cartilage when resorption is increased. Known bone therapies, namely 
oestrogens, selective oestrogen receptor modifiers (SERMs), bisphosphonates, 
strontium ranelate, calcitonin and parathyroid hormone, might prove useful for 
treating two critical tissue components of the OA joint, the bone and the 
cartilage. An optimal treatment for OA likely targets at least these two tissue 
components. The patient subgroups for whom these therapies are most appropriate 
have yet to be fully defined but would likely include, at a minimum, those with 
high bone turnover.

DOI: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2013-204111
PMID: 24285494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]