---
reference_id: "PMID:11583315"
title: "Disseminated intravascular coagulation in solid tumors: clinical and pathologic study."
authors:
- Sallah S
- Wan JY
- Nguyen NP
- Hanrahan LR
- Sigounas G
journal: Thromb Haemost
year: '2001'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disseminated intravascular coagulation in solid tumors: clinical and pathologic study.
**Authors:** Sallah S, Wan JY, Nguyen NP, Hanrahan LR, Sigounas G
**Journal:** Thromb Haemost (2001)

## Content

1. Thromb Haemost. 2001 Sep;86(3):828-33.

Disseminated intravascular coagulation in solid tumors: clinical and pathologic 
study.

Sallah S(1), Wan JY, Nguyen NP, Hanrahan LR, Sigounas G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, 
Memphis 38103, USA. ssallah@utmem.edu

Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is a well known hemostatic 
complication of solid tumors. We evaluated the occurrence of DIC in 1117 
patients with solid tumors. Of these patients, 76 (6.8%) were diagnosed with 
DIC. There were a total of 145 bleeding and clotting episodes reported in the 76 
patients. Thrombocytopenia, hypofibrinogemia, elevated D-dimer and fibrinogen 
degradation products were the most common coagulation abnormalities encountered 
in patients with DIC. In multivariate analysis, older age (p = .0001), male 
gender (p = .009), advanced malignancies (p = .027), breast cancer (p = .038) 
and the presence of necrosis in the tumor specimen (p = .004), emerged as 
independent factors significantly related to the occurrence of DIC in patients 
with solid tumors. Of the 76 patients, 25 (33%) achieved response to treatment 
of DIC as defined in the study. Patients with early stage and advanced 
malignancies who developed DIC had inferior survival when compared with their 
counterparts without DIC (p = .039 and p = .005, respectively). Taken together, 
this study indicates that certain clinical and laboratory features are more 
common in patients with solid tumors who developed DIC. The occurrence of DIC 
appears to have an independent effect on survival of patients with cancer. 
Cooperative studies are encouraged to better address the usefulness and optimal 
prophylactic heparin regimen in patients at risk for DIC.

PMID: 11583315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]