---
reference_id: "PMID:20493394"
title: Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation and other management strategies for MHC class II deficiency.
authors:
- Picard C
- Fischer A
journal: Immunol Allergy Clin North Am
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.iac.2010.01.001
keywords:
- Animals
- Antibiotic Prophylaxis
- Antibody Formation/genetics
- B-Lymphocytes/immunology
- CD4-Positive T-Lymphocytes/immunology
- "Child, Preschool"
- Health Planning Guidelines
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Histocompatibility Antigens Class II/genetics
- Humans
- "Immunity, Cellular/genetics"
- "Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/complications, genetics, immunology, therapy"
- Infection Control
- "Infections/etiology, genetics, immunology, transmission"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation and other management strategies for MHC class II deficiency.
**Authors:** Picard C, Fischer A
**Journal:** Immunol Allergy Clin North Am (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.iac.2010.01.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iac.2010.01.001)

## Content

1. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am. 2010 May;30(2):173-8. doi:
10.1016/j.iac.2010.01.001.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation and other management strategies for MHC
class II deficiency.

Picard C(1), Fischer A.

Author information:
(1)Study Center of Primary Immunodeficiencies, Necker Hospital, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, 149 rue de Sèvres, Paris 75015, France.
capucine.picard@inserm.fr

Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II expression deficiency is a rare
condition with autosomal recessive transmission. The defect of MHC class II
leads to combined immunodeficiency with defective CD4(+) T-cell development and
a lack of T helper cell-dependent antibody production by B cells. The clinical
course of disease is characterized by the recurrence of bacterial, viral,
fungal, and protozoan infections. The optimal symptomatic care that is available
involves the prophylactic use of antibiotics and the administration of
immunoglobulin with adequate nutritional support. Hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation is the only known treatment available to cure MHC class II
expression deficiency.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.iac.2010.01.001
PMID: 20493394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
