---
reference_id: "PMID:39201429"
title: "The Human OCTN Sub-Family: Gene and Protein Structure, Expression, and Regulation."
authors:
- Galluccio M
- Tripicchio M
- Pochini L
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25168743
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Human OCTN Sub-Family: Gene and Protein Structure, Expression, and Regulation.
**Authors:** Galluccio M, Tripicchio M, Pochini L
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25168743](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25168743)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Aug 10;25(16):8743. doi: 10.3390/ijms25168743.

The Human OCTN Sub-Family: Gene and Protein Structure, Expression, and 
Regulation.

Galluccio M(1), Tripicchio M(1), Pochini L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Molecular Biotechnology, and Molecular Biology, 
Department of Biology, Ecology and Earth Sciences (DiBEST), University of 
Calabria, Via P. Bucci 4c, 87036 Arcavacata di Rende, Italy.
(2)Institute of Biomembranes, Bioenergetics and Molecular Biotechnology (IBIOM), 
National Research Council (CNR), Via Amendola 122/O, 70126 Bari, Italy.

OCTN1 and OCTN2 are membrane transport proteins encoded by the SLC22A4 and 
SLC22A5 genes, respectively. Even though several transcripts have been predicted 
by bioinformatics for both genes, only one functional protein isoform has been 
described for each of them. Both proteins are ubiquitous, and depending on the 
physiopathological state of the cell, their expression is regulated by 
well-known transcription factors, although some aspects have been neglected. A 
plethora of missense variants with uncertain clinical significance are reported 
both in the dbSNP and the Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer (COSMIC) 
databases for both genes. Due to their involvement in human pathologies, such as 
inflammatory-based diseases (OCTN1/2), systemic primary carnitine deficiency 
(OCTN2), and drug disposition, it would be interesting to predict the impact of 
variants on human health from the perspective of precision medicine. Although 
the lack of a 3D structure for these two transport proteins hampers any 
speculation on the consequences of the polymorphisms, the already available 3D 
structures for other members of the SLC22 family may provide powerful tools to 
perform structure/function studies on WT and mutant proteins.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25168743
PMCID: PMC11354717
PMID: 39201429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.