---
reference_id: "PMID:26336863"
title: Behavioral disturbance and treatment strategies in Smith-Magenis syndrome.
authors:
- Poisson A
- Nicolas A
- Cochat P
- Sanlaville D
- Rigard C
- de Leersnyder H
- Franco P
- Des Portes V
- Edery P
- Demily C
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-015-0330-x
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Mental Disorders
- Pain
- Sleep Wake Disorders
- "Smith-Magenis Syndrome/drug therapy, psychology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Behavioral disturbance and treatment strategies in Smith-Magenis syndrome.
**Authors:** Poisson A, Nicolas A, Cochat P, Sanlaville D, Rigard C, de Leersnyder H, Franco P, Des Portes V, Edery P, Demily C
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-015-0330-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-015-0330-x)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2015 Sep 4;10:111. doi: 10.1186/s13023-015-0330-x.

Behavioral disturbance and treatment strategies in Smith-Magenis syndrome.

Poisson A(1)(2)(3), Nicolas A(4)(5), Cochat P(6)(7), Sanlaville D(6)(8), Rigard 
C(4)(9), de Leersnyder H, Franco P(6)(10), Des Portes V(6)(11), Edery 
P(6)(8)(12), Demily C(4)(9)(6).

Author information:
(1)Center for Screening and Treatment of Psychiatric Disorders of Genetic 
Origin, Vinatier Hospital, 95 Bd Pinel, 69678, Lyon, France. 
alice.poisson@ch-le-vinatier.fr.
(2)Cognitive Neuroscience Center, UMR 5229, French National Research Center 
(CNRS), Bron, France. alice.poisson@ch-le-vinatier.fr.
(3)Lyon 1 University, Lyon, France. alice.poisson@ch-le-vinatier.fr.
(4)Center for Screening and Treatment of Psychiatric Disorders of Genetic 
Origin, Vinatier Hospital, 95 Bd Pinel, 69678, Lyon, France.
(5)Michel Jouvet Unite (sleep Medicine), Vinatier Hospital, Human chronobiology 
team INSERM 846, Bron, France.
(6)Lyon 1 University, Lyon, France.
(7)Pediatric Nephrology and Rhumatology Ward, Reference Center for Rare Kidney 
Diseases, Civil Hospices of Lyon, INSERM U820, Bron, France.
(8)Department of Genetics, Reference Center for Developmental Anomalies and 
Malformation Syndromes, Civil Hospices of Lyon, Bron, France.
(9)Cognitive Neuroscience Center, UMR 5229, French National Research Center 
(CNRS), Bron, France.
(10)Hypnology Unit, Neuropediatric Ward, Civil Hospices of Lyon and INSERM U628, 
Lyon, France.
(11)Pediatric Neurology Ward, Reference Center "Intellectual Deficiencies with 
Rare Causes", Civil Hospices of Lyon, Bron, France. CNRS UMR 5304, L2C2, 
Institute of Cognitive Sciences, 69675, Bron, France.
(12)Neuroscience Research Center of Lyon, Inserm U1028, CNRS UMR 5292, UCBL, 
TIGER Team, Bron, France.

BACKGROUND: Smith-Magenis syndrome is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder that 
includes intellectual deficiency, speech delay, behavioral disturbance and 
typical sleep disorders. Ninety percent of the cases are due to a 17p11.2 
deletion encompassing the RAI1 gene; other cases are linked to mutations of the 
same gene. Behavioral disorders often include outbursts, attention 
deficit/hyperactivity disorders, self-injury with onychotillomania and 
polyembolokoilamania (insertion of objects into body orifices), etc. 
Interestingly, the stronger the speech delay and sleep disorders, the more 
severe the behavioral issues. Sleep disturbances associate excessive daytime 
sleepiness with nighttime agitation. They are underpinned by an inversion of the 
melatonin secretion cycle. However, the combined intake of beta-blockers in the 
morning and melatonin in the evening may radically alleviate the circadian 
rhythm problems.
DISCUSSION: Once sleep disorders are treated, the next challenge is finding an 
effective treatment for the remaining behavioral problems. Unfortunately, there 
is a lack of objective guidelines. A comprehensive evaluation of such disorders 
should include sleep disorders, potential causes of pain, neurocognitive level 
and environment (i.e. family and school). In any case, efforts should focus on 
improving communication skills, identifying and treating attention 
deficit/hyperactivity, aggressiveness and anxiety. Treatment of Smith-Magenis 
syndrome is complex and requires a multidisciplinary team including, among 
others, geneticists, psychiatrists, neuropediatricians/neurologists, 
somnologists, developmental and behavioral pediatricians, and speech and 
language therapists.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-015-0330-x
PMCID: PMC4559928
PMID: 26336863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]