---
reference_id: "PMID:26432584"
title: Nadolol decreases the incidence and severity of ventricular arrhythmias during exercise stress testing compared with β1-selective β-blockers in patients with catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia.
authors:
- Leren IS
- Saberniak J
- Majid E
- Haland TF
- Edvardsen T
- Haugaa KH
journal: Heart Rhythm
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2015.09.029
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Adrenergic beta-Antagonists/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Adult
- Drug Monitoring
- Electrocardiography/methods
- "Exercise Test/adverse effects, methods"
- Female
- Heart Rate/drug effects
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Nadolol/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Norway
- Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/metabolism
- Severity of Illness Index
- "Tachycardia, Ventricular/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology, etiology, prevention & control"
- Treatment Outcome
- Polymorphic Catecholaminergic Ventricular Tachycardia
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nadolol decreases the incidence and severity of ventricular arrhythmias during exercise stress testing compared with β1-selective β-blockers in patients with catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia.
**Authors:** Leren IS, Saberniak J, Majid E, Haland TF, Edvardsen T, Haugaa KH
**Journal:** Heart Rhythm (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hrthm.2015.09.029](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hrthm.2015.09.029)

## Content

1. Heart Rhythm. 2016 Feb;13(2):433-40. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2015.09.029. Epub
2015  Sep 30.

Nadolol decreases the incidence and severity of ventricular arrhythmias during 
exercise stress testing compared with β1-selective β-blockers in patients with 
catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia.

Leren IS(1), Saberniak J(2), Majid E(3), Haland TF(2), Edvardsen T(2), Haugaa 
KH(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Oslo University Hospital, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, 
Norway; Center for Cardiological Innovation, Oslo University Hospital, 
Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway; University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Oslo University Hospital, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, 
Norway; Center for Cardiological Innovation, Oslo University Hospital, 
Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway; University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway,; Institute for 
Surgical Research, Oslo University Hospital, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway.
(3)University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Oslo University Hospital, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, 
Norway; Center for Cardiological Innovation, Oslo University Hospital, 
Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway; University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway,; Institute for 
Surgical Research, Oslo University Hospital, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway. 
Electronic address: Kristina.Haugaa@rr-research.no.

Comment in
    Heart Rhythm. 2016 Feb;13(2):441-2. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2015.10.027.

BACKGROUND: Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) is an 
inheritable cardiac disease predisposing to malignant ventricular arrhythmias.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to explore the incidence and severity of ventricular 
arrhythmias in patients with CPVT before the initiation of β-blocker treatment, 
when treated with β1-selective β-blockers, and when treated with nadolol.
METHODS: In this study, 34 patients with CPVT were included (mean age 34 ± 19 
years; 15 (44%) women; 30 (88%) ryanodine receptor 2 variant positive). We 
performed 3 bicycle exercise stress tests in each patient: (1) before the 
initiation of β-blocker treatment, (2) after >6 weeks of treatment with 
β1-selective β-blockers and (3) after >6 weeks of treatment with nadolol. We 
recorded resting and maximum heart rates and the most severe ventricular 
arrhythmia occurring. Severity of arrhythmias was scored as 1 point for no 
arrhythmias or only single ventricular extrasystoles, 2 points for >10 
ventricular extrasystoles per minute or bigeminy, 3 points for couplets, and 4 
points for nonsustained ventricular tachycardia or sustained ventricular 
tachycardia.
RESULTS: Resting heart rate was similar during treatment with nadolol and 
β1-selective β-blockers (54 ± 10 beats/min vs 56 ± 14 beats/min; P = .50), while 
maximum heart rate was lower during treatment with nadolol compared with 
β1-selective β-blockers (122 ± 21 beats/min vs 139 ± 24 beats/min; P = .001). 
Arrhythmias during exercise stress testing were less severe during treatment 
with nadolol compared with during treatment with β1-selective β-blockers 
(arrhythmic score 1.6 ± 0.9 vs 2.5 ± 0.8; P < .001) and before the initiation of 
β-blocker treatment (arrhythmic score 1.6 ± 0.9 vs 2.7 ± 0.9; P = .001); 
however, no differences were observed during treatment with β1-selective 
β-blockers compared with before the initiation of β-blocker treatment 
(arrhythmic score 2.5 ± 0.8 vs 2.7 ± 0.9; P = .46).
CONCLUSION: The incidence and severity of ventricular arrhythmias decreased 
during treatment with nadolol compared with during treatment with β1-selective 
β-blockers. β1-Selective β-blockers did not change the occurrence or severity of 
arrhythmias compared with no medication.

Copyright © 2016 Heart Rhythm Society. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2015.09.029
PMID: 26432584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]