---
reference_id: "PMID:20129932"
title: "Perivenous demyelination: association with clinically defined acute disseminated encephalomyelitis and comparison with pathologically confirmed multiple sclerosis."
authors:
- Young NP
- Weinshenker BG
- Parisi JE
- Scheithauer B
- Giannini C
- Roemer SF
- Thomsen KM
- Mandrekar JN
- Erickson BJ
- Lucchinetti CF
journal: Brain
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awp321
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- "Demyelinating Diseases/diagnosis, pathology"
- "Encephalomyelitis, Acute Disseminated/diagnosis, pathology"
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Multiple Sclerosis/pathology
- Prospective Studies
- Retrospective Studies
- "Vascular Diseases/diagnosis, pathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Perivenous demyelination: association with clinically defined acute disseminated encephalomyelitis and comparison with pathologically confirmed multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Young NP, Weinshenker BG, Parisi JE, Scheithauer B, Giannini C, Roemer SF, Thomsen KM, Mandrekar JN, Erickson BJ, Lucchinetti CF
**Journal:** Brain (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awp321](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awp321)

## Content

1. Brain. 2010 Feb;133(Pt 2):333-48. doi: 10.1093/brain/awp321. Epub 2010 Feb 3.

Perivenous demyelination: association with clinically defined acute disseminated 
encephalomyelitis and comparison with pathologically confirmed multiple 
sclerosis.

Young NP(1), Weinshenker BG, Parisi JE, Scheithauer B, Giannini C, Roemer SF, 
Thomsen KM, Mandrekar JN, Erickson BJ, Lucchinetti CF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA.

Distinction between acute disseminated encephalomyelitis and acute multiple 
sclerosis is often clinically difficult. Perivenous demyelination is the 
pathological hallmark of acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, whereas confluent 
demyelination is the hallmark of acute multiple sclerosis. We investigated 
whether perivenous demyelination versus confluent demyelination distinguishes 
acute disseminated encephalomyelitis from multiple sclerosis. Patients with 
perivenous demyelination (n = 13; median age 43 years, range 5-67) on brain 
biopsy and/or autopsy, ascertained retrospectively, were compared with a cohort 
with confluent demyelination only (n = 91; 84% multiple sclerosis, 16% isolated 
syndrome at follow-up; median age 39 years, range 10-69). Clinical presentation, 
course and the International Paediatric Multiple Sclerosis Study Group clinical 
criteria for acute disseminated encephalomyelitis were assessed in both cohorts. 
Among the perivenous demyelination cohort, 10 patients had only perivenous 
demyelination and three also had confluent demyelination. All but one patient 
with perivenous demyelination only had a monophasic course, whereas two of three 
with both types had a relapsing course. The perivenous demyelination cohort was 
more likely than the confluent demyelination cohort to present with 
encephalopathy (P < 0.001), depressed level of consciousness (P < 0.001), 
headache (P < 0.001), meningismus (P = 0.04), cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis (P 
= 0.04) or multifocal enhancing magnetic resonance imaging lesions (P < 0.001). 
A distinct pattern of cortical microglial activation and aggregation without 
associated cortical demyelination was found among six perivenous demyelination 
patients, all of whom had encephalopathy and four of whom had depressed level of 
consciousness. This pattern of cortical pathology was not observed in the 
confluent demyelination cohort, even in one patient with depressed level of 
consciousness. Clinical criteria were 80% sensitive and 91% specific for 
pathologically defined acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (perivenous 
demyelination), but misdiagnosed acute disseminated encephalomyelitis among 9% 
of patients with confluent demyelination and multiple sclerosis diagnosis at 
last follow-up. Perivenous demyelination is associated with 
meningoencephalopathic presentations and a monophasic course. Depressed level of 
consciousness is a more specific clinical criterion for pathologically confirmed 
acute disseminated encephalomyelitis than encephalopathy, which over-diagnosed 
acute disseminated encephalomyelitis among multiple sclerosis patients. A 
distinct pattern of cortical microglial activation without cortical 
demyelination may be the pathological correlate of depressed level of 
consciousness in acute disseminated encephalomyelitis. Although pathological 
evidence of perivenous demyelination may be superior to clinical criteria for 
diagnosing acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, the co-occurrence of perivenous 
and confluent demyelination in some individuals suggests pathogenic overlap 
between acute disseminated encephalomyelitis and multiple sclerosis and 
misclassification even with biopsy.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awp321
PMCID: PMC2822631
PMID: 20129932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]