---
reference_id: "PMID:23460007"
title: Treatment of latent tuberculosis infection.
authors:
- Vernon A
journal: Semin Respir Crit Care Med
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1333544
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of latent tuberculosis infection.
**Authors:** Vernon A
**Journal:** Semin Respir Crit Care Med (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0032-1333544](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0032-1333544)

## Content

1. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2013 Feb;34(1):67-86. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1333544.
 Epub 2013 Mar 4.

Treatment of latent tuberculosis infection.

Vernon A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Tuberculosis Elimination, Clinical Research Branch, Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC/OID [Office of Infectious Diseases]/NCHHSTP 
[National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention]), 
Atlanta, GA 30333, USA. avernon@cdc.gov

Latent tuberculosis infection (LTBI) refers to a circumstance in which viable 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) bacilli are present in an individual but 
symptoms and signs of active disease are lacking, and the bacilli are relatively 
inactive metabolically. In favorable circumstances, some of these inactive 
bacilli resume greater metabolic activity and replication, leading to the 
development of active tuberculosis disease. Treatment of this condition (TLTBI) 
is designed to prevent (soon, or in the distant future) this progression from 
asymptomatic infection to symptomatic, potentially lethal, active disease. This 
narrative review draws upon recent reviews of LTBI and seeks particularly to 
include recently published or presented data that are not included in those 
prior reviews. Adverse effects of treatment are considered, as are the special 
circumstances of human immunodeficiency virus-related LTBI, drug resistance, and 
use of TLTBI in the context of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) inhibition. 
The review describes the main studies underpinning Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention recommendations on use of the new 3-month isoniazid-rifapentine 
regimen and points to evolving data that may support future modification of 
those recommendations.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0032-1333544
PMID: 23460007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]