---
reference_id: "PMID:34586410"
title: Identification of novel OCRL isoforms associated with phenotypic differences between Dent disease-2 and Lowe syndrome.
authors:
- Sakakibara N
- Ijuin T
- Horinouchi T
- Yamamura T
- Nagano C
- Okada E
- Ishiko S
- Aoto Y
- Rossanti R
- Ninchoji T
- Awano H
- Nagase H
- Minamikawa S
- Tanaka R
- Matsuyama T
- Nagatani K
- Kamei K
- Jinnouchi K
- Ohtsuka Y
- Oka M
- Araki Y
- Tanaka T
- Harada MS
- Igarashi T
- Kitahara H
- Morisada N
- Nakamura SI
- Okada T
- Iijima K
- Nozu K
journal: Nephrol Dial Transplant
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfab274
keywords:
- "Dent Disease/diagnosis, genetics"
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- Mutation/genetics
- "Oculocerebrorenal Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- Phenotype
- Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases/genetics
- Protein Isoforms/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of novel OCRL isoforms associated with phenotypic differences between Dent disease-2 and Lowe syndrome.
**Authors:** Sakakibara N, Ijuin T, Horinouchi T, Yamamura T, Nagano C, Okada E, Ishiko S, Aoto Y, Rossanti R, Ninchoji T, Awano H, Nagase H, Minamikawa S, Tanaka R, Matsuyama T, Nagatani K, Kamei K, Jinnouchi K, Ohtsuka Y, Oka M, Araki Y, Tanaka T, Harada MS, Igarashi T, Kitahara H, Morisada N, Nakamura SI, Okada T, Iijima K, Nozu K
**Journal:** Nephrol Dial Transplant (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ndt/gfab274](https://doi.org/10.1093/ndt/gfab274)

## Content

1. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2022 Jan 25;37(2):262-270. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfab274.

Identification of novel OCRL isoforms associated with phenotypic differences
between Dent disease-2 and Lowe syndrome.

Sakakibara N(1), Ijuin T(2), Horinouchi T(1), Yamamura T(1), Nagano C(1), Okada
E(1)(3), Ishiko S(1), Aoto Y(1), Rossanti R(1), Ninchoji T(1), Awano H(1),
Nagase H(1), Minamikawa S(1), Tanaka R(4), Matsuyama T(5), Nagatani K(6), Kamei
K(7), Jinnouchi K(8), Ohtsuka Y(8), Oka M(8), Araki Y(9), Tanaka T(9), Harada
MS(10), Igarashi T(11), Kitahara H(12), Morisada N(1)(13), Nakamura SI(2), Okada
T(2), Iijima K(1), Nozu K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe,
Japan.
(2)Division of Biochemistry, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe,
Japan.
(3)Department of Nephrology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Japan.
(4)Department of Nephrology, Hyogo Prefectural Kobe Children's Hospital, Kobe,
Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Fussa Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Uwajima City Hospital, Uwajima, Japan.
(7)Division of Nephrology and Rheumatology, National Center for Child Health and
Development, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Saga University, Saga, Japan.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, National Hospital Organization Hokkaido Medical
Center, Sapporo, Japan.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University of Occupational and
Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, Japan.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Nippon Medical School Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(12)Department of Pediatrics, Osaka Medical College, Takatsuki, Japan.
(13)Department of Clinical Genetics, Hyogo Prefectural Kobe Children's Hospital,
Kobe, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Although Lowe syndrome and Dent disease-2 are caused by
Oculocerebrorenal syndrome of Lowe (OCRL) mutations, their clinical severities
differ substantially and their molecular mechanisms remain unclear. Truncating
mutations in OCRL exons 1-7 lead to Dent disease-2, whereas those in exons 8-24
lead to Lowe syndrome. Herein we identified the mechanism underlying the action
of novel OCRL protein isoforms.
METHODS: Messenger RNA samples extracted from cultured urine-derived cells from
a healthy control and a Dent disease-2 patient were examined to detect the 5'
end of the OCRL isoform. For protein expression and functional analysis, vectors
containing the full-length OCRL transcripts, the isoform transcripts and
transcripts with truncating mutations detected in Lowe syndrome and Dent
disease-2 patients were transfected into HeLa cells.
RESULTS: We successfully cloned the novel isoform transcripts from OCRL exons
6-24, including the translation-initiation codons present in exon 8. In vitro
protein-expression analysis detected proteins of two different sizes (105 and
80 kDa) translated from full-length OCRL, whereas only one protein (80 kDa) was
found from the isoform and Dent disease-2 variants. No protein expression was
observed for the Lowe syndrome variants. The isoform enzyme activity was
equivalent to that of full-length OCRL; the Dent disease-2 variants retained
>50% enzyme activity, whereas the Lowe syndrome variants retained <20% activity.
CONCLUSIONS: We elucidated the molecular mechanism underlying the two different
phenotypes in OCRL-related diseases; the functional OCRL isoform translated
starting at exon 8 was associated with this mechanism.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the ERA.

DOI: 10.1093/ndt/gfab274
PMID: 34586410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
