---
reference_id: "PMID:35155498"
title: Calpain Inhibitor Calpeptin Alleviates Ischemia/Reperfusion-Induced Acute Kidney Injury via Suppressing AIM2 Inflammasome and Upregulating Klotho Protein.
authors:
- Wu Y
- Yang H
- Cheng M
- Shi J
- Zhang W
- Liu S
- Zhang M
journal: Front Med (Lausanne)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fmed.2022.811980
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Calpain Inhibitor Calpeptin Alleviates Ischemia/Reperfusion-Induced Acute Kidney Injury via Suppressing AIM2 Inflammasome and Upregulating Klotho Protein.
**Authors:** Wu Y, Yang H, Cheng M, Shi J, Zhang W, Liu S, Zhang M
**Journal:** Front Med (Lausanne) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fmed.2022.811980](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2022.811980)

## Content

1. Front Med (Lausanne). 2022 Jan 28;9:811980. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2022.811980. 
eCollection 2022.

Calpain Inhibitor Calpeptin Alleviates Ischemia/Reperfusion-Induced Acute Kidney 
Injury via Suppressing AIM2 Inflammasome and Upregulating Klotho Protein.

Wu Y(1), Yang H(1), Cheng M(1), Shi J(1), Zhang W(1), Liu S(1), Zhang M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Huashan Hospital and Nephrology Institute, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China.

Renal ischemia/reperfusion injury is a major contributor of acute kidney injury 
(AKI), leading to renal cell necrosis, apoptosis, and inflammation. Calpains, a 
family of Ca2+-dependent cysteine proteases, play a pivotal role in the 
pathogenesis of renal diseases. Several studies have reported calpain inhibitors 
showing remarkable reno-protective effects against proteinuria and α-klotho 
deficiency-induced renal aging symptoms, particularly against glomerulus injury. 
However, little is known about the role of the calpain inhibitor calpeptin in 
acute kidney injury. The present study aims to investigate the potential 
mechanism of downregulation of Calpain 1 and 2 activity by calpeptin in the 
ischemia/reperfusion (IR)-induced AKI model. Firstly, we observed that the 
contents of Calpain 1 and 2 were significantly increased in the renal biopsy of 
clinical AKI patients, especially in the diseased tubules space. To investigate 
the impacts of calpain activity inhibition, we further pretreated with calpeptin 
in both the IR mouse model and in the HK-2 cells hypoxia model. We found that 
the calpain inhibitor calpeptin improved renal functional deterioration, 
attenuated pathological structure damage, and decreased tubular cell apoptosis 
in the IR injury-induced AKI mice model. Mechanistically, calpeptin 
significantly suppressed the AIM2 (absent in melanoma 2) and NLRP3 (NOD-like 
receptor protein 3) inflammasome signaling pathways and increased Klotho protein 
levels. Furthermore, immunofluorescence assays demonstrated that the application 
of calpeptin effectively inhibited Calpain 1 activation and gasdermin D (GSDMD) 
cleavage in the renal tubules of IR mice. Taken together, our both in vivo and 
in vitro experiments suggest that calpeptin conveyed reno-protection in AKI 
might be mediated by the inhibition of AIM2 inflammasome activation and 
upregulation of Klotho protein. As such, we provide new evidence that Calpain 1 
and 2 activation may be closely associated with the pathogenesis of clinical 
AKI. The calpain-mediated AIM2 inflammasome signaling pathway and distinct 
interaction between calpain and Klotho may provide a potential novel 
preventative and therapeutic target for acute kidney injury.

Copyright © 2022 Wu, Yang, Cheng, Shi, Zhang, Liu and Zhang.

DOI: 10.3389/fmed.2022.811980
PMCID: PMC8831790
PMID: 35155498

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.