---
reference_id: "PMID:29863979"
title: PD-1 Blockade with Cemiplimab in Advanced Cutaneous Squamous-Cell Carcinoma.
authors:
- Migden MR
- Rischin D
- Schmults CD
- Guminski A
- Hauschild A
- Lewis KD
- Chung CH
- Hernandez-Aya L
- Lim AM
- Chang ALS
- Rabinowits G
- Thai AA
- Dunn LA
- Hughes BGM
- Khushalani NI
- Modi B
- Schadendorf D
- Gao B
- Seebach F
- Li S
- Li J
- Mathias M
- Booth J
- Mohan K
- Stankevich E
- Babiker HM
- Brana I
- Gil-Martin M
- Homsi J
- Johnson ML
- Moreno V
- Niu J
- Owonikoko TK
- Papadopoulos KP
- Yancopoulos GD
- Lowy I
- Fury MG
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1805131
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PD-1 Blockade with Cemiplimab in Advanced Cutaneous Squamous-Cell Carcinoma.
**Authors:** Migden MR, Rischin D, Schmults CD, Guminski A, Hauschild A, Lewis KD, Chung CH, Hernandez-Aya L, Lim AM, Chang ALS, Rabinowits G, Thai AA, Dunn LA, Hughes BGM, Khushalani NI, Modi B, Schadendorf D, Gao B, Seebach F, Li S, Li J, Mathias M, Booth J, Mohan K, Stankevich E, Babiker HM, Brana I, Gil-Martin M, Homsi J, Johnson ML, Moreno V, Niu J, Owonikoko TK, Papadopoulos KP, Yancopoulos GD, Lowy I, Fury MG
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1805131](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1805131)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2018 Jul 26;379(4):341-351. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1805131. Epub
2018  Jun 4.

PD-1 Blockade with Cemiplimab in Advanced Cutaneous Squamous-Cell Carcinoma.

Migden MR(1), Rischin D(1), Schmults CD(1), Guminski A(1), Hauschild A(1), Lewis 
KD(1), Chung CH(1), Hernandez-Aya L(1), Lim AM(1), Chang ALS(1), Rabinowits 
G(1), Thai AA(1), Dunn LA(1), Hughes BGM(1), Khushalani NI(1), Modi B(1), 
Schadendorf D(1), Gao B(1), Seebach F(1), Li S(1), Li J(1), Mathias M(1), Booth 
J(1), Mohan K(1), Stankevich E(1), Babiker HM(1), Brana I(1), Gil-Martin M(1), 
Homsi J(1), Johnson ML(1), Moreno V(1), Niu J(1), Owonikoko TK(1), Papadopoulos 
KP(1), Yancopoulos GD(1), Lowy I(1), Fury MG(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Dermatology and Head and Neck Surgery, University of 
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston (M.R.M.), and South Texas Accelerated 
Research Therapeutics (START), San Antonio (K.P.P.) - both in Texas; the 
Department of Medical Oncology, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre and University of 
Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC (D.R., A.A.T.), the Department of Medical Oncology, 
Royal North Shore Hospital, St. Leonards, VIC (A.G.), the Department of Medical 
Oncology, Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, Perth, WA (A.M.L.), and Royal Brisbane 
and Women's Hospital and University of Queensland, Brisbane (B.G.M.H.) - all in 
Australia; the Department of Dermatology, Brigham and Women's Hospital (C.D.S.), 
the Department of Dermatology, Harvard Medical School (C.D.S.), and the 
Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute (G.R.) - all in 
Boston; Schleswig-Holstein University Hospital, Kiel (A.H.), and University 
Hospital Essen, Essen and German Cancer Consortium, Essen (D.S.) - both in 
Germany; University of Colorado Denver, School of Medicine, Aurora (K.D.L.); the 
Departments of Head and Neck-Endocrine Oncology (C.H.C.) and Cutaneous Oncology 
(N.I.K.), H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, FL; the 
Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis (L.H.-A.); the Department of Dermatology, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, Redwood City (A.L.S.C.), and the Division of 
Dermatology, City of Hope, Duarte (B.M.) - both in California; the Department of 
Medicine, Head and Neck Medical Oncology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer 
Center, New York (L.A.D.), and Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Tarrytown (F.S., M.M., 
K.M., G.D.Y., I.L., M.G.F.) - both in New York; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, 
Basking Ridge, NJ (B.G., S.L., J.L., J.B., E.S.); University of Arizona Cancer 
Center, Tucson (H.M.B.), and Banner MD Anderson Cancer (J.H.) and the Department 
of Medical Oncology, Banner MD Anderson Cancer Center (J.N.), Gilbert - all in 
Arizona; Medical Oncology Department, Vall D'Hebron University Hospital (I.B.), 
and Institut Català D'Oncologia, Oncobell Program (IDIBELL), L'Hospitalet de 
Llobregat (M.G.-M.), Barcelona, and START Madrid-FJD, Hospital Fundación Jiménez 
Díaz, Madrid (V.M.) - all in Spain; Sarah Cannon Research Institute, Nashville 
(M.L.J.); and the Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Winship Cancer 
Institute, Emory University, Atlanta (T.K.O.).

Comment in
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2018 Aug;15(8):472. doi: 10.1038/s41571-018-0056-5.
    Eye (Lond). 2023 Aug;37(12):2482-2487. doi: 10.1038/s41433-022-02358-y.

BACKGROUND: No systemic therapies have been approved for the treatment of 
advanced cutaneous squamous-cell carcinoma. This cancer may be responsive to 
immune therapy, because the mutation burden of the tumor is high and the disease 
risk is strongly associated with immunosuppression. In the dose-escalation 
portion of the phase 1 study of cemiplimab, a deep and durable response was 
observed in a patient with metastatic cutaneous squamous-cell carcinoma.
METHODS: We report the results of the phase 1 study of cemiplimab for expansion 
cohorts of patients with locally advanced or metastatic cutaneous squamous-cell 
carcinoma, as well as the results of the pivotal phase 2 study for a cohort of 
patients with metastatic disease (metastatic-disease cohort). In both studies, 
the patients received an intravenous dose of cemiplimab (3 mg per kilogram of 
body weight) every 2 weeks and were assessed for a response every 8 weeks. In 
the phase 2 study, the primary end point was the response rate, as assessed by 
independent central review.
RESULTS: In the expansion cohorts of the phase 1 study, a response to cemiplimab 
was observed in 13 of 26 patients (50%; 95% confidence interval [CI], 30 to 70). 
In the metastatic-disease cohort of the phase 2 study, a response was observed 
in 28 of 59 patients (47%; 95% CI, 34 to 61). The median follow-up was 7.9 
months in the metastatic-disease cohort of the phase 2 study. Among the 28 
patients who had a response, the duration of response exceeded 6 months in 57%, 
and 82% continued to have a response and to receive cemiplimab at the time of 
data cutoff. Adverse events that occurred in at least 15% of the patients in the 
metastatic-disease cohort of the phase 2 study were diarrhea, fatigue, nausea, 
constipation, and rash; 7% of the patients discontinued treatment because of an 
adverse event.
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with advanced cutaneous squamous-cell carcinoma, 
cemiplimab induced a response in approximately half the patients and was 
associated with adverse events that usually occur with immune checkpoint 
inhibitors. (Funded by Regeneron Pharmaceuticals and Sanofi; ClinicalTrials.gov 
numbers, NCT02383212 and NCT02760498 .).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1805131
PMID: 29863979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]