---
reference_id: "PMID:37174909"
title: "Immature Teratoma: Diagnosis and Management-A Review of the Literature."
authors:
- Moraru L
- Mitranovici MI
- Chiorean DM
- Coroș M
- Moraru R
- Oală IE
- Turdean SG
journal: Diagnostics (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/diagnostics13091516
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immature Teratoma: Diagnosis and Management-A Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Moraru L, Mitranovici MI, Chiorean DM, Coroș M, Moraru R, Oală IE, Turdean SG
**Journal:** Diagnostics (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/diagnostics13091516](https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics13091516)

## Content

1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2023 Apr 23;13(9):1516. doi: 10.3390/diagnostics13091516.

Immature Teratoma: Diagnosis and Management-A Review of the Literature.

Moraru L(1), Mitranovici MI(2), Chiorean DM(3), Coroș M(4), Moraru R(5), Oală 
IE(2), Turdean SG(3)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, "George Emil Palade" University of Medicine, Pharmacy, 
Sciences and Technology, 540142 Targu Mures, Romania.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Emergency County Hospital Hunedoara, 
331057 Hunedoara, Romania.
(3)Department of Pathology, County Clinical Hospital of Targu Mures, 540072 
Targu Mures, Romania.
(4)Department of Surgery, "George Emil Palade" University of Medicine, Pharmacy, 
Sciences and Technology, 540142 Targu Mures, Romania.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, "George Emil Palade" University of Medicine, Pharmacy, 
Sciences and Technology, 540142 Targu Mures, Romania.
(6)Department of Pathology, "George Emil Palade" University of Medicine, 
Pharmacy, Sciences and Technology, 540142 Targu Mures, Romania.

An immature teratoma is a germinal malignant tumor composed of three germ cell 
layers, occurring more frequently in young women. It is the second most frequent 
among the malignant germinal tumors after dysgerminoma, and it is the only 
neoplasm with germ cells that are histologically graded. Even if we do not have 
a consensus regarding its therapeutical management, it has a good prognosis, 
with an excellent overall survival rate and good fertility preservation. More 
studies are needed regarding the necessity of adjuvant chemotherapy in pediatric 
oncology, and because of chemotherapy's long-term adverse effects, surveillance 
or a targeted treatment is preferred, but the main therapy is fertility-sparing 
surgery. Special attention should be given to the genetic mapping of the 
histological pieces for patient risk stratification due to its value in 
prognosis and future treatment.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics13091516
PMCID: PMC10177811
PMID: 37174909

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.