---
reference_id: "PMID:32591351"
title: "Rosai-Dorfman disease: an overview."
authors:
- Bruce-Brand C
- Schneider JW
- Schubert P
journal: J Clin Pathol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2020-206733
keywords:
- Child
- Female
- Histiocytes/pathology
- "Histiocytosis, Sinus/classification, pathology"
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin G/metabolism
- Male
- Plasma Cells/pathology
- Skin/pathology
- "Skin Diseases/classification, pathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rosai-Dorfman disease: an overview.
**Authors:** Bruce-Brand C, Schneider JW, Schubert P
**Journal:** J Clin Pathol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jclinpath-2020-206733](https://doi.org/10.1136/jclinpath-2020-206733)

## Content

1. J Clin Pathol. 2020 Nov;73(11):697-705. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2020-206733.
Epub  2020 Jun 26.

Rosai-Dorfman disease: an overview.

Bruce-Brand C(1)(2), Schneider JW(3)(2), Schubert P(3)(2).

Author information:
(1)Stellenbosch University, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Division of 
Anatomical Pathology, Cape Town, South Africa cassandra.bruce-bran@nhls.ac.za.
(2)National Health Laboratory Service, Tygerberg Hospital, Cape Town, South 
Africa.
(3)Stellenbosch University, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Division of 
Anatomical Pathology, Cape Town, South Africa.

CONTEXT: Rosai-Dorfman disease is an uncommon histiocytic disorder most 
frequently presenting as bilateral cervical lymphadenopathy in children and 
young adults. Extranodal disease occurs in a significant proportion of patients. 
It has been recently classified as part of the 'R group' of histiocytoses by the 
Histiocyte Society in 2016. Cutaneous Rosai-Dorfman disease is regarded as a 
separate disease entity that falls into the 'C group' of histiocytoses according 
to this classification system. The pathogenesis was previously poorly 
understood; however, recent evidence demonstrating clonality in a subset of 
cases raises the possibility of a neoplastic process. A possible association 
with IgG4-related disease remains controversial.
OBJECTIVES: To provide a comprehensive review of Rosai-Dorfman disease, 
including nodal, extranodal and cutaneous forms, with a particular emphasis on 
new insights into the possible clonal nature of the disease; to discuss the 
recently revised classification of the histiocytoses by the Histiocyte Society; 
and to summarise the findings from the literature regarding the controversial 
association with IgG4-related disease.
DATA SOURCES: This review is based on published peer-reviewed English 
literature.
CONCLUSIONS: Classic Rosai-Dorfman disease, which may be sporadic or familial, 
is considered a separate entity from cutaneous disease, which is reflected in 
the revised classification of histiocytoses. An increase in IgG4-positive plasma 
cells may be seen in Rosai-Dorfman disease. This finding in isolation is of 
limited significance and should be interpreted with caution. Studies 
investigating the molecular profile of the disease show that in at least a 
subset of cases the disease is a clonal process. The classification of 
Rosai-Dorfman disease is therefore likely to change as our understanding of the 
aetiopathogenesis evolves.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2020. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/jclinpath-2020-206733
PMID: 32591351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.