---
reference_id: "PMID:11092761"
title: "Hyperammonemia with reduced ornithine, citrulline, arginine and proline: a new inborn error caused by a mutation in the gene encoding delta(1)-pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthase."
authors:
- Baumgartner MR
- Hu CA
- Almashanu S
- Steel G
- Obie C
- Aral B
- Rabier D
- Kamoun P
- Saudubray JM
- Valle D
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/9.19.2853
keywords:
- Adult
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/blood, enzymology, genetics"
- Animals
- Arginine/blood
- CHO Cells
- Catalytic Domain/genetics
- Child
- Citrulline/blood
- Cricetinae
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Fibroblasts
- France
- Humans
- "Hyperammonemia/blood, enzymology, genetics"
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Ornithine/blood
- "Ornithine-Oxo-Acid Transaminase/genetics, metabolism"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Proline/blood, metabolism"
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, metabolism"
- Transfection
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hyperammonemia with reduced ornithine, citrulline, arginine and proline: a new inborn error caused by a mutation in the gene encoding delta(1)-pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthase.
**Authors:** Baumgartner MR, Hu CA, Almashanu S, Steel G, Obie C, Aral B, Rabier D, Kamoun P, Saudubray JM, Valle D
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/9.19.2853](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/9.19.2853)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2000 Nov 22;9(19):2853-8. doi: 10.1093/hmg/9.19.2853.

Hyperammonemia with reduced ornithine, citrulline, arginine and proline: a new
inborn error caused by a mutation in the gene encoding
delta(1)-pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthase.

Baumgartner MR(1), Hu CA, Almashanu S, Steel G, Obie C, Aral B, Rabier D, Kamoun
P, Saudubray JM, Valle D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

delta(1)-pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthase (P5CS), a bifunctional ATP- and
NADPH-dependent mitochondrial enzyme, catalyzes the reduction of glutamate to
delta(1)-pyrroline-5-carboxylate, a critical step in the biosynthesis of
proline, ornithine and arginine. Recently, we reported the cloning and
expression of human and murine P5CS cDNAs. Previously, we showed that mammalian
P5CS undergoes alternative splicing to generate two isoforms differing only by a
2 amino acid insert at the N-terminus of the gamma-glutamyl kinase active site.
The short isoform has high activity in the gut, where it participates in
arginine biosynthesis and is inhibited by ornithine. The long isoform, expressed
in multiple tissues, is necessary for the synthesis of proline from glutamate
and is insensitive to ornithine. Here, we describe a newly recognized inborn
error due to the deficiency of P5CS in two siblings with progressive
neurodegeneration, joint laxity, skin hyperelasticity and bilateral subcapsular
cataracts. Their metabolic phenotype includes hyperammonemia, hypoornithinemia,
hypocitrullinemia, hypoargininemia and hypoprolinemia. Both are homozygous for
the missense mutation, R84Q, which alters a conserved residue in the P5CS
gamma-glutamyl kinase domain. R84Q is not present in 194 control chromosomes and
dramatically reduces the activity of both P5CS isoforms when expressed in
mammalian cells. Additionally, R84Q appears to destabilize the long isoform.
This is the first documented report of an inborn error of P5CS and suggests that
this disorder should be considered in the differential diagnosis in patients
with neurodegeneration and/or cataracts and connective tissue disease.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/9.19.2853
PMID: 11092761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
