---
reference_id: "PMID:34370320"
title: A large deletion in the Plasminogen gene is associated with ligneous membranitis in a Maltese dog.
authors:
- Turba ME
- Ostan PC
- Ghetti S
- Dajbychova M
- Dondi F
- Gentilini F
journal: Anim Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/age.13130
keywords:
- Animals
- Breeding
- "Conjunctivitis/genetics, veterinary"
- Dog Diseases/genetics
- Dogs/genetics
- Male
- "Plasminogen/deficiency, genetics"
- "Skin Diseases, Genetic/genetics, veterinary"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A large deletion in the Plasminogen gene is associated with ligneous membranitis in a Maltese dog.
**Authors:** Turba ME, Ostan PC, Ghetti S, Dajbychova M, Dondi F, Gentilini F
**Journal:** Anim Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/age.13130](https://doi.org/10.1111/age.13130)

## Content

1. Anim Genet. 2021 Oct;52(5):767-771. doi: 10.1111/age.13130. Epub 2021 Aug 9.

A large deletion in the Plasminogen gene is associated with ligneous membranitis 
in a Maltese dog.

Turba ME(1), Ostan PC(2), Ghetti S(3), Dajbychova M(4), Dondi F(3), Gentilini 
F(3).

Author information:
(1)Genefast srl, Forlì, 47122, Italy.
(2)Ambulatorio Veterinario Associato Visionvet, San Giovanni in Persiceto, 
Bologna, 40017, Italy.
(3)Department of Veterinary Medical Sciences, University of Bologna, Ozzano 
dell'Emilia, Bologna, 40064, Italy.
(4)Genomia, Plzen, 31200, Czech Republic.

Ligneous membranitis/conjunctivitis (LM, OMIM 217090) is a hereditary disorder 
caused by a congenital plasminogen (PLG) deficiency. In veterinary medicine, LM 
(OMIA 002020-9615) has rarely been reported in Golden Retrievers, Yorkshire 
Terriers, Doberman Pinschers and Scottish Terriers. In the latter breed, an A>T 
variation in an intron donor site of the PLG gene (PLG, c.1256+2T>A) has been 
found to be the sole causative molecular defect reported to date in dogs. Owing 
to the absence of plasmin enzymatic clearance which in turn depends on the lack 
of its proenzyme plasminogen, fibrin deposits tend to accumulate in viscous 
membranes on the eyes, triggering and sustaining an intense inflammatory 
response. A case of LM was diagnosed in a 7-month-old male Maltese dog. The dog 
was examined for severe recurrent conjunctivitis. A diagnosis of ligneous 
conjunctivitis was made by an ophthalmologist after a thorough eye examination 
and was confirmed by a complete lack of plasma activity of plasminogen. The main 
local signs were redness of the conjunctiva with persistent membranes having 
ligneous (wood-like) membranes on the eyes. The disease was associated with a 
complex rearrangement involving the plasminogen gene loci, causing the complete 
deletion of exon 1. This study provides a spontaneous animal model for LM 
associated with complete plasminogen deficiency and provides a method for 
detecting affected or carrier dogs.

© 2021 The Authors. Animal Genetics published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf 
of Stichting International Foundation for Animal Genetics.

DOI: 10.1111/age.13130
PMCID: PMC9290685
PMID: 34370320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]