---
reference_id: "PMID:39115603"
title: New and Emerging Drug and Gene Therapies for Friedreich Ataxia.
authors:
- Scott V
- Delatycki MB
- Tai G
- Corben LA
journal: CNS Drugs
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s40263-024-01113-z
keywords:
- "Friedreich Ataxia/therapy, drug therapy, genetics"
- Humans
- Genetic Therapy/methods
- Animals
- Oxidative Stress/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New and Emerging Drug and Gene Therapies for Friedreich Ataxia.
**Authors:** Scott V, Delatycki MB, Tai G, Corben LA
**Journal:** CNS Drugs (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40263-024-01113-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40263-024-01113-z)

## Content

1. CNS Drugs. 2024 Oct;38(10):791-805. doi: 10.1007/s40263-024-01113-z. Epub 2024
 Aug 8.

New and Emerging Drug and Gene Therapies for Friedreich Ataxia.

Scott V(1)(2), Delatycki MB(1)(2)(3), Tai G(1), Corben LA(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Bruce Lefroy Centre for Genetic Health Research, Murdoch Children's Research
Institute, Parkville, VIC, 3052, Australia.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC,
Australia.
(3)Victorian Clinical Genetics Service, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(4)Bruce Lefroy Centre for Genetic Health Research, Murdoch Children's Research
Institute, Parkville, VIC, 3052, Australia. louise.corben@mcri.edu.au.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC,
Australia. louise.corben@mcri.edu.au.
(6)Turner Institute for Brain and Mental Health, School of Psychological
Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia. louise.corben@mcri.edu.au.

The life shortening nature of Friedreich Ataxia (FRDA) demands the search for
therapies that can delay, stop or reverse its relentless trajectory. This review
provides a contemporary position of drug and gene therapies for FRDA currently
in phase 1 clinical trials and beyond. Despite significant scientific advances
in the specificity of both compounds and targets developed and investigated,
challenges remain for the advancement of treatments in a limited recruitment
population. Currently therapies focus on reducing oxidative stress and improving
mitochondrial function, modulating frataxin controlled metabolic pathways and
gene replacement and editing. Approval of omaveloxolone, the first treatment for
individuals with FRDA aged 16 years and over, has created much excitement for
both those living with FRDA and those that care for them. The process of
approval of omaveloxolone by the US Food and Drug Administration highlighted the
importance of sensitive outcome measures and the significant role of data from
natural history studies.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s40263-024-01113-z
PMCID: PMC11377510
PMID: 39115603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: V.S. and G.T. do not report any conflicts of
interest. M.B.D. and L.A.C. were the Principal Investigator and Co-Investigator
respectively for the clinical trial for Resveratrol (funded by the National
Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) project grant 1102207). M.B.D.
receives funding from PTC Therapeutics and Biogen to conduct clinical trials.
L.A.C. provides consultancy services to Biogen Inc.
