---
reference_id: "PMID:34951953"
title: A clinical case definition of post-COVID-19 condition by a Delphi consensus.
authors:
- Soriano JB
- Murthy S
- Marshall JC
- Relan P
- Diaz JV
- WHO Clinical Case Definition Working Group on Post-COVID-19 Condition
journal: Lancet Infect Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(21)00703-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A clinical case definition of post-COVID-19 condition by a Delphi consensus.
**Authors:** Soriano JB, Murthy S, Marshall JC, Relan P, Diaz JV, WHO Clinical Case Definition Working Group on Post-COVID-19 Condition
**Journal:** Lancet Infect Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1473-3099(21)00703-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(21)00703-9)

## Content

1. Lancet Infect Dis. 2022 Apr;22(4):e102-e107. doi:
10.1016/S1473-3099(21)00703-9.  Epub 2021 Dec 21.

A clinical case definition of post-COVID-19 condition by a Delphi consensus.

Soriano JB(1), Murthy S(2), Marshall JC(3), Relan P(4), Diaz JV(4); WHO Clinical 
Case Definition Working Group on Post-COVID-19 Condition.

Author information:
(1)Hospital Universitario de la Princesa, Servicio de Neumología, Madrid, Spain; 
Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain; Centro de 
Investigación en Red de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de Salud Carlos 
III, Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: jbsoriano2@gmail.com.
(2)Division of Critical Care, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(3)Department of Surgery, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(4)World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Lancet Infect Dis. 2022 Mar;22(3):316-317. doi: 
10.1016/S1473-3099(22)00060-3.
    Infect Dis Now. 2023 Feb;53(1):104631. doi: 10.1016/j.idnow.2022.10.003.

People with COVID-19 might have sustained postinfection sequelae. Known by a 
variety of names, including long COVID or long-haul COVID, and listed in the 
ICD-10 classification as post-COVID-19 condition since September, 2020, this 
occurrence is variable in its expression and its impact. The absence of a 
globally standardised and agreed-upon definition hampers progress in 
characterisation of its epidemiology and the development of candidate 
treatments. In a WHO-led Delphi process, we engaged with an international panel 
of 265 patients, clinicians, researchers, and WHO staff to develop a consensus 
definition for this condition. 14 domains and 45 items were evaluated in two 
rounds of the Delphi process to create a final consensus definition for adults: 
post-COVID-19 condition occurs in individuals with a history of probable or 
confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection, usually 3 months from the onset, with symptoms 
that last for at least 2 months and cannot be explained by an alternative 
diagnosis. Common symptoms include, but are not limited to, fatigue, shortness 
of breath, and cognitive dysfunction, and generally have an impact on everyday 
functioning. Symptoms might be new onset following initial recovery from an 
acute COVID-19 episode or persist from the initial illness. Symptoms might also 
fluctuate or relapse over time. A separate definition might be applicable for 
children. Although the consensus definition is likely to change as knowledge 
increases, this common framework provides a foundation for ongoing and future 
studies of epidemiology, risk factors, clinical characteristics, and therapy.

Copyright © 2022 World Health Organization. Published by Elsevier Ltd.All rights 
reserved. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1473-3099(21)00703-9
PMCID: PMC8691845
PMID: 34951953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests We declare no competing 
interests.