---
reference_id: "PMID:22094484"
title: Acetazolamide efficacy in hypokalemic periodic paralysis and the predictive role of genotype.
authors:
- Matthews E
- Portaro S
- Ke Q
- Sud R
- Haworth A
- Davis MB
- Griggs RC
- Hanna MG
journal: Neurology
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31823a0cb6
keywords:
- "Acetazolamide/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Hypokalemic Periodic Paralysis/drug therapy, genetics"
- Male
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acetazolamide efficacy in hypokalemic periodic paralysis and the predictive role of genotype.
**Authors:** Matthews E, Portaro S, Ke Q, Sud R, Haworth A, Davis MB, Griggs RC, Hanna MG
**Journal:** Neurology (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0b013e31823a0cb6](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0b013e31823a0cb6)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2011 Nov 29;77(22):1960-4. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31823a0cb6. Epub
2011 Nov 16.

Acetazolamide efficacy in hypokalemic periodic paralysis and the predictive role
of genotype.

Matthews E(1), Portaro S, Ke Q, Sud R, Haworth A, Davis MB, Griggs RC, Hanna MG.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Neuromuscular Disease, Department of
Molecular Neuroscience UCL, Institute of Neurology and National Hospital for
Neurology and Neurosurgery Queen Square London, UK.

OBJECTIVES: Acetazolamide has been the most commonly used treatment for
hypokalemic periodic paralysis since 1968. However, its mechanism of efficacy is
not fully understood, and it is not known whether therapy response relates to
genotype. We undertook a clinical and genetic study to evaluate the response
rate of patients treated with acetazolamide and to investigate possible
correlations between response and genotype.
METHODS: We identified a total of 74 genotyped patients for this study. These
included patients who were referred over a 15-year period to the only U.K.
referral center or to a Chinese center and who underwent extensive clinical
evaluation. For all genotyped patients, the response to acetazolamide therapy in
terms of attack frequency and severity was documented. Direct DNA sequencing of
CACNA1S and SCN4A was performed.
RESULTS: Only 46% of the total patient cohort (34 of 74) reported benefit from
acetazolamide. There was a greater chance of benefit in patients with mutations
in CACNA1S (31 responded of 55 total) than in those with mutations in SCN4A (3
responded of 19 total). Patients with mutations that resulted in amino acids
being substituted by glycine in either gene were the least likely to report
benefit.
CONCLUSIONS: This retrospective study indicates that only approximately 50% of
genotyped patients with hypokalemic periodic paralysis respond to acetazolamide.
We found evidence supporting a relationship between genotype and treatment
response. Prospective randomized controlled trials are required to further
evaluate this relationship. Development of alternative therapies is required.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31823a0cb6
PMCID: PMC3235354
PMID: 22094484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
