---
reference_id: "PMID:27358392"
title: Lesional CD4+ IFN-γ+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes in IgG4-related dacryoadenitis and sialoadenitis.
authors:
- Maehara T
- Mattoo H
- Ohta M
- Mahajan VS
- Moriyama M
- Yamauchi M
- Drijvers J
- Nakamura S
- Stone JH
- Pillai SS
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209139
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Autoimmune Diseases/genetics, immunology, metabolism"
- CD4 Antigens/immunology
- CD4-Positive T-Lymphocytes/immunology
- Case-Control Studies
- Chemokine CCL4/genetics
- Chemokine CCL5/genetics
- "Dacryocystitis/genetics, immunology, metabolism"
- Female
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Granzymes/genetics
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin G/immunology
- "Interferon-gamma/genetics, immunology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Perforin/genetics
- "RNA, Messenger/metabolism"
- "Sialadenitis/genetics, immunology, metabolism"
- Signaling Lymphocytic Activation Molecule Family/genetics
- "Sjogren's Syndrome/genetics, immunology, metabolism"
- Submandibular Gland/metabolism
- T-Box Domain Proteins/genetics
- "T-Lymphocytes, Cytotoxic/immunology"
- Transforming Growth Factor beta1/genetics
- Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha/genetics
- Young Adult
- T-bet Transcription Factor
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lesional CD4+ IFN-γ+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes in IgG4-related dacryoadenitis and sialoadenitis.
**Authors:** Maehara T, Mattoo H, Ohta M, Mahajan VS, Moriyama M, Yamauchi M, Drijvers J, Nakamura S, Stone JH, Pillai SS
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209139](https://doi.org/10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209139)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2017 Feb;76(2):377-385. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209139.
Epub 2016 Jun 29.

Lesional CD4+ IFN-γ+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes in IgG4-related dacryoadenitis and
sialoadenitis.

Maehara T(1)(2), Mattoo H(1), Ohta M(2), Mahajan VS(1), Moriyama M(2)(3),
Yamauchi M(2), Drijvers J(1), Nakamura S(2), Stone JH(1), Pillai SS(1).

Author information:
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Section of Oral and Maxillofacial Oncology, Division of Maxillofacial
Diagnostic and Surgical Sciences, Faculty of Dental Science, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka, Japan.
(3)Faculty of Dental Science, OBT Research Center, Kyushu University, Fukuoka,
Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2016 Sep;12(9):500. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2016.124.

OBJECTIVES: IgG4-related disease (IgG4-RD) is a chronic, systemic, inflammatory
condition of unknown aetiology. We have recently described clonally expanded
circulating CD4+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) in IgG4-RD that infiltrate
affected tissues where they secrete interleukin (IL)-1β and transforming growth
factor -β1 (TGF-β1). In this study, we sought to examine the role of CD4+ CTLs
in the pathogenesis of IgG4-related dacryoadenitis and sialoadenitis (IgG4-DS)
and to determine whether these cells secrete interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) at
lesional sites.
METHODS: Salivary glands of 25 patients with IgG4-DS, 22 patients with Sjögren's
syndrome (SS), 12 patients with chronic sialoadenitis (CS) and 12 healthy
controls were analysed in this study. Gene expression analysis was performed on
submandibular glands (SMGs) from five patients with IgG4-DS, three with CS and
three healthy controls. Infiltrating CD4+ CTLs were examined by quantitative
multicolour imaging in tissue samples from 20 patients with IgG4-DS, 22 patients
with SS, 9 patients with CS and 9 healthy controls.
RESULTS: In IgG4-DS tissues, nine genes associated with CD4+ CTLs were
overexpressed. The expression of granzyme A (GZMA) mRNA was significantly higher
in samples from patients with IgG4-RD compared with corresponding tissues from
SS and healthy controls. Quantitative imaging showed that infiltrating CD4+
GZMA+ CTLs were more abundant in patients with IgG4-DS than in the other groups.
The ratio of CD4+GZMA+ CTLs in SMGs from patients with IgG4-DS correlated with
serum IgG4 concentrations and the number of affected organs. A large fraction of
CD4+GZMA+ CTLs in SMGs from patients with IgG4-DS secreted IFN-γ.
CONCLUSIONS: The pathogenesis of IgG4-DS is associated with tissue infiltration
by CD4+GZMA+ CTLs that secrete IFN-γ.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/.

DOI: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2016-209139
PMCID: PMC5435236
PMID: 27358392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests None declared.
