---
reference_id: "PMID:19863180"
title: "Mantle cell lymphoma: state-of-the-art management and future perspective."
authors:
- Weigert O
- Unterhalt M
- Hiddemann W
- Dreyling M
journal: Leuk Lymphoma
year: '2009'
doi: 10.3109/10428190903288514
keywords:
- Clinical Trials as Topic
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Disease-Free Survival
- Drug Therapy/methods
- Humans
- "Lymphoma, Mantle-Cell/pathology, therapy"
- Stem Cell Transplantation/methods
- "Transplantation, Autologous"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mantle cell lymphoma: state-of-the-art management and future perspective.
**Authors:** Weigert O, Unterhalt M, Hiddemann W, Dreyling M
**Journal:** Leuk Lymphoma (2009)
**DOI:** [10.3109/10428190903288514](https://doi.org/10.3109/10428190903288514)

## Content

1. Leuk Lymphoma. 2009 Dec;50(12):1937-50. doi: 10.3109/10428190903288514.

Mantle cell lymphoma: state-of-the-art management and future perspective.

Weigert O(1), Unterhalt M, Hiddemann W, Dreyling M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, University Hospital Grosshadern, 
Ludwig-Maximilians University, Munich, Germany.

Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is a unique subtype of B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas 
(NHL) characterized in almost all cases by the chromosomal translocation 
t(11;14)(q13;q32) and nuclear cyclin D1 overexpression. Most patients present 
with advanced stage disease, often with extranodal dissemination, and typically 
pursue an aggressive clinical course. Recent improvement has been achieved by 
the successful introduction of monoclonal antibodies and dose-intensified 
approaches including autologous stem cell transplantation strategies. However, 
with the exception of allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, 
current treatment approaches are not curative and the corresponding survival 
curve is characterized by a relatively steep and continuous decline, with a 
median survival of about 4 years and <15% long-term survivors. Despite its 
rarity, MCL is of particular clinical and scientific interest by providing a 
paradigm for neoplasms with dysregulated control of cell cycle machinery and 
impaired apoptotic pathways. Recently gained insights into underlying 
pathobiology unravel numerous promising molecular targeting strategies, however 
their introduction into clinical practice and current treatment algorithms 
remains a challenge. This article will provide relevant information for decision 
making in clinical practice and give a perspective on upcoming management 
strategies.

DOI: 10.3109/10428190903288514
PMID: 19863180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]