---
reference_id: "PMID:35579642"
title: "Effect of Oral Methylprednisolone on Decline in Kidney Function or Kidney Failure in Patients With IgA Nephropathy: The TESTING Randomized Clinical Trial."
authors:
- Lv J
- Wong MG
- Hladunewich MA
- Jha V
- Hooi LS
- Monaghan H
- Zhao M
- Barbour S
- Jardine MJ
- Reich HN
- Cattran D
- Glassock R
- Levin A
- Wheeler DC
- Woodward M
- Billot L
- Stepien S
- Rogers K
- Chan TM
- Liu ZH
- Johnson DW
- Cass A
- Feehally J
- Floege J
- Remuzzi G
- Wu Y
- Agarwal R
- Zhang H
- Perkovic V
- TESTING Study Group
journal: JAMA
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1001/jama.2022.5368
keywords:
- "Administration, Oral"
- Adult
- Disease Progression
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- "Glomerulonephritis, IGA/etiology, therapy"
- Humans
- Kidney
- Male
- "Methylprednisolone/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Proteinuria/etiology
- Renal Dialysis
- "Renal Insufficiency/chemically induced, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of Oral Methylprednisolone on Decline in Kidney Function or Kidney Failure in Patients With IgA Nephropathy: The TESTING Randomized Clinical Trial.
**Authors:** Lv J, Wong MG, Hladunewich MA, Jha V, Hooi LS, Monaghan H, Zhao M, Barbour S, Jardine MJ, Reich HN, Cattran D, Glassock R, Levin A, Wheeler DC, Woodward M, Billot L, Stepien S, Rogers K, Chan TM, Liu ZH, Johnson DW, Cass A, Feehally J, Floege J, Remuzzi G, Wu Y, Agarwal R, Zhang H, Perkovic V, TESTING Study Group
**Journal:** JAMA (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.2022.5368](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2022.5368)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2022 May 17;327(19):1888-1898. doi: 10.1001/jama.2022.5368.

Effect of Oral Methylprednisolone on Decline in Kidney Function or Kidney 
Failure in Patients With IgA Nephropathy: The TESTING Randomized Clinical Trial.

Lv J(1)(2), Wong MG(2)(3), Hladunewich MA(4), Jha V(5)(6)(7), Hooi LS(8), 
Monaghan H(2), Zhao M(1), Barbour S(9), Jardine MJ(10), Reich HN(11), Cattran 
D(11), Glassock R(12), Levin A(9), Wheeler DC(13), Woodward M(7), Billot L(2), 
Stepien S(2), Rogers K(2), Chan TM(14), Liu ZH(15), Johnson DW(16), Cass 
A(2)(17), Feehally J(18), Floege J(19), Remuzzi G(20), Wu Y(21), Agarwal R(22), 
Zhang H(1), Perkovic V(2); TESTING Study Group.

Collaborators: Razavian M, Gallagher M, Daley F, Hand S, Knight H, Gallagher S, 
Bose B, Lawlor C, McCourt J, Peh CA, Scott E, Carroll R, Coates T, Hockley B, 
Hockley M, Latte J, Nicholls K, Cai M, Champion de Crespigny P, Cronin T, 
Farrell M, Hughes P, Masterson R, Sepe G, Tan SJ, Toussaint N, Wollstencroft R, 
Cooper B, Chang M, Clayton H, Tan S, Tsang H, Sudak J, Laurin LP, Pichette V, 
Chausse K, Comeau M, Lepine L, Soliel M, Beauchemin S, René E, Quach M, Daoust 
K, Lessard A, Bachand-Fournier M, Bétournay M, Paradis MS, Mikye Castor M, Huang 
S, Moist L, Gallo K, VanWesenbeeck R, Longfield T, Norris F, Moyer A, Bailey 
Lozon Z, Miller M, Clase C, Rabbat C, Salisbury M, Mazzetti Vieira A, Lalji F, 
Moreau C, Pannu N, Hildebrand A, Ruholl N, Ahmad N, Muneer M, Girard L, Mann MC, 
Hemmelgarn B, Manns B, Ravani P, Li S, Mackay J, Gulewich S, Sheriff Z, Ferera 
J, Vela K, Gonzalez A, Bhasin A, Lam P, Haji F, Shi S, Liu L, Bao Y, Sui G, Wang 
C, Li Z, Lv L, Yang L, Li H, Liu Z, Zhang J, Huang B, Yang Y, Fu S, Li S, Pei H, 
Zhang L, Lu N, Xu J, Xu L, Yang Q, Jin J, Chen N, Wang W, Xu L, Xia Z, Xu H, 
Huang W, Mo Y, Chen W, Wang L, Li R, Yao S, Li X, Ni Z, Wang L, Gu L, Pang H, 
Zhou Y, Jin Y, Zhang H, Wang X, Le W, Hou J, Song X, Zhu L, Zhao J, Hou W, Wu J, 
Shi Y, Liu J, Zhang C, Wan C, Chen S, Zhu H, Tang F, Li H, Jiang X, Wang M, Zuo 
L, Yan Y, Dong B, Wang Y, Zhang X, Bai L, Li P, Qi D, Cai Z, Li G, Wang L, Peng 
K, Hong D, Yao D, Jiang A, Luo Q, Hou S, Zhang F, Zheng L, Luo Y, Cai G, Duan S, 
Zhang Y, Liang S, Shao X, Wang R, Liu X, Xu Y, Zhang J, Chen J, Cheng J, Zhao L, 
Du X, Chen H, Zhu B, Pan W, Ma Y, Cui C, Zhang Q, Zhang J, Fu P, Tang X, Qin W, 
Liang Y, Li D, Sun G, Su X, Zhao B, He Q, Shen X, Zheng D, Sun Y, Zheng H, Zheng 
W, Lu F, Lai L, Zhang M, Xu N, Shi H, Chen W, Liang X, Ye Z, Xu L, Zhang R, Tao 
Y, Xu D, Tang L, Lian X, Ding G, Wang H, Yang L, Li Z, Hu Z, Jiang B, Guo Z, 
Chang J, Wang Q, Li N, Zhang A, Shi S, Li Z, Xu H, Bao B, Zhao Y, Nie Z, Liu T, 
Wang Y, Cui Z, Su C, Gong L, Liu G, Yu L, Wang B, Xu D, Li Y, Lin Q, Yu K, Shen 
Y, Cheng H, Xu X, Wang Y, Liu R, Xu G, Han M, Wang L, Xing C, Zhang C, Huang Z, 
Yang G, Xu X, Lv X, Hong H, Liu B, Tao L, Zhang X, Yang H, Yang X, Zhang X, Yang 
H, Mao Y, Wu H, Li T, Wang H, Zhao B, Lin H, Yang N, Fung KS, Chan R, Law R, 
Melemadathil S, Pt H, Razak R, Sinta KC, Natarajan G, Mohammed J, Thanigachalam 
DK, Devaraju SR, Alavala SR, Golla A, Nagalla V, Nallagasu R, Sahay M, Borra S, 
Sahay R, Dasyam LKS, Kumbagiri M, Msln P, Nazneen A, Prathyusha K, Ramachandran 
R, Gupta KL, Sain T, Prasad N, Bhaduria DS, Pandy AK, Singh P, Abdul Wahab MZ, 
Che Rohani Z, Mohd Yassim H, Razali SNO, Saaidi N, Wan Hazlina WM, Yahya R, Yee 
SY, Zaynah N, Azahar NH, Tan HF, Loh CL, Hashim S, Lee YY, Lim XJ, Mohd Khairi 
N, Ramanaidu S, Thong KM, Liu WJ, Ee LW, Mohd Yusoff Y, Ngu LLS, Chai NS, Hii 
LWS, Tan CHH, Wan Japar SH, Mushahar L, Md Yusuff SH, Noor M, Ng KP, Lim SK, 
Razali WAFA, Wan Md Adnan WAH, Jayne D, Greene T, Walsh M, Wang AY, Mather A, 
Wang AY.

Author information:
(1)Renal Division, Department of Medicine, Peking University First Hospital, 
Beijing, China.
(2)The George Institute for Global Health, University of New South Wales, 
Sydney, Australia.
(3)Department of Renal Medicine, Royal North Shore Hospital, Australia.
(4)Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(5)The George Institute for Global Health India, UNSW, New Delhi, India.
(6)Prasanna School of Public Health, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, 
Manipal, India.
(7)The George Institute for Global Health, School of Public Health, Imperial 
College London, United Kingdom.
(8)Sultanah Aminah Hospital, Johor Bahru, Malaysia.
(9)The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(10)NHMRC Clinical Trials Centre, University of Sydney, Australia.
(11)University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(12)David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles.
(13)Department of Renal Medicine, University College London, United Kingdom.
(14)Department of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, SAR of 
China.
(15)Research Institute of Nephrology, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing, China.
(16)Australasian Kidney Trials Network, University of Queensland, Brisbane, 
Australia.
(17)Menzies School of Health Research, Charles Darwin University, Darwin, 
Australia.
(18)University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom.
(19)Division of Nephrology and Clinical Immunology, RWTH Aachen University, 
Aachen, Germany.
(20)Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri IRCCS, Bergamo, Italy.
(21)Peking University Clinical Research Institute, Beijing, China.
(22)Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis.

Comment in
    JAMA. 2022 May 17;327(19):1872-1874. doi: 10.1001/jama.2022.4638.
    Ann Intern Med. 2022 Sep;175(9):JC105. doi: 10.7326/J22-0067.
    JAMA. 2022 Sep 20;328(11):1107-1108. doi: 10.1001/jama.2022.12709.
    Nephrology (Carlton). 2022 Dec;27(12):1003-1004. doi: 10.1111/nep.14114.

IMPORTANCE: The effect of glucocorticoids on major kidney outcomes and adverse 
events in IgA nephropathy has been uncertain.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the efficacy and adverse effects of methylprednisolone in 
patients with IgA nephropathy at high risk of kidney function decline.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: An international, multicenter, double-blind, 
randomized clinical trial that enrolled 503 participants with IgA nephropathy, 
proteinuria greater than or equal to 1 g per day, and estimated glomerular 
filtration rate (eGFR) of 20 to 120 mL/min/1.73 m2 after at least 3 months of 
optimized background care from 67 centers in Australia, Canada, China, India, 
and Malaysia between May 2012 and November 2019, with follow-up until June 2021.
INTERVENTIONS: Participants were randomized in a 1:1 ratio to receive oral 
methylprednisolone (initially 0.6-0.8 mg/kg/d, maximum 48 mg/d, weaning by 8 
mg/d/mo; n = 136) or placebo (n = 126). After 262 participants were randomized, 
an excess of serious infections was identified, leading to dose reduction (0.4 
mg/kg/d, maximum 32 mg/d, weaning by 4 mg/d/mo) and addition of antibiotic 
prophylaxis for pneumocystis pneumonia for subsequent participants (121 in the 
oral methylprednisolone group and 120 in the placebo group).
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary end point was a composite of 40% decline 
in eGFR, kidney failure (dialysis, transplant), or death due to kidney disease. 
There were 11 secondary outcomes, including kidney failure.
RESULTS: Among 503 randomized patients (mean age, 38 years; 198 [39%] women; 
mean eGFR, 61.5 mL/min/1.73 m2; mean proteinuria, 2.46 g/d), 493 (98%) completed 
the trial. Over a mean of 4.2 years of follow-up, the primary outcome occurred 
in 74 participants (28.8%) in the methylprednisolone group compared with 106 
(43.1%) in the placebo group (hazard ratio [HR], 0.53 [95% CI, 0.39-0.72]; 
P < .001; absolute annual event rate difference, -4.8% per year [95% CI, -8.0% 
to -1.6%]). The effect on the primary outcome was seen across each dose compared 
with the relevant participants in the placebo group recruited to each regimen (P 
for heterogeneity = .11): full-dose HR, 0.58 (95% CI, 0.41-0.81); reduced-dose 
HR, 0.27 (95% CI, 0.11-0.65). Of the 11 prespecified secondary end points, 9 
showed significant differences in favor of the intervention, including kidney 
failure (50 [19.5%] vs 67 [27.2%]; HR, 0.59 [95% CI, 0.40-0.87]; P = .008; 
annual event rate difference, -2.9% per year [95% CI, -5.4% to -0.3%]). Serious 
adverse events were more frequent with methylprednisolone vs placebo (28 [10.9%] 
vs 7 [2.8%] patients with serious adverse events), primarily with full-dose 
therapy compared with its matching placebo (22 [16.2%] vs 4 [3.2%]).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among patients with IgA nephropathy at high risk of 
progression, treatment with oral methylprednisolone for 6 to 9 months, compared 
with placebo, significantly reduced the risk of the composite outcome of kidney 
function decline, kidney failure, or death due to kidney disease. However, the 
incidence of serious adverse events was increased with oral methylprednisolone, 
mainly with high-dose therapy.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT01560052.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2022.5368
PMCID: PMC9115617
PMID: 35579642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Lv reported 
receiving grants from the China National Funds for Distinguished Young 
Scientists and the National Key Research and Development Program of China during 
the conduct of the study and personal fees from Chinook Therapeutics and KBP 
Bioscience outside the submitted work. Dr Wong reported receiving fees for 
advisory boards, steering committee roles, or scientific presentations from 
Travere, Baxter, Amgen, AbbVie, Chinook, Dimerix, Otsuka, GlaxoSmithKline, and 
CSL Behring. Dr Hladunewich reported receiving grants from the Canadian 
Institute for Health Research and study drugs from Pfizer during the conduct of 
the study and grants from Calliditas for a study in IgA, Ionis for a study in 
IgA, Pfizer for a study in focal segmental glomerulosclerolsis, and Roche for a 
study in preeclampsia outside the submitted work and being the medical lead for 
glomerulonephritis for the Ontario Renal Network. Dr Jha reported receiving 
grants paid to the institution from Baxter Healthcare and NephroPlus and 
personal fees paid to the institution from GlaxoSmithKline, AstraZeneca, Bayer, 
Zydus Cadilla, and Panacea outside the submitted work. Dr Jardine reported 
receiving grants from the National Health and Medical Research Council during 
the conduct of the study and other competitively awarded grants from the 
National Health and Medical Research Council, the Australian government 
research-funding body, outside the submitted work. Dr Reich reported receiving 
personal fees from Calliditas, being a clinical trial investigator for Omeros, 
receiving personal fees from Novartis for providing advisory to and being a 
speaker at an internal conference, providing advisory to Chinook and being a 
national coordinating investigator for the ALIGN study, receiving personal fees 
from Travere for providing advisory, being a site trial co-investigator for 
Alnylam, being a site trial investigator for Pfizer, and being director of the 
Glomerulonephritis Fellowship funded by the Louise Fast Foundation outside the 
submitted work. Dr Cattran reported receiving grants from the Canadian Institute 
of Health Research for salary support of coordinator during the conduct of the 
study and personal fees from Calliditis for being on a pharmaceutical scientific 
advisory board, Alnylam Pharmaceutical Scientific for being on a steering 
committee, Novartis for being a pharmaceutical data and safety monitoring 
committee member, Chemocentryx for being a data and safety monitoring committee 
member, Alexion Pharmaceutical for being an advisory board member, and UpToDate 
for being an author and being a member of a steering committee for the 
international IgA nephropathy network outside the submitted work. Dr Glassock 
reported receiving personal fees from Omeros, Biocryst, Novartis, Calliditas, 
Chemocentryx, Ionis, Travere, Arrowhead, and Horizon outside the submitted work, 
being editor of the Nephrology section of UpToDate, and being a contributor to 
KDIGO 2021 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Glomerular 
Diseases. Dr Wheeler reported receiving personal fees from Amgen, Astellas, 
Mundipharma/Napp, Merck Sharp and Dohme, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Vifor for 
speaker fees, personal fees from AstraZeneca for a consultancy contract, and 
personal fees from Bayer GlaxoSmithKline, Gilead, Janssen, Tricida, and Zydus 
for consultancy outside the submitted work. Dr Woodward reported receiving 
personal fees as a consultant from Amgen, Freeline, and Kyowa Kirin outside the 
submitted work. Dr Billot reported receiving grants from the Australian National 
Health and Medical Research Council during the conduct of the study. Dr Johnson 
reported receiving personal fees from Baxter Healthcare, AstraZeneca, Bayer, 
AWAK Technologies, and Boehringer Ingelheim and Lilly; grants from Fresenius 
Medical Care; and travel sponsorship from Ono and Amgen outside the submitted 
work. Dr Cass reported receiving grants from Australian National Health and 
Medical Research Council during the conduct of the study. Dr Floege reported 
receiving personal fees from Calliditas, Idorsia, Omeros, Travere, and Visterra 
during the conduct of the study and personal fees from Bayer, Boehringer, and 
AstraZeneca outside the submitted work. Dr Remuzzi reported receiving personal 
fees from Akebia Pharmaceuticals, Alexion Pharmaceuticals, AstraZeneca, BioCryst 
Pharmaceuticals, Boehringer Ingelheim, Janssen Research & Development, Menarini 
Ricerche Spa, Otsuka, and Silence Therapeutics outside the submitted work. Dr 
Agarwal reported receiving personal fees from Bayer Healthcare Pharmaceuticals, 
AstraZeneca, Boehringer, Relypsa, Vifor Pharma, Merck, Sanofi, Eli Lilly, 
Lexicon, Reata, Chinook, Vertex Pharma, Akebia, and Diamedica outside the 
submitted work and reported being an author for UpToDate. Dr Zhang reported 
receiving personal fees related to steering committee roles from Novartis, 
Omeros, Calliditas, and Chinook and grants and funding from Pfizer during the 
conduct of the study. Dr Perkovic reported receiving grants from Pfizer, which 
provided study drug and initial seed funding, during the conduct of the study 
and grants from AbbVie for a clinical trial steering committee; personal fees 
from Amgen for serving on an advisory board; serving on a clinical trial 
steering committee for Astellas; receiving personal fees from AstraZeneca 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Janssen, Novo Nordisk, and Novartis for serving on a 
steering committee, advisory committee, and scientific presentations; serving on 
a trial steering committee and advisory committee for Bayer; receiving personal 
fees from Chinook Therapeutics for serving on an advisory committee; serving on 
a data and safety monitoring committee for Dimerix; serving on the board of 
directors for George Clinical; serving on a steering committee and advisory 
committee for Gilead, GlaxoSmithKline, and Travere; serving on an advisory 
committee for Medimmune; receiving personal fees from Mitsubishi Tanabe for 
scientific presentations; receiving personal fees from Mundipharma for advisory 
committee and scientific presentations; and serving on an advisory committee for 
Vifor Pharma. No other disclosures were reported.