---
reference_id: PMID:11476106
title: "Desmosomes: structure and function in normal and diseased epidermis."
authors:
- McMillan JR
- Shimizu H
journal: J Dermatol
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1111/j.1346-8138.2001.tb00136.x
keywords:
- Animals
- Desmosomes/physiology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- Mice
- "Skin Diseases/pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Desmosomes: structure and function in normal and diseased epidermis.
**Authors:** McMillan JR, Shimizu H
**Journal:** J Dermatol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1346-8138.2001.tb00136.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1346-8138.2001.tb00136.x)

## Content

1. J Dermatol. 2001 Jun;28(6):291-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1346-8138.2001.tb00136.x.

Desmosomes: structure and function in normal and diseased epidermis.

McMillan JR(1), Shimizu H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Sapporo, Japan.

Desmosomes are important epidermal adhesion complexes that are characterized by 
a cell-specific expression of transmembrane cadherins and plaque-associated 
molecules. Desmosomes have so far, been implicated in three main disease types: 
autoimmune diseases that involve desmosome components (such as pemphigus 
vulgaris and pemphigus foliaceus), congenital diseases that affect intracellular 
calcium channels (such as Hailey-Hailey disease and Darier disease) and 
congenital diseases that directly affect desmosomal structural components. The 
identification of the first congenital defect affecting a desmosome component 
was in the gene for plakophilin I which caused an autosomal recessive skin 
fragility-ectodermal dysplasia syndrome with skin, hair and nail defects. 
Subsequently, either a haploinsufficiency of desmoplakin or a defect in 
desmoglein 1 was found to underlie the autosomal dominant condition Striate 
Palmoplantar Keratoderma. In addition, plakoglobin has been shown to be 
defective in Naxos disease, which results in a cardiomyopathy and growth of 
abnormal hair. These findings pave the way for the discovery of further cell 
cohesion-related diseases and will help to greatly increase our understanding of 
the specific function of desmosome and other epithelial junction components.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1346-8138.2001.tb00136.x
PMID: 11476106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]