---
reference_id: "PMID:7957386"
title: "Clinical and biochemical characteristics of peroxisomal disorders: an update."
authors:
- Wanders RJ
- Barth PG
- Schutgens RB
- Tager JM
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1007/BF02138777
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and biochemical characteristics of peroxisomal disorders: an update.
**Authors:** Wanders RJ, Barth PG, Schutgens RB, Tager JM
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF02138777](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02138777)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 1994;153(7 Suppl 1):S44-8. doi: 10.1007/BF02138777.

Clinical and biochemical characteristics of peroxisomal disorders: an update.

Wanders RJ(1), Barth PG, Schutgens RB, Tager JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Clinical Biochemistry, University Hospital 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Peroxisomal disorders represent a recently recognized group of inherited 
diseases in man, now comprising 14 different disorders. If discussion is 
restricted to those peroxisomal disorders in which there is neurological 
involvement (thereby excluding hyperoxaluria and acatalasaemia), results over 
the least few years have shown that analysis of very-long-chain fatty acids 
(VLCFAs) is a highly reliable initial test to establish whether or not one is 
dealing with a peroxisomal disorder. Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata, its 
recently identified variant form and glutaryl-CoA oxidase deficiency will show 
no abnormalities and must be identified by other means. Recently we have found a 
few clinically proven cases of adrenoleukodystrophy showing normal VLCFA in 
plasma but clearly abnormal values in fibroblasts. This suggests that great care 
is warranted in interpreting plasma VLCFA analyses. Furthermore, plasma bile 
acids, phytanic acid, pristanic acid and pipecolic acid should be analysed in 
any patient with clinical symptoms suggestive for a peroxisomal disorder but 
normal plasma VLCFAs.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02138777
PMID: 7957386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]