---
reference_id: "PMID:34718466"
title: Low Meningococcal Vaccination Rates Among Patients With Newly Diagnosed Complement Component Deficiencies in the United States.
authors:
- Marshall GS
- Ghaswalla PK
- Bengtson LGS
- Buikema AR
- Bancroft T
- Koep E
- Novy P
- Hogea CS
journal: Clin Infect Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/cid/ciab917
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Low Meningococcal Vaccination Rates Among Patients With Newly Diagnosed Complement Component Deficiencies in the United States.
**Authors:** Marshall GS, Ghaswalla PK, Bengtson LGS, Buikema AR, Bancroft T, Koep E, Novy P, Hogea CS
**Journal:** Clin Infect Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cid/ciab917](https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciab917)

## Content

1. Clin Infect Dis. 2022 Aug 24;75(1):155-158. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciab917.

Low Meningococcal Vaccination Rates Among Patients With Newly Diagnosed 
Complement Component Deficiencies in the United States.

Marshall GS(1), Ghaswalla PK(2), Bengtson LGS(3), Buikema AR(3), Bancroft T(3), 
Koep E(4), Novy P(2), Hogea CS(2).

Author information:
(1)Norton Children's and University of Louisville School of Medicine, 
Louisville, Kentucky, USA.
(2)Vaccines, GSK, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Optum, Eden Prairie, Minnesota, USAand.
(4)UnitedHealth Group, Minnetonka, Minnesota, USA.

Meningococcal vaccination is recommended for patients with complement component 
deficiencies (CDs) in the United States. In this retrospective database study, 
only 4.6% and 2.2% of patients received MenACWY and MenB vaccination, 
respectively, within 3 years of CD diagnosis. Thus, meningococcal vaccination 
rates among patients with CDs need to be improved.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious 
Diseases Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciab917
PMCID: PMC9402647
PMID: 34718466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]