---
reference_id: "PMID:20691404"
title: "Loss of corneodesmosin leads to severe skin barrier defect, pruritus, and atopy: unraveling the peeling skin disease."
authors:
- Oji V
- Eckl KM
- Aufenvenne K
- Nätebus M
- Tarinski T
- Ackermann K
- Seller N
- Metze D
- Nürnberg G
- Fölster-Holst R
- Schäfer-Korting M
- Hausser I
- Traupe H
- Hennies HC
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.07.005
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- Child
- Chromosome Mapping
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Epidermis/pathology
- Family
- "Glycoproteins/deficiency, genetics"
- Humans
- Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Male
- "Models, Biological"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Pedigree
- "Pruritus/complications, genetics"
- "Skin/pathology, ultrastructure"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss of corneodesmosin leads to severe skin barrier defect, pruritus, and atopy: unraveling the peeling skin disease.
**Authors:** Oji V, Eckl KM, Aufenvenne K, Nätebus M, Tarinski T, Ackermann K, Seller N, Metze D, Nürnberg G, Fölster-Holst R, Schäfer-Korting M, Hausser I, Traupe H, Hennies HC
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.07.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.07.005)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Aug 13;87(2):274-81. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.07.005.

Loss of corneodesmosin leads to severe skin barrier defect, pruritus, and atopy: 
unraveling the peeling skin disease.

Oji V(1), Eckl KM, Aufenvenne K, Nätebus M, Tarinski T, Ackermann K, Seller N, 
Metze D, Nürnberg G, Fölster-Holst R, Schäfer-Korting M, Hausser I, Traupe H, 
Hennies HC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Münster, 48149 Münster, 
Germany.

Generalized peeling skin disease is an autosomal-recessive ichthyosiform 
erythroderma characterized by lifelong patchy peeling of the skin. After 
genome-wide linkage analysis, we have identified a homozygous nonsense mutation 
in CDSN in a large consanguineous family with generalized peeling skin, 
pruritus, and food allergies, which leads to a complete loss of corneodesmosin. 
In contrast to hypotrichosis simplex, which can be associated with specific 
dominant CDSN mutations, peeling skin disease is characterized by a complete 
loss of CDSN expression. The skin phenotype is consistent with a recent murine 
Cdsn knockout model. Using three-dimensional human skin models, we demonstrate 
that lack of corneodesmosin causes an epidermal barrier defect supposed to 
account for the predisposition to atopic diseases, and we confirm the role of 
corneodesmosin as a decisive epidermal adhesion molecule. Therefore, peeling 
skin disease will represent a new model disorder for atopic diseases, similarly 
to Netherton syndrome and ichthyosis vulgaris in the recent past.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.07.005
PMCID: PMC2917721
PMID: 20691404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]