---
reference_id: "PMID:40004465"
title: 16q24.3 Microdeletions Disrupting Upstream Non-Coding Region of ANKRD11 Cause KBG Syndrome.
authors:
- Iwata-Otsubo A
- Rippert AL
- Balciuniene J
- Fiordaliso SK
- Chen R
- Markose P
- Skraban CM
- Gray C
- Zackai EH
- Dubbs HA
- Deardorff MA
- Conlin LK
- Izumi K
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/genes16020136
keywords:
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- "Tooth Abnormalities/genetics, pathology"
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Chromosome Deletion
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 16/genetics"
- Child
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/genetics"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Adolescent
- Facies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 16q24.3 Microdeletions Disrupting Upstream Non-Coding Region of ANKRD11 Cause KBG Syndrome.
**Authors:** Iwata-Otsubo A, Rippert AL, Balciuniene J, Fiordaliso SK, Chen R, Markose P, Skraban CM, Gray C, Zackai EH, Dubbs HA, Deardorff MA, Conlin LK, Izumi K
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes16020136](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes16020136)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2025 Jan 24;16(2):136. doi: 10.3390/genes16020136.

16q24.3 Microdeletions Disrupting Upstream Non-Coding Region of ANKRD11 Cause 
KBG Syndrome.

Iwata-Otsubo A(1), Rippert AL(1), Balciuniene J(2), Fiordaliso SK(1), Chen R(1), 
Markose P(1), Skraban CM(1)(3)(4), Gray C(1)(3), Zackai EH(1)(4), Dubbs HA(1), 
Deardorff MA(1)(3)(4), Conlin LK(2)(5), Izumi K(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital 
of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(2)Division of Genomic Diagnostics, Department of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(3)Roberts Individualized Medical Genetics Center, Department of Pediatrics, The 
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Background: KBG syndrome is a multisystem developmental disorder characterized 
by macrodontia of the upper permanent incisors, distinctive facial features, a 
short stature, developmental delay, variable intellectual disability, and 
behavioral issues. Heterozygous chromosomal deletion encompassing the partial or 
entire ANKRD11 gene, as well as the loss of function mutations, result in 
haploinsufficiency of the gene, leading to KBG syndrome. This indicates that 
precise levels of ANKRD11 transcripts or protein are essential for human 
development. Clinical report: Here, we report three individuals who present with 
clinical features of KBG syndrome. These individuals carry microdeletions 
encompassing only the non-coding exon 1 of ANKRD11 and its upstream region. Our 
molecular analysis showed that this deletion leads to reduction in the ANKRD11 
transcript and global transcriptome alterations similar to those seen in KBG 
syndrome patients. Conclusions: We concluded that microdeletions involving 
non-coding exon 1 of ANKRD11 lead to KBG syndrome. Our study suggests the 
utility of transcriptome analysis in aiding the interpretation of novel copy 
number variants in the non-coding genomic region of ANKRD11.

DOI: 10.3390/genes16020136
PMCID: PMC11855469
PMID: 40004465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.