---
reference_id: "PMID:9510476"
title: Characterization of mRNA expression of IkappaB alpha and NF-kappaB subfamilies in primary adult T-cell leukemia cells.
authors:
- Inoue M
- Matsuoka M
- Yamaguchi K
- Takatsuki K
- Yoshida M
journal: Jpn J Cancer Res
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.1998.tb00479.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of mRNA expression of IkappaB alpha and NF-kappaB subfamilies in primary adult T-cell leukemia cells.
**Authors:** Inoue M, Matsuoka M, Yamaguchi K, Takatsuki K, Yoshida M
**Journal:** Jpn J Cancer Res (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1349-7006.1998.tb00479.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1349-7006.1998.tb00479.x)

## Content

1. Jpn J Cancer Res. 1998 Jan;89(1):53-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1349-7006.1998.tb00479.x.

Characterization of mRNA expression of IkappaB alpha and NF-kappaB subfamilies 
in primary adult T-cell leukemia cells.

Inoue M(1), Matsuoka M, Yamaguchi K, Takatsuki K, Yoshida M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology, The Institute of Medical 
Science, The University of Tokyo.

Tax protein of HTLV-1 activates the transcriptional capacity of the NF-kappaB 
family, resulting in up-regulation of various genes, which are linked to 
phenotypic alterations of HTLV-1-infected T cells. To understand NF-kappaB 
regulation in HTLV-1-infected leukemic cells in vivo, we analyzed expression of 
NF-kappaB and IkappaB alpha in primary cells isolated from ATL patients. Using 
competitive polymerase chain reaction, we observed an elevated expression of 
IkappaB alpha mRNA in all four ATL cases tested. In contrast to the elevated 
mRNA levels, the levels of IkappaB alpha protein were remarkably reduced in some 
of these cases, suggesting destabilization of IkappaB alpha protein. On the 
other hand, mRNA expression of p50/p105 and p65, subfamilies of NF-kappaB, was 
enhanced in primary cells isolated from some ATL patients. Furthermore, the 
expression patterns of NF-kappaB subfamily were variable among patients and also 
different from those in T cells isolated from uninfected individuals. Although 
the number of cases analyzed was limited, we can conclude from these 
observations that activation of NF-kappaB is restricted to a few subfamilies in 
vivo. These findings in vivo are strikingly different from those in 
HTLV-1-infected T cell lines in vitro, in which Tax is responsible for NF-kappaB 
activation. It is therefore suggested that the elevation of NF-kappaB expression 
in leukemic cells of ATL patients might not be supported mainly by the viral 
protein Tax.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.1998.tb00479.x
PMCID: PMC5921590
PMID: 9510476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]