---
reference_id: "PMID:34181733"
title: EANO guideline on the diagnosis and management of meningiomas.
authors:
- Goldbrunner R
- Stavrinou P
- Jenkinson MD
- Sahm F
- Mawrin C
- Weber DC
- Preusser M
- Minniti G
- Lund-Johansen M
- Lefranc F
- Houdart E
- Sallabanda K
- Le Rhun E
- Nieuwenhuizen D
- Tabatabai G
- Soffietti R
- Weller M
journal: Neuro Oncol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noab150
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EANO guideline on the diagnosis and management of meningiomas.
**Authors:** Goldbrunner R, Stavrinou P, Jenkinson MD, Sahm F, Mawrin C, Weber DC, Preusser M, Minniti G, Lund-Johansen M, Lefranc F, Houdart E, Sallabanda K, Le Rhun E, Nieuwenhuizen D, Tabatabai G, Soffietti R, Weller M
**Journal:** Neuro Oncol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/neuonc/noab150](https://doi.org/10.1093/neuonc/noab150)

## Content

1. Neuro Oncol. 2021 Nov 2;23(11):1821-1834. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noab150.

EANO guideline on the diagnosis and management of meningiomas.

Goldbrunner R(1), Stavrinou P(2), Jenkinson MD(3), Sahm F(4), Mawrin C(5), Weber 
DC(6), Preusser M(7), Minniti G(8), Lund-Johansen M(9)(10), Lefranc F(11), 
Houdart E(12), Sallabanda K(13)(14)(15), Le Rhun E(16), Nieuwenhuizen D(17), 
Tabatabai G(18), Soffietti R(19), Weller M(20).

Author information:
(1)Center of Neurosurgery, Department of General Neurosurgery, University of 
Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Neurosurgical Department, Metropolitan Hospital, Athens, Greece and Center of 
Neurosurgery, Department of General Neurosurgery, University of Cologne, 
Cologne, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, The Walton Centre NHS Foundation Trust, 
Liverpool, UK.
(4)Department of Neuropathology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 
Germany.
(5)Department of Neuropathology, University of Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany.
(6)Center for Proton Therapy, Paul Scherrer Institute, Villigen, Switzerland.
(7)Department of Medicine I, Comprehensive Cancer Center Vienna, Medical 
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(8)Radiation Oncology Unit, Sant'Andrea Hospital, Sapienza University, Rome, 
Italy.
(9)Department of Neurosurgery, Bergen University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(10)Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, 
University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(11)Department of Neurosurgery, Hôpital Erasme, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 
Brussels, Belgium.
(12)Service de Neuroradiologie, Hopital Lariboisiere, Paris, France.
(13)Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital San Carlos, Universidad 
Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(14)Hospital Clinico Universitario San Carlos, Madrid, Spain.
(15)CyberKnife Centre, Genesiscare Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(16)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Clinical Neuroscience Center, 
University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(17)Department of Neurology, Amphia Hospital, Breda, the Netherlands.
(18)Center for Neurooncology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, University Hospital 
Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(19)Department of Neuro-Oncology, City of Health and Science University 
Hospital, Turin, Italy.
(20)Department of Neurology, Clinical Neuroscience Center, University Hospital 
and University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Meningiomas are the most common intracranial tumors. Yet, only few controlled 
clinical trials have been conducted to guide clinical decision making, resulting 
in variations of management approaches across countries and centers. However, 
recent advances in molecular genetics and clinical trial results help to refine 
the diagnostic and therapeutic approach to meningioma. Accordingly, the European 
Association of Neuro-Oncology (EANO) updated its recommendations for the 
diagnosis and treatment of meningiomas. A provisional diagnosis of meningioma is 
typically made by neuroimaging, mostly magnetic resonance imaging. Such 
provisional diagnoses may be made incidentally. Accordingly, a significant 
proportion of meningiomas, notably in patients that are asymptomatic or elderly 
or both, may be managed by a watch-and-scan strategy. A surgical intervention 
with tissue, commonly with the goal of gross total resection, is required for 
the definitive diagnosis according to the WHO classification. A role for 
molecular profiling including gene panel sequencing and genomic methylation 
profiling is emerging. A gross total surgical resection including the involved 
dura is often curative. Inoperable or recurrent tumors requiring treatment can 
be treated with radiosurgery, if the size or the vicinity of critical structures 
allows that, or with fractionated radiotherapy (RT). Treatment concepts 
combining surgery and radiosurgery or fractionated RT are increasingly used, 
although there remain controversies regard timing, type, and dosing of the 
various RT approaches. Radionuclide therapy targeting somatostatin receptors is 
an experimental approach, as are all approaches of systemic pharmacotherapy. The 
best albeit modest results with pharmacotherapy have been obtained with 
bevacizumab or multikinase inhibitors targeting vascular endothelial growth 
factor receptor, but no standard of care systemic treatment has been yet 
defined.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Society for Neuro-Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/neuonc/noab150
PMCID: PMC8563316
PMID: 34181733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]