---
reference_id: "PMID:17634141"
title: Erosive arthritis.
authors:
- Schett G
journal: Arthritis Res Ther
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1186/ar2166
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Erosive arthritis.
**Authors:** Schett G
**Journal:** Arthritis Res Ther (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1186/ar2166](https://doi.org/10.1186/ar2166)

## Content

1. Arthritis Res Ther. 2007;9 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):S2. doi: 10.1186/ar2166.

Erosive arthritis.

Schett G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine 3, University of Erlangen-Nurnberg, Erlangen, 
Germany. georg.schett@med3.imed.uni-erlangen.de

Inflammation and degradation of bone are two closely linked processes. Chronic 
inflammatory arthritis not only leads to inflammatory bone loss but it also 
involves local erosion of articular bone. This osteo-destructive feature of 
chronic inflammatory arthritis is a major cause of disability in patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis. Osteoclasts are essential for the resorption of 
mineralized cartilage and subchondral bone in chronic arthritis. The observed 
up-regulation of osteoclast differentiation factors (receptor activator of 
nuclear factor-kappaB ligand [RANKL]) in the synovial membrane of chronically 
inflamed joints indicates that osteoclasts are abundant in this setting, leading 
to rapid degradation of mineralized tissue. Blockade of osteoclast formation is 
thus a key strategy in preventing structural damage in arthritis. Denosumab, a 
humanized antibody that neutralizes RANKL, is an attractive candidate agent to 
inhibit inflammatory bone loss.

DOI: 10.1186/ar2166
PMCID: PMC1924517
PMID: 17634141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]