---
reference_id: "PMID:38778397"
title: "Decoding Behcet's Uveitis: an In-depth review of pathogenesis and therapeutic advances."
authors:
- Guan Y
- Li F
- Li N
- Yang P
journal: J Neuroinflammation
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12974-024-03123-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Decoding Behcet's Uveitis: an In-depth review of pathogenesis and therapeutic advances.
**Authors:** Guan Y, Li F, Li N, Yang P
**Journal:** J Neuroinflammation (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12974-024-03123-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12974-024-03123-6)

## Content

1. J Neuroinflammation. 2024 May 22;21(1):133. doi: 10.1186/s12974-024-03123-6.

Decoding Behcet's Uveitis: an In-depth review of pathogenesis and therapeutic 
advances.

Guan Y(1)(2), Li F(1), Li N(1), Yang P(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Henan International Joint Research Laboratory 
for Ocular Immunology and Retinal Injury Repair, The First Affiliated Hospital 
of Zhengzhou University, Henan Province Eye Hospital, Zhengzhou, 450052, 
People's Republic of China.
(2)The Academy of Medical Sciences, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, 450052, 
People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Henan International Joint Research Laboratory 
for Ocular Immunology and Retinal Injury Repair, The First Affiliated Hospital 
of Zhengzhou University, Henan Province Eye Hospital, Zhengzhou, 450052, 
People's Republic of China. peizengycmu@126.com.

Behcet's disease (BD) is a rare but globally distributed vasculitis that 
primarily affects populations in the Mediterranean and Asian regions. Behcet's 
uveitis (BU) is a common manifestation of BD, occurring in over two-thirds of 
the patients. BU is characterized by bilateral, chronic, recurrent, 
non-granulomatous uveitis in association with complications such as retinal 
ischemia and atrophy, optic atrophy, macular ischemia, macular edema, and 
further neovascular complications (vitreous hemorrhage, neovascular glaucoma). 
Although the etiology and pathogenesis of BU remain unclear, numerous studies 
reveal that genetic factors (such as HLA-B51), dysregulated immune responses of 
both the innate and adaptive immune systems, infections (such as streptococcus), 
and environmental factors (such as GDP) are all involved in its development. 
Innate immunity, including hyperactivity of neutrophils and γδT cells and 
elevated NK1/NK2 ratios, has been shown to play an essential role in this 
disease. Adaptive immune system disturbance, including homeostatic 
perturbations, Th1, Th17 overaction, and Treg cell dysfunction, is thought to be 
involved in BU pathogenesis. Treatment of BU requires a tailored approach based 
on the location, severity of inflammation, and systemic manifestations. The 
therapy aims to achieve rapid inflammation suppression, preservation of vision, 
and prevention of recurrence. Systemic corticosteroids combined with other 
immunosuppressive agents have been widely used to treat BU, and beneficial 
effects are observed in most patients. Recently, biologics have been shown to be 
effective in treating refractory BU cases. Novel therapeutic targets for 
treating BU include the LCK gene, Th17/Treg balance, JAK pathway inhibition, and 
cytokines such as IL-17 and RORγt. This article summarizes the recent studies on 
BU, especially in terms of pathogenesis, diagnostic criteria and classification, 
auxiliary examination, and treatment options. A better understanding of the 
significance of microbiome composition, genetic basis, and persistent immune 
mechanisms, as well as advancements in identifying new biomarkers and 
implementing objective quantitative detection of BU, may greatly contribute to 
improving the adequate management of BU patients.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12974-024-03123-6
PMCID: PMC11112928
PMID: 38778397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.