---
reference_id: "PMID:38762484"
title: Regulatory mechanisms of PD-1/PD-L1 in cancers.
authors:
- Lin X
- Kang K
- Chen P
- Zeng Z
- Li G
- Xiong W
- Yi M
- Xiang B
journal: Mol Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12943-024-02023-w
keywords:
- Humans
- "Neoplasms/metabolism, immunology, pathology, etiology, genetics"
- Programmed Cell Death 1 Receptor/metabolism
- B7-H1 Antigen/metabolism
- Animals
- Signal Transduction
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Regulatory mechanisms of PD-1/PD-L1 in cancers.
**Authors:** Lin X, Kang K, Chen P, Zeng Z, Li G, Xiong W, Yi M, Xiang B
**Journal:** Mol Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12943-024-02023-w](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12943-024-02023-w)

## Content

1. Mol Cancer. 2024 May 18;23(1):108. doi: 10.1186/s12943-024-02023-w.

Regulatory mechanisms of PD-1/PD-L1 in cancers.

Lin X(1)(2)(3)(4), Kang K(1)(2)(3)(4), Chen P(1), Zeng Z(1)(2)(3)(4), Li 
G(1)(2)(3)(4), Xiong W(1)(2)(3)(4), Yi M(5), Xiang B(6)(7)(8)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)NHC Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Hunan Key Laboratory of Cancer 
Metabolism, Hunan Cancer Hospital and the Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya 
School of Medicine, Central South University, Changsha, 410013, Hunan, China.
(2)FuRong Laboratory, Changsha, 410078, Hunan, China.
(3)Cancer Research Institute, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Central South 
University, Changsha, 410008, Hunan, China.
(4)The Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion of the Chinese 
Ministry of Education, Central South University, Changsha, 410078, Hunan, China.
(5)Department of Dermotology, National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric 
Disorders, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, 410008, Hunan, 
China. yi_mei@csu.edu.cn.
(6)NHC Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Hunan Key Laboratory of Cancer 
Metabolism, Hunan Cancer Hospital and the Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya 
School of Medicine, Central South University, Changsha, 410013, Hunan, China. 
xiangbolin@csu.edu.cn.
(7)FuRong Laboratory, Changsha, 410078, Hunan, China. xiangbolin@csu.edu.cn.
(8)Cancer Research Institute, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Central South 
University, Changsha, 410008, Hunan, China. xiangbolin@csu.edu.cn.
(9)The Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion of the Chinese 
Ministry of Education, Central South University, Changsha, 410078, Hunan, China. 
xiangbolin@csu.edu.cn.
(10)Hunan Cancer Hospital and the Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School 
of Medicine, Central South University, Tongzipo Road, Changsha, 410013, Hunan, 
China. xiangbolin@csu.edu.cn.

Immune evasion contributes to cancer growth and progression. Cancer cells have 
the ability to activate different immune checkpoint pathways that harbor 
immunosuppressive functions. The programmed death protein 1 (PD-1) and 
programmed cell death ligands (PD-Ls) are considered to be the major immune 
checkpoint molecules. The interaction of PD-1 and PD-L1 negatively regulates 
adaptive immune response mainly by inhibiting the activity of effector T cells 
while enhancing the function of immunosuppressive regulatory T cells (Tregs), 
largely contributing to the maintenance of immune homeostasis that prevents 
dysregulated immunity and harmful immune responses. However, cancer cells 
exploit the PD-1/PD-L1 axis to cause immune escape in cancer development and 
progression. Blockade of PD-1/PD-L1 by neutralizing antibodies restores T cells 
activity and enhances anti-tumor immunity, achieving remarkable success in 
cancer therapy. Therefore, the regulatory mechanisms of PD-1/PD-L1 in cancers 
have attracted an increasing attention. This article aims to provide a 
comprehensive review of the roles of the PD-1/PD-L1 signaling in human 
autoimmune diseases and cancers. We summarize all aspects of regulatory 
mechanisms underlying the expression and activity of PD-1 and PD-L1 in cancers, 
including genetic, epigenetic, post-transcriptional and post-translational 
regulatory mechanisms. In addition, we further summarize the progress in 
clinical research on the antitumor effects of targeting PD-1/PD-L1 antibodies 
alone and in combination with other therapeutic approaches, providing new 
strategies for finding new tumor markers and developing combined therapeutic 
approaches.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12943-024-02023-w
PMCID: PMC11102195
PMID: 38762484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.