---
reference_id: "PMID:23865096"
title: EZH2-Related Overgrowth.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Ocansey S
- Tatton-Brown K
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# EZH2-Related Overgrowth.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Ocansey S, Tatton-Brown K

## Content

1. EZH2-Related Overgrowth.

Ocansey S(1), Tatton-Brown K(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2013 Jul 18 [updated 2025 Jun 26].

Author information:
(1)Specialist Registrar in Clinical Genetics, St George's University Hospital 
NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom
(2)Professor and Consultant in Clinical Genetics, St George's University of 
London;, St George's University Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, London, United 
Kingdom

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: EZH2-related overgrowth is a variable overgrowth 
syndrome characterized by tall stature, macrocephaly, variable intellect 
(ranging from normal intellect to severe intellectual disability), 
characteristic facial appearance, and a range of associated clinical features 
including advanced bone age, poor coordination, soft, doughy skin, camptodactyly 
of the fingers and/or toes, umbilical hernia, abnormal tone, and hoarse, low cry 
in infancy. Brain MRI has identified abnormalities in a few individuals with 
EZH2-related overgrowth. Neuroblastoma occurs at an increased frequency in 
individuals with a heterozygous EZH2 pathogenic variant. There is currently no 
evidence that additional malignancies (including hematologic malignancies) occur 
with increased frequency, though a few have been reported.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of EZH2-related overgrowth is based on 
detection of a heterozygous germline EZH2 pathogenic variant on molecular 
genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: For individuals with developmental 
delay and/or learning disability, referral for learning/behavior/speech 
assessment and support may be indicated. Occasionally, toe camptodactyly may 
require surgical release. Physiotherapy may be of benefit to those experiencing 
joint pain secondary to ligamentous laxity or joint contractures. Standard 
treatment with appropriate specialist referral(s) is indicated for epilepsy, 
scoliosis, and other clinical issues. Surveillance: Regular medical follow up of 
young children with EZH2-related overgrowth to monitor developmental progress, 
camptodactyly (for resolution/improvement), and/or hypotonia; medical follow up 
of older children/teenagers who do not have medical complications may be less 
frequent. If scoliosis is present, monitoring per the recommendations of an 
orthopedist. Clinicians should have a low threshold for investigating any 
possible tumor-related symptoms. There are no internationally ratified 
surveillance guidelines for screening of neuroblastoma in individuals carrying 
inactivating EZH2 pathogenic variants, but US guidelines recommend imaging and 
urine biochemistry surveillance until age 10 years. Pregnancy management: 
Families and their health care providers should be made aware that an affected 
baby may be large so that appropriate delivery plans can be made.
GENETIC COUNSELING: EZH2-related overgrowth is inherited in an autosomal 
dominant manner. Some individuals diagnosed with EZH2-related overgrowth have an 
affected parent; some individuals diagnosed with EZH2-related overgrowth have 
the disorder as the result of a de novo EZH2 pathogenic variant. The proportion 
of individuals with EZH2-related overgrowth caused by a de novo pathogenic 
variant is unknown. Each child of an individual with EZH2-related overgrowth has 
a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant; the phenotype in individuals 
who inherit a familial EZH2 pathogenic variant cannot be predicted. Once the 
pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, prenatal 
and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 23865096