---
reference_id: "PMID:17718779"
title: Environmental risk factors for attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder.
authors:
- Banerjee TD
- Middleton F
- Faraone SV
journal: Acta Paediatr
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1111/j.1651-2227.2007.00430.x
keywords:
- "Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/epidemiology, etiology, genetics"
- Child
- "Environmental Exposure/adverse effects, statistics & numerical data"
- Female
- Genotype
- Humans
- Phenotype
- Pregnancy
- Prenatal Exposure Delayed Effects/epidemiology
- Psychology
- Risk Factors
- "Smoking/adverse effects, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Environmental risk factors for attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder.
**Authors:** Banerjee TD, Middleton F, Faraone SV
**Journal:** Acta Paediatr (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1651-2227.2007.00430.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1651-2227.2007.00430.x)

## Content

1. Acta Paediatr. 2007 Sep;96(9):1269-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1651-2227.2007.00430.x.

Environmental risk factors for attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder.

Banerjee TD(1), Middleton F, Faraone SV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Physiology, SUNY Upstate Medical University,
Syracuse, New York 13210, USA.

Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is the most common cognitive and
behavioural disorder diagnosed among school children. It is characterized by
deficient attention and problem solving, along with hyperactivity and difficulty
withholding incorrect responses. This highly prevalent disorder is estimated to
affect 5-10% of children and in many cases, persists into adulthood, leading to
4% prevalence among adults. Converging evidence from epidemiologic,
neuropsychology, neuroimaging, genetic and treatment studies shows that ADHD is
a valid medical disorder. The majority of studies performed to assess genetic
risk factors in ADHD have supported a strong familial nature of this disorder.
Family studies have identified a 2- to 8-fold increase in the risk for ADHD in
parents and siblings of children with ADHD. Various twin and adoption studies
have also highlighted the highly genetic nature of ADHD. In fact the mean
heritability of ADHD was shown to be 0.77, which is comparable to other
neuropsychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia or bipolar disorder. However,
several biological and environmental factors have also been proposed as risk
factors for ADHD, including food additives/diet, lead contamination, cigarette
and alcohol exposure, maternal smoking during pregnancy, and low birth weight.
Many recent studies have specifically examined the relationships between ADHD
and these extraneous factors. This review describes some of these possible risk
factors.
CONCLUSION: Although a substantial fraction of the aetiology of ADHD is due to
genes, the studies reviewed in this article show that many environmental risk
factors and potential gene-environment interactions also increase the risk for
the disorder.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1651-2227.2007.00430.x
PMID: 17718779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
