---
reference_id: "PMID:28590503"
title: "Growth hormone insensitivity with immune dysfunction caused by a STAT5B mutation in the south of Brazil: evidence for a founder effect."
authors:
- Scalco RC
- Gonçalves FT
- Santos HC
- Cardena MMSG
- Tonelli CA
- Funari MFA
- Aracava RM
- Pereira AC
- Fridman C
- Jorge AAL
journal: Genet Mol Biol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2016-0231
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Growth hormone insensitivity with immune dysfunction caused by a STAT5B mutation in the south of Brazil: evidence for a founder effect.
**Authors:** Scalco RC, Gonçalves FT, Santos HC, Cardena MMSG, Tonelli CA, Funari MFA, Aracava RM, Pereira AC, Fridman C, Jorge AAL
**Journal:** Genet Mol Biol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2016-0231](https://doi.org/10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2016-0231)

## Content

1. Genet Mol Biol. 2017 Apr-Jun;40(2):436-441. doi:
10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2016-0231. Epub 2017 Jun 5.

Growth hormone insensitivity with immune dysfunction caused by a STAT5B mutation
in the south of Brazil: evidence for a founder effect.

Scalco RC(1)(2), Gonçalves FT(3), Santos HC(4), Cardena MMSG(3), Tonelli CA(5),
Funari MFA(2), Aracava RM(2), Pereira AC(4), Fridman C(3), Jorge AAL(1).

Author information:
(1)Unidade de Endocrinologia Genética (LIM25), Faculdade de Medicina da
Universidade de São Paulo (FMUSP), São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(2)Unidade de Endocrinologia do Desenvolvimento, Laboratório de Hormônios e
Genética Molecular (LIM42), Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo
(FMUSP), São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Medicina Legal, Ética Médica e Medicina Social e do Trabalho,
Laboratório de Imunohematologia e Hematologia Forense (LIM40), Hospital das
Clínicas da Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo (HC da FMUSP),
São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(4)Laboratório de Cardiologia Genética e Molecular, Instituto do Coração
(InCor), Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, SP,
Brazil.
(5)Universidade do Extremo Sul de Santa Catarina, Criciúma, SC, Brazil.

Homozygous STAT5B mutations causing growth hormone insensitivity with immune
dysfunction were described in 10 patients since 2003, including two Brazilian
brothers from the south of Brazil. Our objectives were to evaluate the
prevalence of their STAT5B mutation in this region and to analyze the presence
of a founder effect. We obtained DNA samples from 1,205 local inhabitants, 48
relatives of the homozygous patients and four individuals of another affected
family. Genotyping for STAT5B c.424_427del mutation and for two polymorphic
markers around it was done through fragment analysis technique. We also
determined Y-chromosome and mtDNA haplotypes and genomic ancestry in
heterozygous carriers. We identified seven families with STAT5B c.424_427del
mutation, with 33 heterozygous individuals. The minor allelic frequency of this
mutation was 0.29% in this population (confidence interval 95% 0.08-0.5%), which
is significantly higher than the frequency of other pathogenic STAT5B allele
variants observed in public databases (p < 0.001). All heterozygous carriers had
the same haplotype present in the homozygous patients, found in only 9.4% of
non-carriers (p < 0.001), supporting the existence of a founder effect. The
Y-chromosome haplotype, mtDNA and genomic ancestry analysis indicated a European
origin of this mutation. Our results provide compelling evidence for a founder
effect of STAT5B c.424_427del mutation.

DOI: 10.1590/1678-4685-GMB-2016-0231
PMCID: PMC5488464
PMID: 28590503
