---
reference_id: "PMID:41102576"
title: "Clinical and genetic characteristics of patients diagnosed with atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS): epidemiological data from the Belgian cohort of the Global aHUS Registry."
authors:
- Massart A
- Weekers L
- Claes KJ
- Van Meerhaeghe T
- Snauwaert E
- Mekahli D
- Goffin E
- Collard L
- Godefroid N
- Adams B
- Van Cauwelaert S
- Van Hoeck K
- Block S
- Al-Dakkak I
- Dahan K
- Stordeur P
- Vande Walle J
journal: J Nephrol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s40620-025-02366-7
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- "Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome/genetics, epidemiology, diagnosis, immunology, therapy"
- Registries
- Belgium/epidemiology
- Adult
- "Child, Preschool"
- Adolescent
- Child
- Retrospective Studies
- Middle Aged
- Young Adult
- Infant
- "Complement Factor H/genetics, immunology"
- "Complement C3/genetics, immunology"
- Prospective Studies
- Prevalence
- Membrane Cofactor Protein/genetics
- Aged
- Sex Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and genetic characteristics of patients diagnosed with atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS): epidemiological data from the Belgian cohort of the Global aHUS Registry.
**Authors:** Massart A, Weekers L, Claes KJ, Van Meerhaeghe T, Snauwaert E, Mekahli D, Goffin E, Collard L, Godefroid N, Adams B, Van Cauwelaert S, Van Hoeck K, Block S, Al-Dakkak I, Dahan K, Stordeur P, Vande Walle J
**Journal:** J Nephrol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40620-025-02366-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40620-025-02366-7)

## Content

1. J Nephrol. 2025 Dec;38(9):2841-2850. doi: 10.1007/s40620-025-02366-7. Epub
2025  Oct 17.

Clinical and genetic characteristics of patients diagnosed with atypical
hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS): epidemiological data from the Belgian cohort
of the Global aHUS Registry.

Massart A(1), Weekers L(2), Claes KJ(3)(4), Van Meerhaeghe T(5), Snauwaert E(6),
Mekahli D(7)(8), Goffin E(9), Collard L(10), Godefroid N(11), Adams B(7)(12),
Van Cauwelaert S(13), Van Hoeck K(14), Block S(15), Al-Dakkak I(16), Dahan
K(9)(17), Stordeur P(#)(18), Vande Walle J(#)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium.
annick.massart@uza.be.
(2)Department of Nephrology, University of Liège, CHU Liège, Liège, Belgium.
(3)Department of Nephrology and Renal Transplantation, Leuven University
Hospital, Louvain, Belgium.
(4)KU Leuven, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Laboratory of
Nephrology, Louvain, Belgium.
(5)Department of Nephrology, Hôpital Universitaire de Bruxelles, Erasme,
Brussels, Belgium.
(6)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent,
Belgium.
(7)Department of Pediatric Nephrology and Organ Transplantation, Leuven
University Hospitals, Louvain, Belgium.
(8)PKD Research Group, Laboratory of Ion Channel Research, Department of
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven, Louvain, Belgium.
(9)Department of Nephrology, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, Université
Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(10)Pediatric Department, CHC Montlégia, Liège, Belgium.
(11)Pediatric Department, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, Université
Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.
(12)Queen Fabiola Children's University Hospital, Brussels, Belgium.
(13)Department of Nephrology and Transplantation, Universitair Ziekenhuis
Brussels, Brussels, Belgium.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium.
(15)Alexion Pharma Belgium, Brussels, Belgium.
(16)Global Epidemiology, Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Inc, Boston, MA, USA.
(17)Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique, Centre de Génétique, Gosselies,
Belgium.
(18)Laboratoire d'Immunologie (LHUB), Belgian National Reference Center for the
Complement System, Hôpital Universitaire de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS) usually results from an
overactivation of the alternative complement pathway. As large clinical trials
are scarce, patient registries can partially fill the knowledge gap on patient
characteristics, management, and outcomes. We here describe the baseline
clinical and genetic characteristics as well as the management of all Belgian
patients enrolled in the Global aHUS Registry at data cut-off.
METHODS: This observational study prospectively and retrospectively collected
data (data cut-off: December 26, 2022) from patients of all ages with a clinical
diagnosis of aHUS, irrespective of treatment.
RESULTS: A total of 121 Belgian patients were registered in the Global aHUS
Registry, resulting in a prevalence of 10.4 aHUS patients per million
inhabitants, with a higher proportion of females affected (57.9% vs 42.1% of
males). Among the 109 patients tested for at least one variant and/or
anti-complement factor H (CFH) antibodies, 36 were positive for a pathogenic
complement gene variant associated with aHUS (n = 29) and/or seropositive for
anti-CFH antibodies (n = 14). The most common variants affected CFH, C3 and
CD46. The higher proportion of complement gene variants in treated women versus
men was not related to a specific gene.
CONCLUSIONS: This study strengthens the real-world evidence on aHUS and adds to
previously published Global aHUS Registry data. In addition, it provides
insights into the differential epidemiology of the disease in Belgium and
demonstrates the increased susceptibility of women to aHUS across the whole
spectrum of recognized complement gene variants.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s40620-025-02366-7
PMCID: PMC12711931
PMID: 41102576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: Annick
Massart received consulting fees from Alexion and Hansa, and support for
attending meetings from Hansa (through her institution). She participated on a
Data Safety Monitoring Board or Advisory Board for Novartis (through her
institution). Laurent Weekers received support for attending meetings from
AstraZeneca and participated in Advisory Boards for Alexion, Hanza, and Amicus.
Kathleen J Claes received consulting fees from Alexion, Amgen, Novartis, and
Sobi; honoraria for lectures from AstraZeneca; support for attending meetings
and/or travel from Bayer. She participated on a Data Safety Monitoring Board or
Advisory Board for Novartis and has a leadership or fiduciary role in other
board, society, committee or advocacy groups for the Belgian Society of
Nephrology. She is a member of the European Reference Network for Rare Kidney
Diseases (ERKNet). Evelien Snauwaert is the beneficiary of a budget from the
Fonds voor Innovatie en Klinisch Onderzoek (FIKO) type III from the Ghent
University Hospital, received support from Alexion for meetings/travel and
participated to a Data Safety Monitoring Committee/Advisory Board from Alexion.
She is a member of the ERKNet. Djalila Mekahli received grants from Otsuka and
Galapagos. She is supported by the Research Foundation Flanders (FWO; G0C8920N)
and received a clinical senior research grant (1804123N). Laure Collard received
consulting fees for an advisory board from Alexion (through her institution),
and from Anlynam and Chiesi (through her company); consulting fees for symposium
moderation from Anlynam and Chiesi (through her company); payment for lectures
from Anlynam and Sandoz (through her company); payment for expert testimony from
Twinpharma (through her company); financial support for attending meetings from
Chiesi. Nathalie Godefroid participated to a Data Safety Monitoring Board or
Advisory Board for Alexion. Koenraad Van Hoeck received honoraria for lectures
from Thomas More Highschool (through his institution). Sebastien Block is an
employee of Alexion Pharmaceuticals. Imad Al-Dakkak was an employee of Alexion
Pharmaceuticals at the time of the study conduct, and he owns AstraZeneca
stocks. Karin Dahan received grants from Alnylam (through her institution),
consulting fees and honoraria for lectures from Alnylam and Sobi, support for
attending meetings from Chiesi, and participated on a Data Safety Monitoring
Board or Advisory Board for Alnylam. Patrick Stordeur received honoraria for
lectures from Alexion Pharma Belgium and support for attending meetings from
Thermofisher. Johan Vande Walle received consulting fees from Ferring, Astellas,
Bayer, and Alexion (through his institution); payment for lectures from Ferring,
Bayer, and Alexion (through his institution); payment for expert testimony from
Ferring (through his institution); support for attending meetings from Alexion
(through his institution). He participated on a Data Safety Monitoring Board or
Advisory Board for Bayer (through his institution) and has a leadership or
fiduciary role in other board, society, committee or advocacy group for the
International Pediatric Nephrology Association and Connect 4 Children (through
his institution). Tess Van Meerhaeghe, Eric Goffin, Brigitte Adams and Stefan
Van Cauwelaert have nothing to disclose. Ethical approval: The study was
approved by the relevant ethics committee at every center. Human and animal
rights: The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
The protocol was reviewed and approved by the relevant ethics committee at every
center, and all participants or their legal representatives provided written
informed consent for enrollment. No animals were involved in this research.
Informed consent and consent to participate: All participants or their legal
representatives provided written informed consent for enrollment.
