---
reference_id: "PMID:1887027"
title: Hyperechoic renal medullary pyramids in infants and children.
authors:
- Shultz PK
- Strife JL
- Strife CF
- McDaniel JD
journal: Radiology
year: '1991'
doi: 10.1148/radiology.181.1.1887027
keywords:
- "Acidosis, Renal Tubular/diagnostic imaging"
- Acute Kidney Injury/diagnostic imaging
- Adolescent
- Bartter Syndrome/diagnostic imaging
- Calcium/urine
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Furosemide/adverse effects
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Kidney Diseases/diagnostic imaging, urine"
- Kidney Medulla/diagnostic imaging
- Male
- "Nephrocalcinosis/chemically induced, diagnostic imaging"
- Ultrasonography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hyperechoic renal medullary pyramids in infants and children.
**Authors:** Shultz PK, Strife JL, Strife CF, McDaniel JD
**Journal:** Radiology (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1148/radiology.181.1.1887027](https://doi.org/10.1148/radiology.181.1.1887027)

## Content

1. Radiology. 1991 Oct;181(1):163-7. doi: 10.1148/radiology.181.1.1887027.

Hyperechoic renal medullary pyramids in infants and children.

Shultz PK(1), Strife JL, Strife CF, McDaniel JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH
45229-2899.

Comment in
    Radiology. 1991 Oct;181(1):9-11. doi: 10.1148/radiology.181.1.1887061.

Fifty-five children (34 boys, 21 girls; age range, 1 day to 18 years) with
increased echogenicity of the renal medullary pyramids at ultrasound evaluation
were identified. The clinical diagnoses associated with hyperechoic medullary
pyramids could be separated based on the presence or absence of hypercalciuria.
Patients with drug-induced hypercalciuria included 10 infants treated with
furosemide, two treated with long-term steroid therapy, and one treated with
excessive amounts of vitamin D. Other clinical conditions associated with
hypercalciuria included renal tubular acidosis (n = 10), Bartter syndrome (n =
5), hyperparathyroidism (n = 3), Williams syndrome (n = 2) and medullary sponge
kidney (n = 2). Ten children with transient renal insufficiency and three with
sickle cell disease had normal urine calcium concentration. Isolated disease
entities accounted for the remainder of cases. A specific diagnosis can usually
be made in a patient with hyperechoic renal medullary pyramids by using a
systematic clinical approach that includes evaluation of patient age, serum and
urine calcium concentration, and renal function.

DOI: 10.1148/radiology.181.1.1887027
PMID: 1887027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
