---
reference_id: "PMID:37207067"
title: "Differential Diagnosis Between Perianal Crohn's Disease and Hidradenitis Suppurativa: A Challenging Teamwork."
authors:
- Amhis M
- Belarbi KN
- Bourrat E
- Nassif A
- Viala J
- Martinez-Vinson C
journal: JPGN Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1097/PG9.0000000000000081
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differential Diagnosis Between Perianal Crohn's Disease and Hidradenitis Suppurativa: A Challenging Teamwork.
**Authors:** Amhis M, Belarbi KN, Bourrat E, Nassif A, Viala J, Martinez-Vinson C
**Journal:** JPGN Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PG9.0000000000000081](https://doi.org/10.1097/PG9.0000000000000081)

## Content

1. JPGN Rep. 2021 Apr 30;2(2):e081. doi: 10.1097/PG9.0000000000000081.
eCollection  2021 May.

Differential Diagnosis Between Perianal Crohn's Disease and Hidradenitis 
Suppurativa: A Challenging Teamwork.

Amhis M(1), Belarbi KN(2), Bourrat E(3), Nassif A(4), Viala J(1), 
Martinez-Vinson C(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Gastroentérologie pédiatrique, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de 
Paris, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France.
(2)Radiologie pédiatrique, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Robert 
Debré, Paris, France.
(3)Dermatologie/pédiatrie générale, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, 
Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France.
(4)Medical Center, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is a rare, debilitating skin disease characterized 
by the presence of recurrent tender subcutaneous nodules that develop into 
abscesses and fistulae. Isolated perineal Crohn's disease (CD) is unusual, 
diagnosis can be difficult, and distinction from HS is a challenge for the 
gastroenterologist. The aim of this work was to determine the criteria that 
distinguish perineal CD from perineal HS. Four patients with isolated perineal 
CD and three with perineal HS were included. Rectal or skin biopsies of all CD 
patients showed granulomas. No granulomas were found for HS. Fistulae were 
present in 4/4 CD, extended to the anal canal. All patients with HS had gluteal 
abscesses. They were bilateral in all cases, superficial. Perineal lesions 
management should involve a multidisciplinary approach in order to make an 
accurate diagnosis and ultimately to give the best and most effective treatment.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer on behalf of 
European Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition and 
North American Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and 
Nutrition.

DOI: 10.1097/PG9.0000000000000081
PMCID: PMC10191525
PMID: 37207067

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Martinez-Vinson received honoraria, 
speaker’s fees and/or congress fees from AbbVie, MSD, Nestle, Biogen, Adacyte. 
The remaining authors report no conflicts of interest.