---
reference_id: "PMID:38229112"
title: "N-terminal titin fragment: a non-invasive, pharmacodynamic biomarker for microdystrophin efficacy."
authors:
- Boehler JF
- Brown KJ
- Ricotti V
- Morris CA
journal: Skelet Muscle
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13395-023-00334-y
keywords:
- Humans
- Mice
- Animals
- Dogs
- Connectin/genetics
- Proteomics
- "Mice, Inbred mdx"
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Duchenne/genetics, therapy"
- Biomarkers
- Creatine Kinase
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism"
- Protein Kinases/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# N-terminal titin fragment: a non-invasive, pharmacodynamic biomarker for microdystrophin efficacy.
**Authors:** Boehler JF, Brown KJ, Ricotti V, Morris CA
**Journal:** Skelet Muscle (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13395-023-00334-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13395-023-00334-y)

## Content

1. Skelet Muscle. 2024 Jan 16;14(1):2. doi: 10.1186/s13395-023-00334-y.

N-terminal titin fragment: a non-invasive, pharmacodynamic biomarker for 
microdystrophin efficacy.

Boehler JF(1), Brown KJ(2), Ricotti V(3), Morris CA(4).

Author information:
(1)Solid Biosciences, 500 Rutherford Avenue 3rd Floor, Boston, MA, 02129, USA. 
jessica@solidbio.com.
(2)Rejuvenate Bio, 11425 Sorrento Valley Road, San Diego, CA, 92121, USA.
(3)National Institute for Health and Care Research Great Ormond Street Hospital 
Biomedical Research Centre/University College London Great Ormond Street 
Institute of Child Health, London, UK.
(4)PHDL Consulting LLC, 43 Sylvanus Wood Lane, Woburn, MA, 01801, USA.

BACKGROUND: Multiple clinical trials to assess the efficacy of AAV-directed gene 
transfer in participants with Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) are ongoing. The 
success of these trials currently relies on standard functional outcome measures 
that may exhibit variability within and between participants, rendering their 
use as sole measures of drug efficacy challenging. Given this, supportive 
objective biomarkers may be useful in enhancing observed clinical results. 
Creatine kinase (CK) is traditionally used as a diagnostic biomarker of DMD, but 
its potential as a robust pharmacodynamic (PD) biomarker is difficult due to the 
wide variability seen within the same participant over time. Thus, there is a 
need for the discovery and validation of novel PD biomarkers to further support 
and bolster traditional outcome measures of efficacy in DMD.
METHOD: Potential PD biomarkers in DMD participant urine were examined using a 
proteomic approach on the Somalogic platform. Findings were confirmed in both 
mdx mice and Golden Retriever muscular dystrophy (GRMD) dog plasma samples.
RESULTS: Changes in the N-terminal fragment of titin, a well-known, previously 
characterized biomarker of DMD, were correlated with the expression of 
microdystrophin protein in mice, dogs, and humans. Further, titin levels were 
sensitive to lower levels of expressed microdystrophin when compared to CK.
CONCLUSION: The measurement of objective PD biomarkers such as titin may provide 
additional confidence in the assessment of the mechanism of action and efficacy 
in gene therapy clinical trials of DMD.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT03368742.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13395-023-00334-y
PMCID: PMC10790446
PMID: 38229112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Jessica F Boehler is an employee and holds 
equity in Solid Biosciences Inc. Kristy J Brown, Valeria Ricotti and Carl A 
Morris are former employees and hold equity in Solid Biosciences Inc. Carl A 
Morris acts as an advisor for Solid Biosciences Inc.