---
reference_id: PMID:39767180
title: COPA Syndrome-From Pathogenesis to Treatment.
authors:
- Padureanu V
- Forțofoiu MC
- Donoiu I
- Tieranu EN
- Dumitrascu C
- Padureanu R
- Mușetescu AE
- Alexandru C
- Iorgus CC
- Bobirca F
- Dascalu A
- Bobirca A
journal: Diagnostics (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/diagnostics14242819
content_type: abstract_only
---

# COPA Syndrome-From Pathogenesis to Treatment.
**Authors:** Padureanu V, Forțofoiu MC, Donoiu I, Tieranu EN, Dumitrascu C, Padureanu R, Mușetescu AE, Alexandru C, Iorgus CC, Bobirca F, Dascalu A, Bobirca A
**Journal:** Diagnostics (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/diagnostics14242819](https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics14242819)

## Content

1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2024 Dec 14;14(24):2819. doi:
10.3390/diagnostics14242819.

COPA Syndrome-From Pathogenesis to Treatment.

Padureanu V(1), Forțofoiu MC(1), Donoiu I(2), Tieranu EN(2), Dumitrascu C(3), 
Padureanu R(1), Mușetescu AE(4), Alexandru C(3)(5), Iorgus CC(3), Bobirca F(6), 
Dascalu A(7), Bobirca A(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Medicine and Pharmacy of 
Craiova, 200349 Craiova, Romania.
(2)Department of Cardiology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Craiova, 
200349 Craiova, Romania.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine and Rheumatology, "Dr. Ion Cantacuzino" 
Clinical Hospital, 011437 Bucharest, Romania.
(4)Department of Rheumatology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy of Craiova, 
200349 Craiova, Romania.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine and Rheumatology, "Carol Davila" University 
of Medicine and Pharmacy, 050474 Bucharest, Romania.
(6)Department of General Surgery, "Carol Davila" University of Medicine and 
Pharmacy, "Dr. Ion Cantacuzino" Clinical Hospital, 030167 Bucharest, Romania.
(7)Department of Ophthalmology, Emergency University Hospital Bucharest, 050098 
Bucharest, Romania.

Coatomer subunit α (COPA) syndrome is a mendelian autosomal dominant immune 
dysregulation disease characterized by early onset lung disease in the form of 
diffuse alveolar hemorrhaging or interstitial lung disease, frequently 
associated with arthritis, glomerulonephritis, and high titer autoantibodies 
usually mimicking other autoimmune diseases. While immunosuppressive medication 
has been effective in controlling arthritis, data on long-term lung disease 
control remains scarce, which poses a real challenge as the progression of lung 
disease is the main cause of poor life expectancy in COPA patients. 
Nevertheless, JAK inhibitor therapy seems to be the most promising therapeutic 
choice now.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics14242819
PMCID: PMC11674574
PMID: 39767180

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.