---
reference_id: "PMID:33858994"
title: "Laryngeal Dystonia: Multidisciplinary Update on Terminology, Pathophysiology, and Research Priorities."
authors:
- Simonyan K
- Barkmeier-Kraemer J
- Blitzer A
- Hallett M
- Houde JF
- Jacobson Kimberley T
- Ozelius LJ
- Pitman MJ
- Richardson RM
- Sharma N
- Tanner K
- The NIH/NIDCD Workshop on Research Priorities in Spasmodic Dysphonia/Laryngeal Dystonia
journal: Neurology
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000011922
keywords:
- Dysphonia
- Dystonia
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Laryngeal Dystonia: Multidisciplinary Update on Terminology, Pathophysiology, and Research Priorities.
**Authors:** Simonyan K, Barkmeier-Kraemer J, Blitzer A, Hallett M, Houde JF, Jacobson Kimberley T, Ozelius LJ, Pitman MJ, Richardson RM, Sharma N, Tanner K, The NIH/NIDCD Workshop on Research Priorities in Spasmodic Dysphonia/Laryngeal Dystonia
**Journal:** Neurology (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000011922](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000011922)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2021 May 25;96(21):989-1001. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000011922.
Epub  2021 Apr 15.

Laryngeal Dystonia: Multidisciplinary Update on Terminology, Pathophysiology, 
and Research Priorities.

Simonyan K(1), Barkmeier-Kraemer J(2), Blitzer A(2), Hallett M(2), Houde JF(2), 
Jacobson Kimberley T(2), Ozelius LJ(2), Pitman MJ(2), Richardson RM(2), Sharma 
N(2), Tanner K(2); The NIH/NIDCD Workshop on Research Priorities in Spasmodic 
Dysphonia/Laryngeal Dystonia.

Collaborators: Berke G, Eadie T, Greenlee J, Hammer M, Johns M, Konczak J, 
Ludlow C, Nagarajan S, Ross C, Song P, Stepp C.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery (K.S.), Harvard 
Medical School and Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Boston, MA, Department of 
Neurology (K.S., L.J.O., N.S.), Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA; 
Division of Otolaryngology (J.B.-K.), University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT; 
New York Center for Voice and Swallowing Disorders and Department of Neurology 
(A.B.), Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY; Human Motor 
Control Section (M.H.), National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD; Department of Otolaryngology-Head 
and Neck Surgery (J.H.), University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, 
CA; School of Rehabilitation and Health Sciences (T.J.K.), Massachusetts General 
Hospital Institute of Health Professions, Boston, MA; Department of 
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery (M.J.P.), Columbia University Irving 
Medical Center, New York, NY; Department of Neurosurgery (R.M.R.), Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, MA; and Department of Communication Disorders (K.T.), 
Brigham Young University, Provo, UT. kristina_simonyan@meei.harvard.edu.
(2)From the Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery (K.S.), Harvard 
Medical School and Massachusetts Eye and Ear, Boston, MA, Department of 
Neurology (K.S., L.J.O., N.S.), Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA; 
Division of Otolaryngology (J.B.-K.), University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT; 
New York Center for Voice and Swallowing Disorders and Department of Neurology 
(A.B.), Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY; Human Motor 
Control Section (M.H.), National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD; Department of Otolaryngology-Head 
and Neck Surgery (J.H.), University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, 
CA; School of Rehabilitation and Health Sciences (T.J.K.), Massachusetts General 
Hospital Institute of Health Professions, Boston, MA; Department of 
Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery (M.J.P.), Columbia University Irving 
Medical Center, New York, NY; Department of Neurosurgery (R.M.R.), Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, MA; and Department of Communication Disorders (K.T.), 
Brigham Young University, Provo, UT.

OBJECTIVE: To delineate research priorities for improving clinical management of 
laryngeal dystonia, the NIH convened a multidisciplinary panel of experts for a 
1-day workshop to examine the current progress in understanding its 
etiopathophysiology and clinical care.
METHODS: The participants reviewed the current terminology of disorder and 
discussed advances in understanding its pathophysiology since a similar workshop 
was held in 2005. Clinical and research gaps were identified, and 
recommendations for future directions were delineated.
RESULTS: The panel unanimously agreed to adopt the term "laryngeal dystonia" 
instead of "spasmodic dysphonia" to reflect the current progress in 
characterizations of this disorder. Laryngeal dystonia was recognized as a 
multifactorial, phenotypically heterogeneous form of isolated dystonia. Its 
etiology remains unknown, whereas the pathophysiology likely involves 
large-scale functional and structural brain network disorganization. Current 
challenges include the lack of clinically validated diagnostic markers and 
outcome measures and the paucity of therapies that address the disorder 
pathophysiology.
CONCLUSION: Research priorities should be guided by challenges in clinical 
management of laryngeal dystonia. Identification of disorder-specific biomarkers 
would allow the development of novel diagnostic tools and unified measures of 
treatment outcome. Elucidation of the critical nodes within neural networks that 
cause or modulate symptoms would allow the development of targeted therapies 
that address the underlying pathophysiology. Given the rarity of laryngeal 
dystonia, future rapid research progress may be facilitated by multicenter, 
national and international collaborations.

© 2021 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000011922
PMCID: PMC8205448
PMID: 33858994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]