---
reference_id: "PMID:8708658"
title: "A Brazilian cohort of patients with Tourette's syndrome."
authors:
- Cardoso F
- Veado CC
- de Oliveira JT
journal: J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1136/jnnp.60.2.209
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Brazil/epidemiology
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Tourette Syndrome/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Brazilian cohort of patients with Tourette's syndrome.
**Authors:** Cardoso F, Veado CC, de Oliveira JT
**Journal:** J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jnnp.60.2.209](https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.60.2.209)

## Content

1. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1996 Feb;60(2):209-12. doi:
10.1136/jnnp.60.2.209.

A Brazilian cohort of patients with Tourette's syndrome.

Cardoso F(1), Veado CC, de Oliveira JT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte,
Brazil.

The clinical features of 32 patients (24 males) with Tourette's syndrome in
Brazil were studied. The mean age at onset was 7.1 years, tics being the first
symptom in 71% and hyperactivity in 29%. Blinking, grimacing, and shoulder
elevation were the most common motor tics and sniffing, throat clearing, and
grunting noises, the most frequent vocal tics. Coprolalia was present in 28%,
echolalia in 16%, palilalia in 9%, and copropraxia in 25% of patients. Attention
deficit and hyperactivity disorder was diagnosed in 63%, and obsessive
compulsive behaviour in 44% of patients. In 84% of patients there was a family
history of tics whereas attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder and
obsessive compulsive behaviour were respectively present in relatives of 19% and
53% of the patients studied. These data suggest that Tourette's syndrome in
Brazil is not clinically different from other countries, supporting the notion
that genetic factors play the most important part in its aetiology.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.60.2.209
PMCID: PMC1073809
PMID: 8708658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
