---
reference_id: "PMID:28554534"
title: "Ophthalmic Manifestations of Xeroderma Pigmentosum: A Perspective from the United Kingdom."
authors:
- Lim R
- Sethi M
- Morley AMS
journal: Ophthalmology
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2017.04.031
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Color Vision/physiology
- "Eye Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- Intraocular Pressure/physiology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prospective Studies
- Pupil/physiology
- "Tonometry, Ocular"
- United Kingdom
- Visual Acuity/physiology
- "Xeroderma Pigmentosum/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ophthalmic Manifestations of Xeroderma Pigmentosum: A Perspective from the United Kingdom.
**Authors:** Lim R, Sethi M, Morley AMS
**Journal:** Ophthalmology (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ophtha.2017.04.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ophtha.2017.04.031)

## Content

1. Ophthalmology. 2017 Nov;124(11):1652-1661. doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2017.04.031. 
Epub 2017 May 26.

Ophthalmic Manifestations of Xeroderma Pigmentosum: A Perspective from the 
United Kingdom.

Lim R(1), Sethi M(2), Morley AMS(3).

Author information:
(1)Nationally Commissioned Xeroderma Pigmentosum Service, Guy's and St Thomas' 
NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom; Department of Ophthalmology, Guy's 
and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
limrongxuan@gmail.com.
(2)Nationally Commissioned Xeroderma Pigmentosum Service, Guy's and St Thomas' 
NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom; King's College London, Kings 
Health Partners, Division of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, St John's 
Institute of Dermatology, Guy's Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Nationally Commissioned Xeroderma Pigmentosum Service, Guy's and St Thomas' 
NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom; Department of Ophthalmology, Guy's 
and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.

PURPOSE: To document the ocular manifestations of xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), 
presenting via the United Kingdom (UK) XP service, and to analyze the 
correlations between XP genotype and ophthalmic phenotype.
DESIGN: Prospective observational case series.
SUBJECTS: Eighty-nine patients seen by the UK Nationally Commissioned XP 
Service, from April 2010 to December 2014, with a genetically confirmed 
diagnosis of XP.
METHODS: Patients underwent a full ophthalmic examination at each visit. 
Clinical features from both eyes were recorded on a standard proforma. The most 
recent assessments were analyzed. A 2-tailed Fisher exact test was used to 
assess for differences in ocular features between patients in XP subgroups with 
impaired transcription coupled nucleotide excision repair (TC-NER) (category 1: 
XP-A, B, D, F, and G) and preserved TC-NER (category 2: XP-C, E, and V).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Lid and periocular abnormalities, ocular surface 
pathologies, neuro-ophthalmologic abnormalities, lens and retinal abnormalities, 
and visual acuity (VA).
RESULTS: Ninety-three percent of XP patients in our cohort had ocular 
involvement, with 65% describing photophobia. The most common abnormalities were 
in the periocular skin and ocular surface, including interpalpebral conjunctival 
melanosis (44%) and conjunctival injection (43%). Eleven percent of patients had 
required treatment for periocular cancers and 2% for ocular surface cancers. The 
most common neuro-ophthalmologic finding was minimal pupillary reaction to light 
(25%). Patients in category 2 had significantly more ocular surface 
abnormalities than patients in category 1, including a greater proportion of 
conjunctival injection (P = 0.003), conjunctival corkscrew vessels (P < 0.001), 
corneal scarring (P = 0.01) and pingueculae under the age of 50 (P = 0.02). 
Meanwhile, patients in category 1 had a higher proportion of poorly reactive 
pupils (P < 0.001) and abnormal ocular movements (P = 0.03) compared with those 
in category 2. Five patients (6%) presented to ophthalmologists with ocular 
surface signs related to XP, before any formal diagnosis of XP was made.
CONCLUSIONS: A large proportion of XP patients have ocular involvement. Regular 
examination by an ophthalmologist is essential, especially in screening for 
eyelid and ocular surface tumors. The ocular phenotype-genotype segregation 
within XP patients suggests that XP is a heterogeneous and complex disease. With 
further study, we hope to offer these patients more individualized patient care.

Copyright © 2017 American Academy of Ophthalmology. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2017.04.031
PMID: 28554534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]