---
reference_id: "PMID:35821434"
title: "Pediatric pineal region tumors: institutional experience of surgical managements with posterior interhemispheric transtentorial approach."
authors:
- Tomita T
- Alden TD
- Dipatri AJ
journal: Childs Nerv Syst
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00381-022-05595-4
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- "Pinealoma/surgery, pathology"
- Retrospective Studies
- Brain Neoplasms/surgery
- Pineal Gland/surgery
- "Postoperative Complications/epidemiology, etiology"
- Teratoma
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric pineal region tumors: institutional experience of surgical managements with posterior interhemispheric transtentorial approach.
**Authors:** Tomita T, Alden TD, Dipatri AJ
**Journal:** Childs Nerv Syst (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00381-022-05595-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00381-022-05595-4)

## Content

1. Childs Nerv Syst. 2023 Sep;39(9):2293-2305. doi: 10.1007/s00381-022-05595-4. 
Epub 2022 Jul 11.

Pediatric pineal region tumors: institutional experience of surgical managements 
with posterior interhemispheric transtentorial approach.

Tomita T(1), Alden TD(2), Dipatri AJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, Division of Pediatric Neurosurgery, Ann & 
Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Northwestern University Feinberg 
School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA. ttomita@luriechildrens.org.
(2)Department of Neurological Surgery, Division of Pediatric Neurosurgery, Ann & 
Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Northwestern University Feinberg 
School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.

PURPOSE: Resecting pineal region tumors in children is often challenging. 
Several approaches have been proposed and practiced. A personal series of 
pediatric pineal region tumors resected through craniotomy with posterior 
interhemispheric occipital transtentorial (OT) approach are reviewed. We present 
the surgical techniques, pitfalls, and their results.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Eighty patients ranging in age from 3 months to 21 years 
old, and treated over 3 decades were reviewed. Hydrocephalus caused the main 
presenting symptoms and was noted in 74 patients. It was treated prior to the 
craniotomy for tumor resection with endoscopic third ventriculostomy (ETV) in 
33, external ventricular drainage in 26, and precraniotomy shunt in 15. Nine 
patients had ETV together with endoscopic biopsy. All patients had a 
parieto-occipital craniotomy in a prone position. Through a tentorial section, a 
gross total resection of the tumor was attempted except for germinomas.
RESULTS: The tumor pathology showed 32 germ cell tumors (GCT), 22 benign 
astrocytomas, 13 pineal parenchymal tumors, 5 ATRTs, 3 papillary tumors, and 5 
others. Of GCTs, 18 were teratomas. The extent of resection consisted of 55 
gross total resections, 13 subtotal resections, 10 partial, and 2 biopsies with 
one postoperative death. Hemiparesis in 2, cerebellar ataxia in another 2, and 
hemiballismus in 1 were transient and improved over time. One had permanent 
hemisensory loss and another patient had bilateral oculomotor palsy. 
Postoperative homonymous hemianopia occurred in 2 patients but subsided over a 
short period of time. Parinaud's sign was noted in 24 patients, of which 16 were 
transient.
CONCLUSION: The posterior interhemispheric OT approach provides a safe route and 
comfortable access to the pineal region in children. A great majority of 
postoperative neurological complications are the results of direct manipulations 
of the midbrain at tumor resection. Identification and preservation of the 
tumor-brain interface are of paramount importance. GCTs other than teratomas are 
treated with neoadjuvant chemotherapy and may eliminate the need for craniotomy. 
Exophytic midbrain JPAs are amenable to resection.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00381-022-05595-4
PMCID: PMC10432319
PMID: 35821434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.