---
reference_id: "PMID:19267933"
title: Jacobsen syndrome.
authors:
- Mattina T
- Perrotta CS
- Grossfeld P
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-4-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Jacobsen syndrome.
**Authors:** Mattina T, Perrotta CS, Grossfeld P
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-4-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-4-9)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2009 Mar 7;4:9. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-4-9.

Jacobsen syndrome.

Mattina T(1), Perrotta CS, Grossfeld P.

Author information:
(1)Genetica Medica, Department of Pediatrics, University of Catania, Catania, 
Italy. mattina@unict.it

Jacobsen syndrome is a MCA/MR contiguous gene syndrome caused by partial 
deletion of the long arm of chromosome 11. To date, over 200 cases have been 
reported. The prevalence has been estimated at 1/100,000 births, with a 
female/male ratio 2:1. The most common clinical features include pre- and 
postnatal physical growth retardation, psychomotor retardation, and 
characteristic facial dysmorphism (skull deformities, hypertelorism, ptosis, 
coloboma, downslanting palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds, broad nasal bridge, 
short nose, v-shaped mouth, small ears, low set posteriorly rotated ears). 
Abnormal platelet function, thrombocytopenia or pancytopenia are usually present 
at birth. Patients commonly have malformations of the heart, kidney, 
gastrointestinal tract, genitalia, central nervous system and skeleton. Ocular, 
hearing, immunological and hormonal problems may be also present. The deletion 
size ranges from approximately 7 to 20 Mb, with the proximal breakpoint within 
or telomeric to subband 11q23.3 and the deletion extending usually to the 
telomere. The deletion is de novo in 85% of reported cases, and in 15% of cases 
it results from an unbalanced segregation of a familial balanced translocation 
or from other chromosome rearrangements. In a minority of cases the breakpoint 
is at the FRA11B fragile site. Diagnosis is based on clinical findings 
(intellectual deficit, facial dysmorphic features and thrombocytopenia) and 
confirmed by cytogenetics analysis. Differential diagnoses include Turner and 
Noonan syndromes, and acquired thrombocytopenia due to sepsis. Prenatal 
diagnosis of 11q deletion is possible by amniocentesis or chorionic villus 
sampling and cytogenetic analysis. Management is multi-disciplinary and requires 
evaluation by general pediatrician, pediatric cardiologist, neurologist, 
ophthalmologist. Auditory tests, blood tests, endocrine and immunological 
assessment and follow-up should be offered to all patients. Cardiac 
malformations can be very severe and require heart surgery in the neonatal 
period. Newborns with Jacobsen syndrome may have difficulties in feeding and 
tube feeding may be necessary. Special attention should be devoted due to 
hematological problems. About 20% of children die during the first two years of 
life, most commonly related to complications from congenital heart disease, and 
less commonly from bleeding. For patients who survive the neonatal period and 
infancy, the life expectancy remains unknown.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-4-9
PMCID: PMC2670819
PMID: 19267933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]