---
reference_id: "PMID:35577615"
title: Numerical simulation of the transport of nanoparticles as drug carriers in hydromagnetic blood flow through a diseased artery with vessel wall permeability and rheological effects.
authors:
- Tripathi J
- Vasu B
- Bég OA
- Mounika BR
- Gorla RSR
journal: Microvasc Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.mvr.2022.104375
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Numerical simulation of the transport of nanoparticles as drug carriers in hydromagnetic blood flow through a diseased artery with vessel wall permeability and rheological effects.
**Authors:** Tripathi J, Vasu B, Bég OA, Mounika BR, Gorla RSR
**Journal:** Microvasc Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mvr.2022.104375](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mvr.2022.104375)

## Content

1. Microvasc Res. 2022 Jul;142:104375. doi: 10.1016/j.mvr.2022.104375. Epub 2022 
May 14.

Numerical simulation of the transport of nanoparticles as drug carriers in 
hydromagnetic blood flow through a diseased artery with vessel wall permeability 
and rheological effects.

Tripathi J(1), Vasu B(2), Bég OA(3), Mounika BR(4), Gorla RSR(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics, Motilal Nehru National Institute of Technology 
Allahabad, Prayagraj, Uttar Pradesh 211004, India.
(2)Department of Mathematics, Motilal Nehru National Institute of Technology 
Allahabad, Prayagraj, Uttar Pradesh 211004, India. Electronic address: 
bvasu@mnnit.ac.in.
(3)Department of Mechanical and Aeronautical Engineering, School of Science, 
Engineering and Environment (SEE), Newton Building, Salford University, 
Manchester M54WT, UK.
(4)Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, National Institute 
of Technology Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu 620015, India.
(5)Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Air Force Institute of 
Technology, Wright Patterson Air Force Base, Dayton, OH 45433, USA.

Erratum for
    Microvasc Res. 2022 Jan;139:104241. doi: 10.1016/j.mvr.2021.104241.

The present study considers the mathematical modelling of unsteady non-Newtonian 
hydro-magnetic nano-hemodynamics through a rigid cylindrical artery featuring 
two different stenoses (composite and irregular). The Ostwald-De Waele power-law 
fluid model is adopted to simulate the non-Newtonian characteristics of blood. 
Inspired by drug delivery applications for cardiovascular treatments, blood is 
considered doped with a homogenous suspension of biocompatible nanoparticles. 
The arterial vessel exhibits the permeability effect (lateral influx/efflux), 
and an external magnetic field is also applied in the radial direction to the 
flow. A combination of the Buongiorno and Tiwari-Das nanoscale models is 
adopted. The strongly nonlinear nature of the governing equations requires a 
robust numerical method, and therefore the finite difference technique is 
deployed to solve the resulting equations. Validation of solutions for the pure 
blood case (absence of nanoparticles) is included. Comprehensive solutions are 
presented for shear-thickening (n = 1.5) and shear-thinning (n = 0.5) blood flow 
for the effects of crucial nanoscale thermophysical, solutal parameters, and 
hydrodynamic parameters. Comparison of profiles (velocity, temperature, wall 
shear stress, and flow rate) is also made for composite and irregular stenosis. 
Colour visualization of streamline plots is included for pure blood and nano 
mediated blood both with and without applied magnetic field. The inclusion of 
nanoparticles (Cu/blood) within blood increases the axial velocity of blood. By 
applying external magnetic field in the radial direction, axial velocity is 
significantly damped whereas much less dramatic alterations are computed in 
blood temperature and concentration profiles. The simulations are relevant to 
the diffusion of nano-drugs in magnetic targeted treatment of stenosed arterial 
diseases.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mvr.2022.104375
PMID: 35577615