---
reference_id: "PMID:36990432"
title: Cytokine Storm Syndromes in Pediatric Patients.
authors:
- Diorio C
- Teachey DT
- Canna SW
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaip.2023.03.033
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cytokine Storm Syndromes in Pediatric Patients.
**Authors:** Diorio C, Teachey DT, Canna SW
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaip.2023.03.033](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaip.2023.03.033)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2023 Jun;11(6):1636-1644. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2023.03.033. Epub 2023 Mar 27.

Cytokine Storm Syndromes in Pediatric Patients.

Diorio C(1), Teachey DT(2), Canna SW(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, Pa; Immune Dysregulation Frontier Program, Department of 
Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania 
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pa. Electronic address: 
diorioc@chop.edu.
(2)Division of Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, Pa; Immune Dysregulation Frontier Program, Department of 
Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania 
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pa.
(3)Immune Dysregulation Frontier Program, Department of Pediatrics, Children's 
Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pa; Division of Rheumatology, Department of Pediatrics, 
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School 
of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pa.

Cytokine storm syndromes (CSS) represent a diverse group of disorders 
characterized by severe overactivation of the immune system. In the majority of 
patients, CSS arise from a combination of host factors, including genetic risk 
and predisposing conditions, and acute triggers such as infections. CSS present 
differently in adults than in children, who are more likely to present with 
monogenic forms of these disorders. Individual CSS are rare, but in aggregate 
represent an important cause of severe illness in both children and adults. We 
present 3 rare, illustrative cases of CSS in pediatric patients 
that describe the spectrum of CSS.

Copyright © 2023 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2023.03.033
PMID: 36990432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]