---
reference_id: "PMID:39138440"
title: "Comorbidity of binge eating disorder and other psychiatric disorders: a systematic review."
authors:
- Kowalewska E
- Bzowska M
- Engel J
- Lew-Starowicz M
journal: BMC Psychiatry
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12888-024-05943-5
keywords:
- Humans
- "Binge-Eating Disorder/epidemiology, psychology"
- Comorbidity
- Mental Disorders/epidemiology
- Substance-Related Disorders/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comorbidity of binge eating disorder and other psychiatric disorders: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Kowalewska E, Bzowska M, Engel J, Lew-Starowicz M
**Journal:** BMC Psychiatry (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12888-024-05943-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-024-05943-5)

## Content

1. BMC Psychiatry. 2024 Aug 13;24(1):556. doi: 10.1186/s12888-024-05943-5.

Comorbidity of binge eating disorder and other psychiatric disorders: a 
systematic review.

Kowalewska E(1), Bzowska M(2), Engel J(3), Lew-Starowicz M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Centre of Postgraduate Medical Education, Warsaw, 
Poland. ewelina.kowalewska@cmkp.edu.pl.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Centre of Postgraduate Medical Education, Warsaw, 
Poland.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Social Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Division of 
Clinical Psychology and Sexual Medicine, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, 
Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Binge eating disorder (BED), although relatively recently recognized 
as a distinct clinical syndrome, is the most common eating disorder. BED can 
occur as a separate phenomenon or in combination with other mental disorders, 
adding to the overall burden of the illness. Due to the relatively short history 
of recognizing BED as a distinct disorder, this review aimed to summarize the 
current knowledge on the co-occurrence of BED with other psychiatric disorders.
METHOD: This review adhered to the PRISMA guidelines. Multiple databases, such 
as MEDLINE, MEDLINE Complete, and Academic Search Ultimate, were used to 
identify relevant studies. Of the 3766 articles initially identified, 63 
articles published within the last 13 years were included in this review. This 
systematic review has been registered through INPLASY (INPLASY202370075).
RESULTS: The most frequently observed comorbidities associated with BED were 
mood disorders, anxiety disorders and substance use disorders. They were also 
related to more severe BED presentations. Other psychiatric conditions 
frequently associated with BED include reaction to severe stress and adjustment 
disorders, impulse control disorder, ADHD, personality disorders, behavioral 
disorders, disorders of bodily distress or bodily experience, and psychotic 
disorders. Additionally, BED was linked to suicidality and sleep disorders.
DISCUSSION: The findings highlight the interconnected nature of BED with various 
psychiatric conditions and related factors, shedding light on the complexity and 
broader impact of BED on mental health and the need for appropriate screening 
and appropriately targeted clinical interventions.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12888-024-05943-5
PMCID: PMC11323383
PMID: 39138440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.