---
reference_id: "PMID:33305448"
title: Phonophobia and brainstem excitability in migraine.
authors:
- Kalita J
- Misra UK
- Bansal R
journal: Eur J Neurosci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/ejn.15078
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phonophobia and brainstem excitability in migraine.
**Authors:** Kalita J, Misra UK, Bansal R
**Journal:** Eur J Neurosci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ejn.15078](https://doi.org/10.1111/ejn.15078)

## Content

1. Eur J Neurosci. 2021 Mar;53(6):1988-1997. doi: 10.1111/ejn.15078. Epub 2020
Dec  30.

Phonophobia and brainstem excitability in migraine.

Kalita J(1), Misra UK(1), Bansal R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Lucknow, India.

Phonophobia in migraineurs may be due to lower hearing threshold (HT) and higher 
brainstem neuronal excitability. We report the correlation of phonophobia in 
migraineurs with HT, brain stem auditory evoked potential (BAEP) findings, and 
auditory triggers. Sixty-one migraineurs and 101 controls were included for HT, 
of whom 59 migraineurs and 31 controls had BAEP studies. Clinical details, 
migraine triggers, and headache frequency were noted. Hearing threshold was 
measured, and amplitudes of waves I to V of BAEP studies were measured. 
Migraineurs had lower HT compared with controls (41.61 ± 5.25 versus 
45.39 ± 6.26 dB; p < 0.001) especially in chronic migraine (40.24 ± 4.81; 
p < 0.001). Hearing threshold correlated with headache frequency (p < 0.05) and 
auditory, visual, and tactile (p < 0.05) triggers. Hearing threshold was lower 
during headache (p < 0.001). Wave II, III, and IV amplitudes of BAEP were higher 
in migraineurs than the controls. Wave II (p < 0.05) and III (p < 0.05) 
amplitudes correlated with HT. Migraineurs have lower HT, especially in those 
having chronic migraine, ictal HT recording, and multiple sensory triggers. 
Higher amplitudes of BAEP waves in migraineurs and their relationship with the 
frequency of headache and HT suggest the sensitization of brainstem auditory 
neurons.

© 2020 Federation of European Neuroscience Societies and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ejn.15078
PMID: 33305448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]