---
reference_id: "PMID:34606885"
title: Systemic Collagen VII Replacement Therapy for Advanced Recessive Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa.
authors:
- Gretzmeier C
- Pin D
- Kern JS
- Chen M
- Woodley DT
- Bruckner-Tuderman L
- de Souza MP
- Nyström A
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jid.2021.09.008
keywords:
- Animals
- Collagen Type VII/metabolism
- Dogs
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa Dystrophica/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- Fibrosis
- Mice
- Skin/pathology
- Transforming Growth Factor beta/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systemic Collagen VII Replacement Therapy for Advanced Recessive Dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa.
**Authors:** Gretzmeier C, Pin D, Kern JS, Chen M, Woodley DT, Bruckner-Tuderman L, de Souza MP, Nyström A
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jid.2021.09.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jid.2021.09.008)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 2022 Apr;142(4):1094-1102.e3. doi:
10.1016/j.jid.2021.09.008.  Epub 2021 Oct 2.

Systemic Collagen VII Replacement Therapy for Advanced Recessive Dystrophic 
Epidermolysis Bullosa.

Gretzmeier C(1), Pin D(2), Kern JS(3), Chen M(4), Woodley DT(4), 
Bruckner-Tuderman L(1), de Souza MP(5), Nyström A(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine and Medical Center, University 
of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(2)UPSP 2016.A104, VetAgro Sup, Univeristy of Lyon, Marcy l'Étoile, France.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine and Medical Center, University 
of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany; Dermatology Department, Faculty of Medicine, 
Dentistry and Health Sciences, The Royal Melbourne Hospital, The University of 
Melbourne, Parkville, Australia.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Keck School of Medicine of USC, University of 
Southern California, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(5)Phoenix Tissue Repair, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine and Medical Center, University 
of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany; Freiburg Institute for Advanced Studies (FRIAS), 
University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. Electronic address: 
alexander.nystroem@uniklinik-freiburg.de.

Recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB) is a genetic skin blistering 
disease associated with progressive multiorgan fibrosis. RDEB is caused by 
biallelic mutations in COL7A1 encoding the extracellular matrix protein collagen 
VII (C7), which is necessary for epidermal‒dermal adherence. C7 is not simply a 
structural protein but also has multiple functions, including the regulation of 
TGFβ bioavailability and the inhibition of skin scarring. Intravenous (IV) 
administration of recombinant C7 (rC7) rescues C7-deficient mice from neonatal 
lethality. However, the effect on established RDEB has not been determined. In 
this study, we used small and large adult RDEB animal models to investigate the 
disease-modulating abilities of IV rC7 on established RDEB. In adult RDEB mice, 
rC7 accumulated at the basement membrane zone in multiple organs after a single 
infusion. Fortnightly IV injections of rC7 for 7 weeks in adult RDEB mice 
reduced fibrosis of skin and eye. The fibrosis-delaying effect was associated 
with a reduction of TGFβ signaling. IV rC7 in adult RDEB dogs incorporated in 
the dermal‒epidermal junction of skin and improved disease by promoting wound 
healing and reducing dermal‒epidermal separation. In both species, IV C7 was 
well-tolerated. These preclinical studies suggest that repeated IV 
administration of rC7 is an option for systemic treatment of established adult 
RDEB.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jid.2021.09.008
PMID: 34606885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]