---
reference_id: "PMID:38098067"
title: "Parkinson's disease and gut microbiota: from clinical to mechanistic and therapeutic studies."
authors:
- Zhang X
- Tang B
- Guo J
journal: Transl Neurodegener
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s40035-023-00392-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Parkinson's disease and gut microbiota: from clinical to mechanistic and therapeutic studies.
**Authors:** Zhang X, Tang B, Guo J
**Journal:** Transl Neurodegener (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40035-023-00392-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40035-023-00392-8)

## Content

1. Transl Neurodegener. 2023 Dec 15;12(1):59. doi: 10.1186/s40035-023-00392-8.

Parkinson's disease and gut microbiota: from clinical to mechanistic and 
therapeutic studies.

Zhang X(1), Tang B(1)(2)(3)(4)(5)(6), Guo J(7)(8)(9)(10)(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, 410008, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Hunan Province in Neurodegenerative Disorders, Central 
South University, Changsha, 410008, China.
(3)Hunan International Scientific and Technological Cooperation Base of 
Neurodegenerative and Neurogenetic Diseases, Changsha, 410008, China.
(4)Center for Medical Genetics and Hunan Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, 
School of Life Sciences, Central South University, Changsha, 410008, China.
(5)Engineering Research Center of Hunan Province in Cognitive Impairment 
Disorders, Central South University, Changsha, 410008, China.
(6)National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric Disorders, Xiangya Hospital, 
Central South University, Changsha, 410008, China.
(7)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, 410008, China. guojifeng@csu.edu.cn.
(8)Key Laboratory of Hunan Province in Neurodegenerative Disorders, Central 
South University, Changsha, 410008, China. guojifeng@csu.edu.cn.
(9)Hunan International Scientific and Technological Cooperation Base of 
Neurodegenerative and Neurogenetic Diseases, Changsha, 410008, China. 
guojifeng@csu.edu.cn.
(10)Center for Medical Genetics and Hunan Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, 
School of Life Sciences, Central South University, Changsha, 410008, China. 
guojifeng@csu.edu.cn.
(11)Engineering Research Center of Hunan Province in Cognitive Impairment 
Disorders, Central South University, Changsha, 410008, China. 
guojifeng@csu.edu.cn.
(12)National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric Disorders, Xiangya Hospital, 
Central South University, Changsha, 410008, China. guojifeng@csu.edu.cn.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is one of the most prevalent neurodegenerative 
diseases. The typical symptomatology of PD includes motor symptoms; however, a 
range of nonmotor symptoms, such as intestinal issues, usually occur before the 
motor symptoms. Various microorganisms inhabiting the gastrointestinal tract can 
profoundly influence the physiopathology of the central nervous system through 
neurological, endocrine, and immune system pathways involved in the 
microbiota-gut-brain axis. In addition, extensive evidence suggests that the gut 
microbiota is strongly associated with PD. This review summarizes the latest 
findings on microbial changes in PD and their clinical relevance, describes the 
underlying mechanisms through which intestinal bacteria may mediate PD, and 
discusses the correlations between gut microbes and anti-PD drugs. In addition, 
this review outlines the status of research on microbial therapies for PD and 
the future directions of PD-gut microbiota research.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40035-023-00392-8
PMCID: PMC10722742
PMID: 38098067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.