---
reference_id: "PMID:30511354"
title: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis of long clinical course clinically presenting with progressive muscular atrophy.
authors:
- Matsubara T
- Oda M
- Takahashi T
- Watanabe C
- Tachiyama Y
- Morino H
- Kawakami H
- Kaji R
- Maruyama H
- Murayama S
- Izumi Y
journal: Neuropathology
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1111/neup.12523
keywords:
- "Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/complications, metabolism, pathology"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Humans
- Inclusion Bodies/metabolism
- Middle Aged
- "Muscular Atrophy, Spinal/complications, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis of long clinical course clinically presenting with progressive muscular atrophy.
**Authors:** Matsubara T, Oda M, Takahashi T, Watanabe C, Tachiyama Y, Morino H, Kawakami H, Kaji R, Maruyama H, Murayama S, Izumi Y
**Journal:** Neuropathology (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1111/neup.12523](https://doi.org/10.1111/neup.12523)

## Content

1. Neuropathology. 2019 Feb;39(1):47-53. doi: 10.1111/neup.12523. Epub 2018 Dec
3.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis of long clinical course clinically presenting with 
progressive muscular atrophy.

Matsubara T(1)(2)(3), Oda M(1), Takahashi T(2), Watanabe C(4), Tachiyama Y(5), 
Morino H(6), Kawakami H(6), Kaji R(7), Maruyama H(2), Murayama S(3), Izumi 
Y(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mifukai Vihara Hananosato Hospital, Hiroshima, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Clinical Neuroscience and Therapeutics, Hiroshima University 
Graduate School of Biomedical and Health Sciences, Hiroshima, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology and Neuropathology (Brain Bank for Aging Research), 
Tokyo Metropolitan Geriatric Hospital & Institute of Gerontology, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization Hiroshima-Nishi 
Medical Center, Hiroshima, Japan.
(5)Department of Clinical Laboratory, National Hospital Organization 
Hiroshima-Nishi Medical Center, Hiroshima, Japan.
(6)Department of Epidemiology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and 
Medicine, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.
(7)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, 
Tokushima University Graduate School, Tokushima, Japan.

Erratum in
    Neuropathology. 2020 Apr;40(2):211. doi: 10.1111/neup.12657.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) primarily affects upper and lower motor 
neurons. Phosphorylated trans-activation response DNA-binding protein of 43 kDa 
(TDP-43) inclusion bodies are reportedly a pathological hallmark of sporadic 
ALS. Here, we present an atypical case of sporadic ALS that progressed very 
slowly, persisted for 19 years, and clinically appeared to only affect the lower 
motor neurons; however, upper motor neuron degeneration was detected at autopsy. 
Furthermore, no inclusion bodies positive for phosphorylated TDP-43, ubiquitin, 
fused in sarcoma, or superoxide dismutase-1 were detected in the central nervous 
system. We performed exome-sequencing data analysis but found no genetic 
disorders. This was therefore an unusual case of lower motor neuron-predominant 
ALS without TDP-43 pathology or known gene-disease associations. We also 
reviewed autopsied ALS cases that progressed slowly and had no phosphorylated 
TDP-43 or ubiquitin-positive inclusions and present the clinicopathological 
features of such cases. Based on these results, there may be a sporadic ALS 
subgroup that progresses slowly and shows no accumulation of phosphorylated 
TDP-43.

© 2018 Japanese Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/neup.12523
PMID: 30511354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]