---
reference_id: "PMID:30157389"
title: Emicizumab Prophylaxis in Patients Who Have Hemophilia A without Inhibitors.
authors:
- Mahlangu J
- Oldenburg J
- Paz-Priel I
- Negrier C
- Niggli M
- Mancuso ME
- Schmitt C
- Jiménez-Yuste V
- Kempton C
- Dhalluin C
- Callaghan MU
- Bujan W
- Shima M
- Adamkewicz JI
- Asikanius E
- Levy GG
- Kruse-Jarres R
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1803550
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Emicizumab Prophylaxis in Patients Who Have Hemophilia A without Inhibitors.
**Authors:** Mahlangu J, Oldenburg J, Paz-Priel I, Negrier C, Niggli M, Mancuso ME, Schmitt C, Jiménez-Yuste V, Kempton C, Dhalluin C, Callaghan MU, Bujan W, Shima M, Adamkewicz JI, Asikanius E, Levy GG, Kruse-Jarres R
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1803550](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1803550)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2018 Aug 30;379(9):811-822. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1803550.

Emicizumab Prophylaxis in Patients Who Have Hemophilia A without Inhibitors.

Mahlangu J(1), Oldenburg J(1), Paz-Priel I(1), Negrier C(1), Niggli M(1), 
Mancuso ME(1), Schmitt C(1), Jiménez-Yuste V(1), Kempton C(1), Dhalluin C(1), 
Callaghan MU(1), Bujan W(1), Shima M(1), Adamkewicz JI(1), Asikanius E(1), Levy 
GG(1), Kruse-Jarres R(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Haemophilia Comprehensive Care Centre, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
University of the Witwatersrand and National Health Laboratory Service, 
Johannesburg (J.M.); Universitätsklinikum Bonn, Bonn, Germany (J.O.); Genentech, 
South San Francisco, CA (I.P.-P., J.I.A., G.G.L.); Louis Pradel University 
Hospital, Lyon, France (C.N.); F. Hoffmann-La Roche, Basel, Switzerland (M.N., 
C.S., C.D., E.A.); Angelo Bianchi Bonomi Hemophilia and Thrombosis Center, 
Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan (M.E.M.); the 
Hematology Department, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Autónoma University, 
Madrid (V.J.-Y.); the Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Emory 
School of Medicine, Atlanta (C.K.); Children's Hospital of Michigan, Detroit 
(M.U.C.); Instituto Costarricense de Investigaciones Científicas, San José, 
Costa Rica (W.B.); the Department of Pediatrics, Nara Medical University, 
Kashihara, Japan (M.S.); and the Washington Center for Bleeding Disorders at 
Bloodworks Northwest, Seattle (R.K.-J.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2018 Aug 30;379(9):880-882. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1808789.

BACKGROUND: Emicizumab is a bispecific monoclonal antibody that bridges 
activated factor IX and factor X to replace the function of missing activated 
factor VIII, thereby restoring hemostasis. In a phase 3, multicenter trial, we 
investigated its use as prophylaxis in persons who have hemophilia A without 
factor VIII inhibitors.
METHODS: We randomly assigned, in a 2:2:1 ratio, participants 12 years of age or 
older who had been receiving episodic treatment with factor VIII to receive a 
subcutaneous maintenance dose of emicizumab of 1.5 mg per kilogram of body 
weight per week (group A) or 3.0 mg per kilogram every 2 weeks (group B) or no 
prophylaxis (group C). The primary end point was the difference in rates of 
treated bleeding (group A vs. group C and group B vs. group C). Participants who 
had been receiving factor VIII prophylaxis received emicizumab at a maintenance 
dose of 1.5 mg per kilogram per week (group D); intraindividual comparisons were 
performed in those who had participated in a noninterventional study.
RESULTS: A total of 152 participants were enrolled. The annualized bleeding rate 
was 1.5 events (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.9 to 2.5) in group A and 1.3 
events (95% CI, 0.8 to 2.3) in group B, as compared with 38.2 events (95% CI, 
22.9 to 63.8) in group C; thus, the rate was 96% lower in group A and 97% lower 
in group B (P<0.001 for both comparisons). A total of 56% of the participants in 
group A and 60% of those in group B had no treated bleeding events, as compared 
with those in group C, who all had treated bleeding events. In the 
intraindividual comparison involving 48 participants, emicizumab prophylaxis 
resulted in an annualized bleeding rate that was 68% lower than the rate with 
previous factor VIII prophylaxis (P<0.001). The most frequent adverse event was 
low-grade injection-site reaction. There were no thrombotic or thrombotic 
microangiopathy events, development of antidrug antibodies, or new development 
of factor VIII inhibitors.
CONCLUSIONS: Emicizumab prophylaxis administered subcutaneously once weekly or 
every 2 weeks led to a significantly lower bleeding rate than no prophylaxis 
among persons with hemophilia A without inhibitors; more than half the 
participants who received prophylaxis had no treated bleeding events. In an 
intraindividual comparison, emicizumab therapy led to a significantly lower 
bleeding rate than previous factor VIII prophylaxis. (Funded by F. Hoffmann-La 
Roche and Chugai Pharmaceutical; HAVEN 3 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02847637 
.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1803550
PMID: 30157389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]