---
reference_id: "PMID:38905377"
title: "Pure 46, XY gonadal dysgenesis and 46, XY complete androgen insensitivity syndrome: A case report."
authors:
- Yu T
- Liu L
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000038297
keywords:
- Humans
- "Androgen-Insensitivity Syndrome/genetics, diagnosis, complications"
- "Gonadal Dysgenesis, 46,XY/genetics, diagnosis"
- "Gonadoblastoma/genetics, diagnosis, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pure 46, XY gonadal dysgenesis and 46, XY complete androgen insensitivity syndrome: A case report.
**Authors:** Yu T, Liu L
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000038297](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000038297)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2024 Jun 21;103(25):e38297. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000038297.

Pure 46, XY gonadal dysgenesis and 46, XY complete androgen insensitivity 
syndrome: A case report.

Yu T(1), Liu L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, West China Xiamen Hospital of 
Sichuan University, Xiamen, China.
(2)Department of Emergency, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jiamusi University, 
Jiamusi, Heilongjiang, China.

BACKGROUND: Disorders of sex development (DSD) are congenital conditions 
characterized by atypical development of chromosomal, gonadal, and phenotypic 
sex. 46, XY DSD can result from disorders of testicular development or androgen 
synthesis.
METHODS: We present 2 rare cases of 46, XY DSD, specifically XY pure gonadal 
dysgenesis and complete androgen insensitivity syndrome.
RESULTS: Both cases underwent prophylactic gonadectomy due to the elevated risk 
of gonadal malignancy. Bilateral gonadoblastoma and dysgerminoma were diagnosed 
on one side, while Leydig cell hyperplasia and only Sertoli cells were diagnosed 
in the seminiferous tubules on both sides. The normal menstruation for the pure 
gonadal dysgenesis patient only as CAIS patients never menstruate. Estrogen 
replacement therapy was administered periodically to promote the development of 
secondary sexual characteristics and menstruation in pure gonadal dysgenesis 
case, as well as to prevent osteoporosis. Follow-up examinations revealed no 
tumor recurrence, and the patient with Swyer syndrome had regular menstrual 
cycles.
CONCLUSION: Laparoscopic bilateral prophylactic gonadectomy and long-term 
hormone therapy with patient counseling and support are recommended.

Copyright © 2024 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000038297
PMCID: PMC11191977
PMID: 38905377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors have no funding and conflicts of 
interest to disclose.