---
reference_id: "PMID:38910565"
title: Mechanism of neutrophil extracellular traps in the pathogenesis of gout.
authors:
- Chen T
- Zhou J
- Dang W
journal: Clin Exp Rheumatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.55563/clinexprheumatol/ezzfbt
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanism of neutrophil extracellular traps in the pathogenesis of gout.
**Authors:** Chen T, Zhou J, Dang W
**Journal:** Clin Exp Rheumatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.55563/clinexprheumatol/ezzfbt](https://doi.org/10.55563/clinexprheumatol/ezzfbt)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2024 Nov;42(11):2272-2279. doi: 
10.55563/clinexprheumatol/ezzfbt. Epub 2024 Jun 19.

Mechanism of neutrophil extracellular traps in the pathogenesis of gout.

Chen T(1), Zhou J(1), Dang W(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Clinical Medical College, The 
First Affiliated Hospital of Chengdu Medical College, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(2)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Clinical Medical College, The 
First Affiliated Hospital of Chengdu Medical College, Chengdu, Sichuan, China. 
dwtdwt123-dwt@163.com.

Gout is a self-limited inflammatory disease caused by the deposition of 
monosodium urate (MSU) crystals in joints and surrounding tissues due to 
abnormal purine metabolism. Neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) are formed by 
neutrophils in response to pathogen attack. During gout, NETs induced by MSU 
crystals exacerbate inflammation, and aggregated NETs (aggNETs) promote the 
resolution of gout-associated inflammation by encapsulating MSU crystals, 
degrading cytokines and chemokines, and blocking the recruitment and activation 
of neutrophils. With disease progression, NETs participate in the formation of 
tophi. Therefore, aggNETs are a possible mechanism of spontaneous gout 
regression. Studying the specific mechanism by which NETs affect inflammatory 
bursts and spontaneous regression in gout patients is important. This review 
summarises the role of NETs in different stages of gout and the specific 
pathogenesis of NETs in gout to provide new ideas for the diagnosis and 
treatment of gout.

DOI: 10.55563/clinexprheumatol/ezzfbt
PMID: 38910565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]