---
reference_id: "PMID:37656291"
title: "Hypokalemic periodic paralysis: a 3-year follow-up study."
authors:
- Holm-Yildiz S
- Krag T
- Witting N
- Pedersen BS
- Dysgaard T
- Sloth L
- Pedersen J
- Kjær R
- Kannuberg L
- Dahlqvist J
- de Stricker Borch J
- Solheim T
- Fornander F
- Eisum AS
- Vissing J
journal: J Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-023-11964-z
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- Female
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- Hypokalemic Periodic Paralysis/genetics
- Follow-Up Studies
- Mutation/genetics
- Muscle Weakness
- Paralysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypokalemic periodic paralysis: a 3-year follow-up study.
**Authors:** Holm-Yildiz S, Krag T, Witting N, Pedersen BS, Dysgaard T, Sloth L, Pedersen J, Kjær R, Kannuberg L, Dahlqvist J, de Stricker Borch J, Solheim T, Fornander F, Eisum AS, Vissing J
**Journal:** J Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-023-11964-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-023-11964-z)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2023 Dec;270(12):6057-6063. doi: 10.1007/s00415-023-11964-z. Epub
2023  Sep 1.

Hypokalemic periodic paralysis: a 3-year follow-up study.

Holm-Yildiz S(1), Krag T(2), Witting N(2), Pedersen BS(2), Dysgaard T(2), Sloth
L(2), Pedersen J(2), Kjær R(2), Kannuberg L(2), Dahlqvist J(2), de Stricker
Borch J(2), Solheim T(2), Fornander F(2), Eisum AS(2), Vissing J(2).

Author information:
(1)Copenhagen Neuromuscular Center, Department of Neurology 8077,
Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Inge Lehmanns Vej 8, 2100, Copenhagen,
Denmark. Sonja.desiree.holm-yildiz@regionh.dk.
(2)Copenhagen Neuromuscular Center, Department of Neurology 8077,
Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Inge Lehmanns Vej 8, 2100, Copenhagen,
Denmark.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Primary hypokalemic periodic paralysis (HypoPP) is an
inherited channelopathy most commonly caused by mutations in CACNA1S. HypoPP can
present with different phenotypes: periodic paralysis (PP), permanent muscle
weakness (PW), and mixed weakness (MW) with both periodic and permanent
weakness. Little is known about the natural history of HypoPP.
METHODS: In this 3-year follow-up study, we used the MRC scale for manual muscle
strength testing and whole-body muscle MRI (Mercuri score) to assess disease
progression in individuals with HypoPP-causing mutations in CACNA1S.
RESULTS: We included 25 men (mean age 43 years, range 18-76 years) and 12 women
(mean age 42 years, range 18-76 years). Two participants were asymptomatic, 21
had PP, 12 MW, and two PW. The median number of months between baseline and
follow-up was 42 (range 26-52). Muscle strength declined in 11 patients during
follow-up. Four of the patients with a decline in muscle strength had no attacks
of paralysis during follow-up, and two of these patients had never had attacks
of paralysis. Fat replacement of muscles increased in 27 patients during
follow-up. Eight of the patients with increased fat replacement had no attacks
of paralysis during follow-up, and two of these patients had never had attacks
of paralysis.
DISCUSSION: The study demonstrates that HypoPP can be a progressive myopathy in
both patients with and without attacks of paralysis.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-023-11964-z
PMCID: PMC10632268
PMID: 37656291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest.
