---
reference_id: "PMID:39126928"
title: "Intestinal occlusion revealing Peutz Jeghers syndrome: A rare case report."
authors:
- Mabrouk MY
- Guelil A
- Bouzayan L
- Slimi Y
- Jabi R
- Bouziane M
journal: Int J Surg Case Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2024.110128
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intestinal occlusion revealing Peutz Jeghers syndrome: A rare case report.
**Authors:** Mabrouk MY, Guelil A, Bouzayan L, Slimi Y, Jabi R, Bouziane M
**Journal:** Int J Surg Case Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijscr.2024.110128](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijscr.2024.110128)

## Content

1. Int J Surg Case Rep. 2024 Sep;122:110128. doi: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2024.110128.
Epub  2024 Aug 8.

Intestinal occlusion revealing Peutz Jeghers syndrome: A rare case report.

Mabrouk MY(1), Guelil A(2), Bouzayan L(2), Slimi Y(2), Jabi R(2), Bouziane M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, Mohamed VI University Hospital, Oujda, 
Morocco; Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Laboratory of Anatomy, Microsurgery 
and Surgery Experimental and Medical Simulation (LAMCESM), Mohammed 1st 
University, Oujda, Morocco. Electronic address: mmyassine94@gmail.com.
(2)Department of General Surgery, Mohamed VI University Hospital, Oujda, 
Morocco; Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Laboratory of Anatomy, Microsurgery 
and Surgery Experimental and Medical Simulation (LAMCESM), Mohammed 1st 
University, Oujda, Morocco.

INTRODUCTION: Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is a rare autosomal dominant 
congenital disorder characterized by the presence of hamartomatous polyps in the 
gastrointestinal tract and mucocutaneous lentiginosis. It is associated with an 
elevated risk of cancer and substantial morbidity related to polyps, notably 
intestinal intussusception during childhood.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report the case of an 18-year-old female patient, who 
consulted for subocclusif syndrome with multiple pigmented spots on the face and 
lips. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed an image of 
ileo-mesenterico-colic intussusception. The patient underwent a hemicolectomy 
involving the ileum, removing the intussusception and the ileal polyp. The 
pathologic examination confirmed the diagnosis of Peutz-Jeghers polyps without 
malignancy.
DISCUSSION: The diagnosis of SPJ can be established in patients presenting one 
or more polyps and at least two of the associated clinical criteria: labial 
melanin deposits, family history of the syndrome and polyposis of the small 
bowel. Half of the cases present with small bowel obstruction. PJS is associated 
with an increased risk of gastrointestinal and non-gastrointestinal 
malignancies. Endoscopic or surgical polypectomy remains the preferred treatment 
options to prevent complications.
CONCLUSION: Regular surveillance of the gastrointestinal tract is recommended 
both for cancer prevention and early detection, and to prevent polyp-related 
complications and certainly improve prognosis in these patients.

Copyright © 2024. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijscr.2024.110128
PMCID: PMC11363998
PMID: 39126928

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.