---
reference_id: "PMID:17054804"
title: "Relative risk for cardiovascular atherosclerotic events after smoking cessation: 6-9 years excess risk in individuals with familial hypercholesterolemia."
authors:
- Kramer A
- Jansen AC
- van Aalst-Cohen ES
- Tanck MW
- Kastelein JJ
- Zwinderman AH
journal: BMC Public Health
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-6-262
keywords:
- Aged
- "Arteriosclerosis/epidemiology, etiology"
- Case-Control Studies
- Family Health
- Female
- Humans
- "Hypercholesterolemia/complications, genetics"
- Male
- Medical History Taking
- Middle Aged
- Multicenter Studies as Topic
- Netherlands/epidemiology
- Proportional Hazards Models
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
- "Smoking/adverse effects, epidemiology"
- Smoking Cessation
- Smoking Prevention
- Time Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relative risk for cardiovascular atherosclerotic events after smoking cessation: 6-9 years excess risk in individuals with familial hypercholesterolemia.
**Authors:** Kramer A, Jansen AC, van Aalst-Cohen ES, Tanck MW, Kastelein JJ, Zwinderman AH
**Journal:** BMC Public Health (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1471-2458-6-262](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-6-262)

## Content

1. BMC Public Health. 2006 Oct 23;6:262. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-6-262.

Relative risk for cardiovascular atherosclerotic events after smoking cessation: 
6-9 years excess risk in individuals with familial hypercholesterolemia.

Kramer A(1), Jansen AC, van Aalst-Cohen ES, Tanck MW, Kastelein JJ, Zwinderman 
AH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Informatics, Academic Medical Center, University of 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. a.kramer@amc.uva.nl <a.kramer@amc.uva.nl>

BACKGROUND: Smoking history is often di- or trichotomized into for example 
"never, ever or current smoking". However, smoking must be treated as a 
time-dependent covariate when lifetime data is available. In particular, 
individuals do not smoke at birth, there is usually a wide variation with 
respect to smoking history, and smoking cessation must also be considered.
METHODS: Therefore we analyzed smoking as a time-dependent risk factor for 
cardiovascular atherosclerotic events in a cohort of 2400 individuals with 
familial hypercholesterolemia who were followed from birth until 2004. Excess 
risk after smoking-cessation was modelled in a Cox regression model with linear 
and exponential decaying trends. The model with the highest likelihood value was 
used to estimate the decay of the excess risk of smoking.
RESULTS: Atherosclerotic events were observed in 779 patients with familial 
hypercholesterolemia and 1569 individuals had a smoking history. In the model 
with the highest likelihood value the risk reduction of smoking after cessation 
follows a linear pattern with time and it appears to take 6 to 9 years before 
the excess risk is reduced to zero. The risk of atherosclerotic events due to 
smoking was estimated as 2.1 (95% confidence interval 1.5; 2.9).
CONCLUSION: It was concluded that excess risk due to smoking declined linearly 
after cessation in at least six to nine years.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2458-6-262
PMCID: PMC1635710
PMID: 17054804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]