---
reference_id: "PMID:38524667"
title: "Laminin 511-E8, an autoantigen in IgG4-related cholangitis, contributes to cholangiocyte protection."
authors:
- Trampert DC
- Kersten R
- Tolenaars D
- Jongejan A
- van de Graaf SFJ
- Beuers U
journal: JHEP Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jhepr.2024.101015
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Laminin 511-E8, an autoantigen in IgG4-related cholangitis, contributes to cholangiocyte protection.
**Authors:** Trampert DC, Kersten R, Tolenaars D, Jongejan A, van de Graaf SFJ, Beuers U
**Journal:** JHEP Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jhepr.2024.101015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhepr.2024.101015)

## Content

1. JHEP Rep. 2024 Jan 23;6(4):101015. doi: 10.1016/j.jhepr.2024.101015.
eCollection  2024 Apr.

Laminin 511-E8, an autoantigen in IgG4-related cholangitis, contributes to
cholangiocyte protection.

Trampert DC(1), Kersten R(1), Tolenaars D(1), Jongejan A(2), van de Graaf
SFJ(1), Beuers U(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Tytgat Institute for Liver and
Intestinal Research, Amsterdam Gastroenterology Endocrinology Metabolism (AGEM),
Amsterdam UMC, Location AMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Epidemiology & Data Science, Bioinformatics Laboratory,
Amsterdam Public Health Research Institute, Amsterdam UMC, Location AMC,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: IgG4-related cholangitis (IRC) is the hepatobiliary
manifestation of IgG4-related disease. Anti-laminin 511-E8 autoantibodies have
been identified in its pancreatic manifestation. Laminin 511-E8 promotes
endothelial barrier function, lymphocyte recruitment, and cholangiocyte
differentiation. Here, we investigate anti-laminin 511-E8 autoantibody presence
in IRC, and mechanisms via which laminin 511 may contribute to cholangiocyte
protection.
METHODS: Anti-laminin 511-E8 serum autoantibody positivity was assessed by
ELISA. RNA sequencing and RT-qPCR were performed on human H69 cholangiocytes
treated with recombinant laminin 511-E8. H69 cholangiocytes were subjected to
shRNA knockdown targeting genes encoding laminin 511 (LAMA5, LAMB1, LAMC1) or
treated with recombinant laminin 511-E8. Cholangiocellular bile acid influx was
quantified radiochemically using 22,23-3H-glycochenodeoxycholic acid (GCDC).
GCDC-induced apoptosis was determined by Caspase-3/7 assays. Cholangiocellular
barrier function was assessed by FITC-Dextran permeability assays.
Immunofluorescent staining of laminin 511 and claudin 1 was performed on
extrahepatic bile duct tissue of control and anti-laminin 511-E8 positive
individuals with IRC.
RESULTS: Seven out of 52 individuals with IRC had autoantibodies against laminin
511-E8. Recombinant laminin 511-E8 led to differential expression of genes
involved in secretion, barrier function, and inflammation. Knockdown of laminin
511 constituents increased toxic bile acid permeation and GCDC-induced
apoptosis. Laminin 511-E8 treatment decreased toxic bile acid permeation and
dose-dependently alleviated GCDC-induced apoptosis. LAMA5 and LAMC1 knockdown
increased transepithelial permeability. Laminin 511-E8 treatment reduced
transepithelial permeability and prevented T lymphocyte-induced barrier
dysfunction. Laminin 511 and claudin 1 staining patterns appeared altered in
anti-laminin 511-E8 positive individuals with IRC.
CONCLUSIONS: Laminin 511-E8 is an autoantigen in subsets of individuals with
IRC. Laminin 511 enhances cholangiocellular barrier function and protects
cholangiocytes against T lymphocyte-induced barrier dysfunction, toxic bile acid
permeation and bile acid-induced apoptosis.
IMPACT AND IMPLICATIONS: A subset of patients with IgG4-related cholangitis
(IRC) has autoantibodies against laminin 511-E8. In human cholangiocytes,
laminin 511 protects against (T lymphocyte-induced) epithelial barrier
dysfunction and hydrophobic bile acids. Laminin 511 and claudin 1 staining may
be altered in extrahepatic bile ducts of patients with IRC who are anti-laminin
511-E8 positive. This makes it tempting to speculate that a decreased epithelial
barrier function with attraction of immune cells and impaired bicarbonate
secretion as a result of dysfunction of laminin 511 by autoantibody binding
could potentially be a common systemic pathogenic mechanism in a subset of
patients with IgG4-RD.

© 2024 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhepr.2024.101015
PMCID: PMC10959701
PMID: 38524667

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest
with regard to this work. Please refer to the accompanying ICMJE disclosure
forms for further details.
