---
reference_id: "PMID:33199321"
title: Rheumatoid arthritis and bone health.
authors:
- Ashai S
- Harvey NC
journal: Clin Med (Lond)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.7861/clinmed.20.6.rabh
keywords:
- Adrenal Cortex Hormones/therapeutic use
- "Arthritis, Rheumatoid/drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Bone Density
- Female
- "Fractures, Bone/epidemiology, prevention & control"
- Humans
- Male
- "Osteoporosis/drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rheumatoid arthritis and bone health.
**Authors:** Ashai S, Harvey NC
**Journal:** Clin Med (Lond) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.7861/clinmed.20.6.rabh](https://doi.org/10.7861/clinmed.20.6.rabh)

## Content

1. Clin Med (Lond). 2020 Nov;20(6):565-567. doi: 10.7861/clinmed.20.6.rabh.

Rheumatoid arthritis and bone health.

Ashai S(1), Harvey NC(2).

Author information:
(1)MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, Southampton, UK.
(2)MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, Southampton, UK nch@mrc.soton.ac.uk.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an inflammatory arthropathy affecting 1% of the 
population, with a female predominance. Systemic inflammation is a key component 
of RA disease; corticosteroids are often required to rapidly control disease 
activity. Both inflammation and corticosteroids, however, have an adverse effect 
on bone mineral density, potentially resulting in osteoporosis and an increased 
risk of fractures. In this article, we describe the link between RA and impaired 
bone health, together with appropriate strategies to maintain bone density and 
reduce fracture risk. Key approaches include achieving adequate control of 
inflammation, minimising corticosteroid use, monitoring bone mineral density and 
intervening with antiosteoporosis medications when indicated.

© Royal College of Physicians 2020. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.7861/clinmed.20.6.rabh
PMCID: PMC7687316
PMID: 33199321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]