---
reference_id: "PMID:27570737"
title: "N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency: Novel mutation associated with neonatal presentation and literature review of molecular and phenotypic spectra."
authors:
- Al Kaabi EH
- El-Hattab AW
journal: Mol Genet Metab Rep
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2016.08.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency: Novel mutation associated with neonatal presentation and literature review of molecular and phenotypic spectra.
**Authors:** Al Kaabi EH, El-Hattab AW
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab Rep (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgmr.2016.08.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgmr.2016.08.004)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2016 Aug 17;8:94-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2016.08.004. 
eCollection 2016 Sep.

N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency: Novel mutation associated with neonatal 
presentation and literature review of molecular and phenotypic spectra.

Al Kaabi EH(1), El-Hattab AW(2).

Author information:
(1)Pediatrics Department, Tawam Hospital, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates.
(2)Division of Clinical Genetics and Metabolic Disorders, Pediatrics Department, 
Tawam Hospital, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates.

The urea cycle is the main pathway for the disposal of excess nitrogen. 
Carbamoylphosphate synthetase 1 (CPS1), the first and rate-limiting enzyme of 
urea cycle, is activated by N-acetylglutamate (NAG), and thus N-acetylglutamate 
synthase (NAGS) is an essential part of the urea cycle. Although NAGS deficiency 
is the rarest urea cycle disorder, it is the only one that can be specifically 
and effectively treated by a drug, N-carbamylglutamate, a stable structural 
analogous of NAG that activates CPS1. Here we report an infant with NAGS 
deficiency who presented with neonatal hyperammonemia. She was found to have a 
novel homozygous splice-site mutation, c.1097-2A>T, in the NAGS gene. We 
describe the clinical course of this infant, who had rapid response to 
N-carbamylglutamate treatment. In addition, we reviewed the clinical and 
molecular spectra of previously reported individuals with NAGS deficiency, which 
presents in most cases with neonatal hyperammonemia, and in some cases the 
presentation is later, with a broad spectrum of ages and manifestations. With 
this broad later-onset phenotypic spectrum, maintaining a high index of 
suspicion is needed for the early diagnosis of this treatable disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2016.08.004
PMCID: PMC4992009
PMID: 27570737