---
reference_id: "PMID:38152131"
title: "Androgen excess: a hallmark of polycystic ovary syndrome."
authors:
- Wang K
- Li Y
- Chen Y
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1273542
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Androgen excess: a hallmark of polycystic ovary syndrome.
**Authors:** Wang K, Li Y, Chen Y
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2023.1273542](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2023.1273542)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2023 Dec 13;14:1273542. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2023.1273542. eCollection 2023.

Androgen excess: a hallmark of polycystic ovary syndrome.

Wang K(1), Li Y(2), Chen Y(1).

Author information:
(1)The Second School of Clinical Medicine, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, 
Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of General Practice, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang 
Chinese Medical University, Hangzhou, China.

Polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS) is a metabolic, reproductive, and 
psychological disorder affecting 6-20% of reproductive women worldwide. However, 
there is still no cure for PCOS, and current treatments primarily alleviate its 
symptoms due to a poor understanding of its etiology. Compelling evidence 
suggests that hyperandrogenism is not just a primary feature of PCOS. Instead, 
it may be a causative factor for this condition. Thus, figuring out the 
mechanisms of androgen synthesis, conversion, and metabolism is relatively 
important. Traditionally, studies of androgen excess have largely focused on 
classical androgen, but in recent years, adrenal-derived 11-oxygenated androgen 
has also garnered interest. Herein, this Review aims to investigate the origins 
of androgen excess, androgen synthesis, how androgen receptor (AR) signaling 
mediates adverse PCOS traits, and the role of 11-oxygenated androgen in the 
pathophysiology of PCOS. In addition, it provides therapeutic strategies 
targeting hyperandrogenism in PCOS.

Copyright © 2023 Wang, Li and Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2023.1273542
PMCID: PMC10751361
PMID: 38152131 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.