---
reference_id: "PMID:16722538"
title: "Thromboangiitis obliterans (Buerger's disease)."
authors:
- Arkkila PE
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-1-14
keywords:
- Adult
- Atherosclerosis/diagnosis
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Rare Diseases
- Risk Factors
- "Smoking/adverse effects, epidemiology"
- Smoking Cessation
- "Thromboangiitis Obliterans/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thromboangiitis obliterans (Buerger's disease).
**Authors:** Arkkila PE
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-1-14](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-1-14)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2006 Apr 27;1:14. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-1-14.

Thromboangiitis obliterans (Buerger's disease).

Arkkila PE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Helsinki University, Centrala Hospital, 00029 
Hus, Finland. perttu.arkkila@hus.fi

Thromboangiitis obliterans or Buerger's disease is a segmental occlusive 
inflammatory condition of arteries and veins, characterized by thrombosis and 
recanalization of the affected vessels. It is a non-atherosclerotic inflammatory 
disease affecting small and medium sized arteries and veins of upper and lower 
extremities. The clinical criteria include: age under 45 years; current or 
recent history of tobacco use; presence of distal-extremity ischemia indicated 
by claudication, pain at rest, ischemic ulcers or gangrenes and documented by 
non-invasive vascular testing; exclusion of autoimmune diseases, hypercoagulable 
states and diabetes mellitus; exclusion of a proximal source of emboli by 
echocardiography or arteriography; consistent arteriographic findings in the 
clinically involved and non-involved limbs. The disease is found worldwide, the 
prevalence among all patients with peripheral arterial disease ranges from 
values as low as 0.5 to 5.6% in Western Europe to values as high as 45 to 63% in 
India, 16 to 66% in Korea and Japan, and 80% among Ashkenazi Jews. The etiology 
of thromboangiitis obliterans is unknown, but use or exposure to tobacco is 
central to the initiation and progression of the disease. If the patient smokes, 
stopping completely is an essential first step of treatment. The effectiveness 
of other treatments including vasodilating or anti-clotting drugs, surgical 
revascularization or sympathectomy in preventing amputation or treating pain, 
remains to be determined.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-1-14
PMCID: PMC1523324
PMID: 16722538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]