---
reference_id: "PMID:1994692"
title: Factors affecting outcome in meningococcal infections.
authors:
- Tesoro LJ
- Selbst SM
journal: Am J Dis Child
year: '1991'
doi: 10.1001/archpedi.1991.02160020112029
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Factors affecting outcome in meningococcal infections.
**Authors:** Tesoro LJ, Selbst SM
**Journal:** Am J Dis Child (1991)
**DOI:** [10.1001/archpedi.1991.02160020112029](https://doi.org/10.1001/archpedi.1991.02160020112029)

## Content

1. Am J Dis Child. 1991 Feb;145(2):218-20. doi: 
10.1001/archpedi.1991.02160020112029.

Factors affecting outcome in meningococcal infections.

Tesoro LJ(1), Selbst SM.

Author information:
(1)Division of General Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine 19104.

Comment in
    Am J Dis Child. 1991 Oct;145(10):1090-1. doi: 
10.1001/archpedi.1991.02160100022013.

A prognostic score for evaluating meningococcal infections in patients consists 
of the following five features that indicate a poor prognosis: onset of 
petechiae within 12 hours of presentation; shock; normal or low peripheral 
leukocyte count; normal or low erythrocyte sedimentation rate; and absence of 
meningitis. Based on our experience and some published data, we suspected that 
the score may no longer be reliable. We reviewed the charts of 73 children with 
meningococcal infection from December 19, 1979 to December 19, 1987 and applied 
the prognostic score mentioned previously. Our findings indicate that although a 
low score is generally associated with a good outcome, a higher score is less 
predictive of poor outcome than previously suggested. A rash with petechiae or 
purpura, the presence of shock, and a normal or low peripheral leukocyte count 
continue to be predictors of poor outcome. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 
not evaluated owing to a limited amount of data. The absence of meningitis did 
not correlate with a worse outcome in our patients. Most patients who died had 
evidence of meningeal involvement at the time of presentation. Instead, altered 
mental status at presentation, particularly obtundation or coma, was an ominous 
sign. We conclude that absence of meningitis is not a good predictor of outcome, 
as was previously thought. Altered mental status at the time of presentation may 
prove to be a stronger indicator of poor outcome.

DOI: 10.1001/archpedi.1991.02160020112029
PMID: 1994692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]