---
reference_id: "PMID:39008620"
title: Customized antisense oligonucleotide-based therapy for neurofilament-associated Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.
authors:
- Medina J
- Rebelo A
- Danzi MC
- Jacobs EH
- Xu IRL
- Ahrens KP
- Chen S
- Raposo J
- Yanick C
- Zuchner S
- Saporta MA
journal: Brain
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awae225
keywords:
- "Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease/genetics, therapy"
- Humans
- Neurofilament Proteins/genetics
- "Oligonucleotides, Antisense/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells
- "Motor Neurons/pathology, metabolism"
- Axons/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Customized antisense oligonucleotide-based therapy for neurofilament-associated Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.
**Authors:** Medina J, Rebelo A, Danzi MC, Jacobs EH, Xu IRL, Ahrens KP, Chen S, Raposo J, Yanick C, Zuchner S, Saporta MA
**Journal:** Brain (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awae225](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awae225)

## Content

1. Brain. 2024 Dec 3;147(12):4227-4239. doi: 10.1093/brain/awae225.

Customized antisense oligonucleotide-based therapy for neurofilament-associated 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease.

Medina J(1), Rebelo A(1), Danzi MC(1), Jacobs EH(2)(3), Xu IRL(1), Ahrens KP(1), 
Chen S(1), Raposo J(1), Yanick C(2), Zuchner S(1), Saporta MA(2).

Author information:
(1)Dr. John T. Macdonald Foundation Department of Human Genetics, University of 
Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 
Miami, FL 33136, USA.
(3)Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Miami Miller School of 
Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2024 Sep;20(9):505. doi: 10.1038/s41582-024-01013-2.

DNA-based therapeutics have emerged as a revolutionary approach for addressing 
the treatment gap in rare inherited conditions by targeting the fundamental 
genetic causes of disease. Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease, a group of 
inherited neuropathies, represents one of the most prevalent Mendelian disease 
groups in neurology and is characterized by diverse genetic aetiology. Axonal 
forms of CMT, known as CMT2, are caused by dominant mutations in >30 different 
genes that lead to degeneration of lower motor neuron axons. Recent advances in 
antisense oligonucleotide therapeutics have shown promise in targeting 
neurodegenerative disorders. Here, we elucidate pathomechanistic changes 
contributing to variant specific molecular phenotypes in CMT2E, caused by a 
single nucleotide substitution (p.N98S) in the neurofilament light chain gene 
(NEFL). We used a patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cell-induced motor 
neuron model that recapitulates several cellular and biomarker phenotypes 
associated with CMT2E. Using an antisense oligonucleotide treatment strategy 
targeting a heterozygous gain-of-function variant, we aimed to resolve molecular 
phenotypic changes observed in the CMT2E p.N98S subtype. To determine the 
therapeutic potential of antisense oligonucleotide, we applied our treatment 
strategy in induced pluripotent stem cell-derived motor neurons and used both 
established and new biomarkers of peripheral nervous system axonal degeneration. 
Our findings demonstrated a significant decrease in clinically relevant 
biomarkers of axonal degeneration, presenting the first clinically viable 
genetic therapeutic for CMT2E. Similar strategies could be used to develop 
precision medicine approaches for otherwise untreatable gain-of-function 
inherited disorders.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain. All rights reserved. For commercial re-use, please contact 
reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for reprints. All other 
permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service via the Permissions 
link on the article page on our site—for further information please contact 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awae225
PMCID: PMC11629702
PMID: 39008620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no competing interests.