---
reference_id: "PMID:32213850"
title: The Interplay between Peripherin 2 Complex Formation and Degenerative Retinal Diseases.
authors:
- Tebbe L
- Kakakhel M
- Makia MS
- Al-Ubaidi MR
- Naash MI
journal: Cells
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3390/cells9030784
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Genetic Therapy
- Humans
- Morphogenesis
- Mutation/genetics
- "Peripherins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Retinal Degeneration/genetics, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Interplay between Peripherin 2 Complex Formation and Degenerative Retinal Diseases.
**Authors:** Tebbe L, Kakakhel M, Makia MS, Al-Ubaidi MR, Naash MI
**Journal:** Cells (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells9030784](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells9030784)

## Content

1. Cells. 2020 Mar 24;9(3):784. doi: 10.3390/cells9030784.

The Interplay between Peripherin 2 Complex Formation and Degenerative Retinal
Diseases.

Tebbe L(1), Kakakhel M(1), Makia MS(1), Al-Ubaidi MR(1), Naash MI(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Houston, Houston, 77204
TX, USA.

Peripherin 2 (Prph2) is a photoreceptor-specific tetraspanin protein present in
the outer segment (OS) rims of rod and cone photoreceptors. It shares many
common features with other tetraspanins, including a large intradiscal loop
which contains several cysteines. This loop enables Prph2 to associate with
itself to form homo-oligomers or with its homologue, rod outer segment membrane
protein 1 (Rom1) to form hetero-tetramers and hetero-octamers. Mutations in
PRPH2 cause a multitude of retinal diseases including autosomal dominant
retinitis pigmentosa (RP) or cone dominant macular dystrophies. The importance
of Prph2 for photoreceptor development, maintenance and function is underscored
by the fact that its absence results in a failure to initialize OS formation in
rods and formation of severely disorganized OS membranous structures in cones.
Although the exact role of Rom1 has not been well studied, it has been concluded
that it is not necessary for disc morphogenesis but is required for fine tuning
OS disc size and structure. Pathogenic mutations in PRPH2 often result in
complex and multifactorial phenotypes, involving not just photoreceptors, as has
historically been reasoned, but also secondary effects on the retinal pigment
epithelium (RPE) and retinal/choroidal vasculature. The ability of Prph2 to form
complexes was identified as a key requirement for the development and
maintenance of OS structure and function. Studies using mouse models of
pathogenic Prph2 mutations established a connection between changes in complex
formation and disease phenotypes. Although progress has been made in the
development of therapeutic approaches for retinal diseases in general, the
highly complex interplay of functions mediated by Prph2 and the precise
regulation of these complexes made it difficult, thus far, to develop a suitable
Prph2-specific therapy. Here we describe the latest results obtained in
Prph2-associated research and how mouse models provided new insights into the
pathogenesis of its related diseases. Furthermore, we give an overview on the
current status of the development of therapeutic solutions.

DOI: 10.3390/cells9030784
PMCID: PMC7140794
PMID: 32213850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
