---
reference_id: "PMID:9090381"
title: Human PEX7 encodes the peroxisomal PTS2 receptor and is responsible for rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata.
authors:
- Braverman N
- Steel G
- Obie C
- Moser A
- Moser H
- Gould SJ
- Valle D
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1038/ng0497-369
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Chondrodysplasia Punctata, Rhizomelic/genetics"
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 6/genetics"
- "DNA, Complementary/genetics"
- Fibroblasts
- Gene Expression
- Genes/genetics
- Humans
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Organ Specificity
- Peroxisomal Targeting Signal 2 Receptor
- "RNA, Messenger/analysis"
- "Receptors, Cytoplasmic and Nuclear/genetics, metabolism"
- Recombinant Fusion Proteins/metabolism
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human PEX7 encodes the peroxisomal PTS2 receptor and is responsible for rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata.
**Authors:** Braverman N, Steel G, Obie C, Moser A, Moser H, Gould SJ, Valle D
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0497-369](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0497-369)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1997 Apr;15(4):369-76. doi: 10.1038/ng0497-369.

Human PEX7 encodes the peroxisomal PTS2 receptor and is responsible for 
rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata.

Braverman N(1), Steel G, Obie C, Moser A, Moser H, Gould SJ, Valle D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata (RCDP) is a rare autosomal recessive 
phenotype that comprises complementation group 11 of the peroxisome biogenesis 
disorders (PBD). PEX7, a candidate gene for RCDP identified in yeast, encodes 
the receptor for peroxisomal matrix proteins with the type-2 peroxisome 
targeting signal (PTS2). By homology probing we identified human and murine PEX7 
genes and found that expression of either corrects the PTS2-import defect 
characteristic of RCDP cells. In a collection of 36 RCDP probands, we found two 
inactivating PEX7 mutations: one, L292ter, was present in 26 of the probands, 
all with a severe phenotype; the second, A218V, was present in three probands, 
including two with a milder phenotype. A third mutation, G217R, whose functional 
significance is yet to be determined, was present in five probands, all compound 
heterozygotes with L292ter. We conclude that PEX7 is responsible for RCDP (PBD 
CG11) and suggest a founder effect may explain the high frequency of L292ter.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0497-369
PMID: 9090381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]