---
reference_id: "PMID:12510171"
title: Aging of myocardial collagen.
authors:
- de Souza RR
journal: Biogerontology
year: '2002'
doi: "10.1023/a:1021312027486"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aging of myocardial collagen.
**Authors:** de Souza RR
**Journal:** Biogerontology (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1023/a:1021312027486](https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1021312027486)

## Content

1. Biogerontology. 2002;3(6):325-35. doi: 10.1023/a:1021312027486.

Aging of myocardial collagen.

de Souza RR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of São 
Paulo, Brazil. souzarrd@uol.com.br

The objective of this article was to present a review of the collagen tissue of 
the heart muscle as a function of age. The myocardial collagen matrix consists 
of a network of fibrillar collagen which is intimately connected to the myocyte. 
Most collagen fibers reside in parallel with myocytes. These fibers may have a 
wavy, taut or coiled appearance. Fibrillar collagen types I and III are the 
major components of the myocardial collagen matrix. Collagen type I has been 
found to represent nearly 80% of the total collagen protein, while type III 
collagen is present in lower proportions (approximately 11%). Cardiac 
fibroblasts are the cellular source of fibrillar collagen, cardiac myocytes 
expressing only mRNA for type IV collagen. Collagens types I and III exhibit a 
high tensile strength which plays an important role in the behavior of the 
ventricle during the cardiac cycle. The collagen concentration and the 
intermolecular cross-linking of collagen increase with age. Measurements of 
collagen content in myocardial tissue suggest that it is the type I collagen 
fibers that increase in number and thickness in the aged. At the same time, 
electron microscopic observations have shown an increase in the number of 
collagen fibrils with a large diameter in the aging heart. The mechanism 
responsible for the myocardial fibrosis in the senescent myocardium is unclear. 
The collagen deposition in the myocardium could be due to the regulation of 
collagen biosynthesis at pre-translational levels. It is possible that the 
regulatory elements involved in this process are growth factors such as TGF-beta 
1 and hormones and neurotransmitters. Details of regulatory mechanism that may 
come into play during aging may be elucidated by further investigations. The 
accumulation of collagen within the myocardium increases muscle stiffness. 
Myocardial function is affected by this process; this is usually reflected by 
incomplete relaxation during early diastolic filling, and presumably account for 
the decrease in early left ventricular diastolic compliance.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1021312027486
PMID: 12510171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]