---
reference_id: "PMID:32432520"
title: Senior-Løken syndrome and intracranial hypertension.
authors:
- Tay SA
- Vincent AL
journal: Ophthalmic Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1080/13816810.2020.1766086
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Senior-Løken syndrome and intracranial hypertension.
**Authors:** Tay SA, Vincent AL
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1080/13816810.2020.1766086](https://doi.org/10.1080/13816810.2020.1766086)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Genet. 2020 Aug;41(4):354-357. doi: 10.1080/13816810.2020.1766086. 
Epub 2020 May 20.

Senior-Løken syndrome and intracranial hypertension.

Tay SA(1)(2)(3), Vincent AL(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, New 
Zealand National Eye Centre, University of Auckland , Auckland, New Zealand.
(2)Eye Department, Greenlane Clinical Centre, Auckland District Health Board , 
Auckland, New Zealand.
(3)Singapore National Eye Centre , Singapore, Singapore.

BACKGROUND: Senior-Løken syndrome (SLS) is a rare autosomal recessive disease 
characterised by nephronophthisis and retinal degeneration, and belongs to a 
group of genetically heterogeneous disorders known as the ciliopathies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Case report of a  patient with genetically proven SLS 
presenting with headaches and swollen optic nerve heads, review of medical notes 
and ophthalmic imaging, with retinal photography, fundus autofluorescence, and 
OCT retinal nerve fibre layer analysis.
RESULTS: We present findings in a 15 year old girl with Senior-Løken syndrome 
associated with compound heterozygous mutations in the SDCCAG8 gene,  who 
initially presented with a retinal dystrophy, and subsequent renal failure 
requiring renal transplantation and immunosuppression. Four and a half years 
later, she presented with headaches, reduced vision and clinical findings of 
papilloedema.  Cerebrospinal fluid analysis revealed a high opening pressure of 
37cmH20 and neuroimaging was otherwise unremarkable.  Treatment with a reduced 
dose of oral acetazolamide resulted in symptomatic relief of headaches, and 
resolution of optic nerve swelling.
CONCLUSION: The association of intracranial hypertension in a ciliopathy is a 
rare occurrence.  The aetiology of intracranial hypertension in this case is 
likely multi-factorial, due to renal transplantation, post-renal transplant 
medications and/ or weight gain.  With evidence of cilia involvement in the 
central nervous system, ciliary dysfunction may contribute to intracranial 
hypertension, and should be considered in these patients presenting with 
headaches. Diagnosis may be difficult with advanced retinal degeneration and 
baseline retinal nerve fibre layer thinning. Treatment requires careful 
monitoring of renal function.

DOI: 10.1080/13816810.2020.1766086
PMID: 32432520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]