---
reference_id: "PMID:26092928"
title: Elevated expression of periostin in human osteoarthritic cartilage and its potential role in matrix degradation via matrix metalloproteinase-13.
authors:
- Attur M
- Yang Q
- Shimada K
- Tachida Y
- Nagase H
- Mignatti P
- Statman L
- Palmer G
- Kirsch T
- Beier F
- Abramson SB
journal: FASEB J
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1096/fj.15-272427
keywords:
- "ADAM Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- ADAMTS4 Protein
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Animals
- "Blotting, Western"
- "Cartilage, Articular/metabolism"
- Cattle
- "Cell Adhesion Molecules/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Chondrocytes/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Extracellular Matrix/metabolism
- Female
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Male
- "Matrix Metalloproteinase 13/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Middle Aged
- "Osteoarthritis/genetics, metabolism"
- "Procollagen N-Endopeptidase/genetics, metabolism"
- RNA Interference
- "Rats, Sprague-Dawley"
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Elevated expression of periostin in human osteoarthritic cartilage and its potential role in matrix degradation via matrix metalloproteinase-13.
**Authors:** Attur M, Yang Q, Shimada K, Tachida Y, Nagase H, Mignatti P, Statman L, Palmer G, Kirsch T, Beier F, Abramson SB
**Journal:** FASEB J (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1096/fj.15-272427](https://doi.org/10.1096/fj.15-272427)

## Content

1. FASEB J. 2015 Oct;29(10):4107-21. doi: 10.1096/fj.15-272427. Epub 2015 Jun 19.

Elevated expression of periostin in human osteoarthritic cartilage and its
potential role in matrix degradation via matrix metalloproteinase-13.

Attur M(1), Yang Q(2), Shimada K(2), Tachida Y(2), Nagase H(2), Mignatti P(2),
Statman L(2), Palmer G(2), Kirsch T(2), Beier F(2), Abramson SB(2).

Author information:
(1)*Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Department of Cell
Biology, and Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, New York University (NYU) School
of Medicine and NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, New York, USA; Frontier
Research Laboratories, Daiichi Sankyo Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan; Department of
Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida,
USA; and Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine
and Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada
mukundan.attur@nyumc.org.
(2)*Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Department of Cell
Biology, and Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, New York University (NYU) School
of Medicine and NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, New York, USA; Frontier
Research Laboratories, Daiichi Sankyo Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan; Department of
Orthopaedics and Rehabilitation, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida,
USA; and Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Schulich School of Medicine
and Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.

We investigated the role of periostin, an extracellular matrix protein, in the
pathophysiology of osteoarthritis (OA). In OA, dysregulated gene expression and
phenotypic changes in articular chondrocytes culminate in progressive loss of
cartilage from the joint surface. The molecular mechanisms underlying this
process are poorly understood. We examined periostin expression by
immunohistochemical analysis of lesional and nonlesional cartilage from human
and rodent OA knee cartilage. In addition, we used small interfering (si)RNA and
adenovirus transduction of chondrocytes to knock down and up-regulate periostin
levels, respectively, and analyzed its effect on matrix metalloproteinase
(MMP)-13, a disintegrin and MMP with thrombospondin motifs (ADAMTS)-4, and type
II collagen expression. We found high periostin levels in human and rodent OA
cartilage. Periostin increased MMP-13 expression dose [1-10 µg/ml (EC50 0.5-1
μg/ml)] and time (24-72 h) dependently, significantly enhanced expression of
ADAMTS4 mRNA, and promoted cartilage degeneration through collagen and
proteoglycan degradation. Periostin induction of MMP-13 expression was inhibited
by CCT031374 hydrobromide, an inhibitor of the canonical Wnt/β-catenin signaling
pathway. In addition, siRNA-mediated knockdown of endogenous periostin blocked
constitutive MMP-13 expression. These findings implicate periostin as a
catabolic protein that promotes cartilage degeneration in OA by up-regulating
MMP-13 through canonical Wnt signaling.

© FASEB.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.15-272427
PMCID: PMC4566939
PMID: 26092928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
