---
reference_id: "PMID:34913770"
title: Quantitative proteome profiling provides evidence of an activation of the complement cascade in ATTR amyloidosis.
authors:
- Treitz C
- Gottwald J
- Gericke E
- Urban P
- Meliß RR
- Axmann HD
- Siebert F
- Becker K
- Tholey A
- Röcken C
journal: Amyloid
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/13506129.2021.2015316
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Quantitative proteome profiling provides evidence of an activation of the complement cascade in ATTR amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Treitz C, Gottwald J, Gericke E, Urban P, Meliß RR, Axmann HD, Siebert F, Becker K, Tholey A, Röcken C
**Journal:** Amyloid (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/13506129.2021.2015316](https://doi.org/10.1080/13506129.2021.2015316)

## Content

1. Amyloid. 2022 Jun;29(2):102-109. doi: 10.1080/13506129.2021.2015316. Epub 2021
 Dec 16.

Quantitative proteome profiling provides evidence of an activation of the 
complement cascade in ATTR amyloidosis.

Treitz C(1), Gottwald J(2), Gericke E(2), Urban P(3), Meliß RR(3), Axmann HD(4), 
Siebert F(4), Becker K(5), Tholey A(1), Röcken C(2).

Author information:
(1)Systematic Proteome Research and Bioanalytics, Institute of Experimental 
Medicine, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(2)Department of Pathology, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(3)Institute of Pathology and Dermatopathology, Hannover, Germany.
(4)Center of Hand- and Feat-Surgery, Hannover, Germany.
(5)Clinics of Hand-Surgery, Hannover, Germany.

Amyloidosis is a disease group caused by pathological aggregation and deposition 
of peptides in diverse tissue sites. Apart from the fibril protein, amyloid 
deposits frequently enclose non-fibrillar constituents. In this study, carpal 
tunnel tissue sections with ATTR amyloid were analysed by quantitative mass 
spectrometry-based proteomics. Following manual dissection, tissue samples of 
equal size and with heterogeneous amyloid load were dissected and forwarded to 
bottom-up proteome analysis and label-free protein profiling. The 
amyloid-associated proteins showed significant correlations of label-free 
intensity profiles. A comprehensive list of 83 proteins specifically enriched in 
amyloid deposits was discovered. In addition to well-known signature proteins 
(e.g. apolipoprotein E, apolipoprotein A-IV, and vitronectin), 22 members of the 
complement system, including all seven components of the membrane attack complex 
could be associated to the disease. These data lend support to the hypothesis 
that the complement system is activated in ATTR amyloidosis.

DOI: 10.1080/13506129.2021.2015316
PMID: 34913770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]