---
reference_id: "PMID:21327546"
title: "Neurological disorders associated with cassava diet: a review of putative etiological mechanisms."
authors:
- Adamolekun B
journal: Metab Brain Dis
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s11011-011-9237-y
keywords:
- Africa
- "Ataxia/etiology, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Cyanides/chemistry, metabolism"
- Diet/adverse effects
- Female
- "Glucosides/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/etiology, pathology"
- Humans
- Male
- Manihot/chemistry
- Neurotoxicity Syndromes/etiology
- Nitriles/chemistry
- "Optic Atrophy/etiology, pathology"
- "Paraparesis, Spastic/etiology, pathology"
- Plant Roots/chemistry
- "Polyneuropathies/etiology, pathology"
- "Thiamine Deficiency/etiology, pathology"
- "Thiocyanates/metabolism, urine"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurological disorders associated with cassava diet: a review of putative etiological mechanisms.
**Authors:** Adamolekun B
**Journal:** Metab Brain Dis (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11011-011-9237-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11011-011-9237-y)

## Content

1. Metab Brain Dis. 2011 Mar;26(1):79-85. doi: 10.1007/s11011-011-9237-y. Epub
2011  Feb 16.

Neurological disorders associated with cassava diet: a review of putative 
etiological mechanisms.

Adamolekun B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, 855 
Monroe Avenue, Memphis, TN 38163, USA. badamole@uthsc.edu

Tropical ataxic neuropathy (TAN) and epidemic spastic paraparesis (konzo) are 
two neurological disorders associated with the consumption of cassava (Manihot 
esculenta) in several African countries. TAN is characterized by sensory 
polyneuropathy, sensory ataxia, bilateral optic atrophy and bilateral 
sensori-neural deafness. It occurs in elderly individuals subsisting on a 
monotonous cassava diet with minimal protein supplementation. Konzo is a 
syndrome of symmetrical spastic paraparesis with a predilection for children and 
young women and invariably associated with consumption of inadequately processed 
bitter cassava roots with minimal protein supplementation. Despite numerous 
epidemiological, clinical and biochemical studies aimed at elucidating the 
etiological mechanisms of these disorders, their etiologies remain unknown, and 
there is no known treatment. The diseases continue to be prevalent in endemic 
areas, causing significant disability and increased mortality. A fresh appraisal 
of the putative etiologic mechanisms proposed for these intriguing and enigmatic 
syndromes is presented in this paper. Evidences against a causal role for 
cyanide intoxication are discussed, and evidences implicating thiamine 
deficiency as a unifying etiological mechanism for these neurological syndromes 
are presented. It is concluded that urgent research is needed to evaluate 
thiamine status and implement a therapeutic trial of thiamine in these 
debilitating neurological disorders.

DOI: 10.1007/s11011-011-9237-y
PMID: 21327546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]