---
reference_id: "PMID:8310396"
title: "Duane's retraction syndrome."
authors:
- DeRespinis PA
- Caputo AR
- Wagner RS
- Guo S
journal: Surv Ophthalmol
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1016/0039-6257(93)90077-k
keywords:
- "Duane Retraction Syndrome/diagnosis, etiology, surgery"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Duane's retraction syndrome.
**Authors:** DeRespinis PA, Caputo AR, Wagner RS, Guo S
**Journal:** Surv Ophthalmol (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0039-6257(93)90077-k](https://doi.org/10.1016/0039-6257(93)90077-k)

## Content

1. Surv Ophthalmol. 1993 Nov-Dec;38(3):257-88. doi: 10.1016/0039-6257(93)90077-k.

Duane's retraction syndrome.

DeRespinis PA(1), Caputo AR, Wagner RS, Guo S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus, University of Medicine 
and Dentistry of New Jersey/New Jersey Medical School, Newark.

Erratum in
    Surv Ophthalmol 1996 Mar-Apr;40(5):423.

Comment in
    Surv Ophthalmol. 1994 Jan-Feb;38(4):395-6. doi: 
10.1016/0039-6257(94)90081-7.
    Surv Ophthalmol. 1997 Nov-Dec;42(3):295. doi: 10.1016/s0039-6257(97)90028-x.

Duane's retraction syndrome (DRS) has been a recognized clinical entity for 
nearly a century. It is a clinically well described ocular disorder consisting 
of retraction of the globe with narrowing of the lid fissure in attempted 
adduction, frequent abduction deficiency with variable limitation to adduction, 
and upshoot and/or downshoot of the affected eye on adduction. Among strabismus 
patients the incidence of DRS is probably not more than 5%. Most cases are 
sporadic, but familial cases have been estimated at 10% by most authors. 
Numerous theories concerning the etiology and pathogenesis of DRS have been 
proposed, including agenesis of the abducens nucleus, but the majority of 
investigators concur that the characteristic findings are best explained by a 
paradoxical innervation of the lateral rectus muscle, which subsequently causes 
a cocontraction of the horizontal rectus muscles. The frequent association of 
DRS with other congenital anomalies suggests a teratogenic event occurring 
between the fourth to eighth week of gestation as an etiological factor. In this 
review historical aspects and theories of the syndrome are studied and 
statistical data are compiled and analyzed. Clinical features, differential 
diagnoses and variants of the syndrome are examined. Testing and treatment 
objectives are discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/0039-6257(93)90077-k
PMID: 8310396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]