---
reference_id: PMID:33843434
title: "Pathogenicity and Virulence of Legionella: Intracellular replication and host response."
authors:
- Chauhan D
- Shames SR
journal: Virulence
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/21505594.2021.1903199
keywords:
- Humans
- Immunity
- Legionella/genetics
- "Legionnaires' Disease"
- Vacuoles
- Virulence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenicity and Virulence of Legionella: Intracellular replication and host response.
**Authors:** Chauhan D, Shames SR
**Journal:** Virulence (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/21505594.2021.1903199](https://doi.org/10.1080/21505594.2021.1903199)

## Content

1. Virulence. 2021 Dec;12(1):1122-1144. doi: 10.1080/21505594.2021.1903199.

Pathogenicity and Virulence of Legionella: Intracellular replication and host 
response.

Chauhan D(1), Shames SR(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas, USA.

Bacteria of the genus Legionella are natural pathogens of amoebae that can cause 
a severe pneumonia in humans called Legionnaires' Disease. Human disease results 
from inhalation of Legionella-contaminated aerosols and subsequent bacterial 
replication within alveolar macrophages. Legionella pathogenicity in humans has 
resulted from extensive co-evolution with diverse genera of amoebae. To 
replicate intracellularly, Legionella generates a replication-permissive 
compartment called the Legionella-containing vacuole (LCV) through the concerted 
action of hundreds of Dot/Icm-translocated effector proteins. In this review, we 
present a collective overview of Legionella pathogenicity including infection 
mechanisms, secretion systems, and translocated effector function. We also 
discuss innate and adaptive immune responses to L. pneumophila, the implications 
of Legionella genome diversity and future avenues for the field.

DOI: 10.1080/21505594.2021.1903199
PMCID: PMC8043192
PMID: 33843434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the authors.