---
reference_id: "PMID:8324396"
title: "Late-phase reaction in asthma: basic mechanisms."
authors:
- Pradalier A
journal: Int Arch Allergy Immunol
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1159/000236471
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Late-phase reaction in asthma: basic mechanisms.
**Authors:** Pradalier A
**Journal:** Int Arch Allergy Immunol (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000236471](https://doi.org/10.1159/000236471)

## Content

1. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 1993;101(3):322-5. doi: 10.1159/000236471.

Late-phase reaction in asthma: basic mechanisms.

Pradalier A(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre d'Allergie, Hôpital Rothschild, Paris, France.

Allergens are recognized by mast cells and sensitized T cells. In the 
early-phase reaction, mast cells produce mediators that cause changes in the 
airways. The mediators also induce chemotactic recruitment and activation of 
eosinophils and neutrophils during the late-phase reaction (LPR). The numbers of 
eosinophils and neutrophils are increased 4 h after challenge with allergen in 
the broncho-alveolar lavage fluid (BAL) of asthmatics who show an LPR. This is 
associated with an increased sensitivity to methacholine or histamine. The 
increase in the levels of eosinophils and their cationic proteins in the BAL is 
related to the magnitude of the LPR. The cationic proteins are toxic to human 
epithelium. Basophils, macrophages and lymphocytes are also involved in the 
inflammatory reaction. Some authors believe that basophils are more important 
than mast cells in the LPR to antigen. T lymphocytes release lymphokines, such 
as interleukin 5, which enhances the degranulation of eosinophils. All of the 
inflammatory cells release a range of mediators, in particular leukotrienes and 
platelet activating factor.

DOI: 10.1159/000236471
PMID: 8324396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]