---
reference_id: "PMID:28624334"
title: "Seasonality and autoimmune diseases: The contribution of the four seasons to the mosaic of autoimmunity."
authors:
- Watad A
- Azrielant S
- Bragazzi NL
- Sharif K
- David P
- Katz I
- Aljadeff G
- Quaresma M
- Tanay G
- Adawi M
- Amital H
- Shoenfeld Y
journal: J Autoimmun
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2017.06.001
keywords:
- Animals
- "Autoimmune Diseases/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology"
- Autoimmunity
- Environment
- Humans
- Risk Factors
- Seasons
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Seasonality and autoimmune diseases: The contribution of the four seasons to the mosaic of autoimmunity.
**Authors:** Watad A, Azrielant S, Bragazzi NL, Sharif K, David P, Katz I, Aljadeff G, Quaresma M, Tanay G, Adawi M, Amital H, Shoenfeld Y
**Journal:** J Autoimmun (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaut.2017.06.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaut.2017.06.001)

## Content

1. J Autoimmun. 2017 Aug;82:13-30. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2017.06.001. Epub 2017 Jun
 16.

Seasonality and autoimmune diseases: The contribution of the four seasons to the
mosaic of autoimmunity.

Watad A(1), Azrielant S(2), Bragazzi NL(3), Sharif K(4), David P(5), Katz I(5),
Aljadeff G(5), Quaresma M(5), Tanay G(5), Adawi M(6), Amital H(1), Shoenfeld
Y(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine 'B', Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel;
Zabludowicz Center for Autoimmune Diseases, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer,
Israel; Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
(2)Zabludowicz Center for Autoimmune Diseases, Sheba Medical Center,
Tel-Hashomer, Israel; Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University,
Tel-Aviv, Israel.
(3)Postgraduate School of Public Health, Department of Health Sciences (DISSAL),
University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy.
(4)Department of Medicine 'B', Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel;
Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.
(5)Zabludowicz Center for Autoimmune Diseases, Sheba Medical Center,
Tel-Hashomer, Israel.
(6)Baruch Padeh and Ziv hospitals, Bar-Ilan, Faculty of Medicine, Zefat, Israel.
(7)Zabludowicz Center for Autoimmune Diseases, Sheba Medical Center,
Tel-Hashomer, Israel; Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University,
Tel-Aviv, Israel; Incumbent of the Laura Schwarz-Kipp Chair for Research of
Autoimmune Diseases, Tel-Aviv University, Israel. Electronic address:
shoenfel@post.tau.ac.il.

Autoimmune diseases (ADs) are a heterogeneous groups of diseases that occur as a
results of loss of tolerance to self antigens. While the etiopathogeneis remain
obscure, different environmental factors were suggested to have a role in the
development of autoimmunity, including infections, low vitamin D levels, UV
radiation, and melatonin. Interestingly, such factors possess seasonal variation
patterns that could influence disease development, severity and progression.
Vitamin D levels which reach a nadir during late winter and early spring is
correlated with increased disease activity, clinical severity as well as relapse
rates in several disease entities including multiple sclerosis (MS),
non-cutaneous flares of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), psoriasis, and
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Additionally, immunomodulatory actions of melatonin
secretion ameliorate the severity of several ADs including MS and SLE. Melatonin
levels are lowest during spring, a finding that correlates with the highest
exacerbation rates of MS. Further, melatonin is postulated to be involved in the
etiopathogenesis of inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) through it influence on
adhesion molecule and therefore transcription factor expression. Moreover,
infections can mount to ADs through pro-inflammatory cytokine release and human
antigen mimicry. Seasonal patterns of infectious diseases are correlated with
the onset and exacerbation of ADs. During the winter, increased incidence of
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infectious are associated with MS and SLE flares/onset
respectively. In addition, higher Rotavirus infections during the winter
precedes type 1 diabetes mellitus onset (T1DM). Moreover, Escherichia coli
(E. coli) infection prior to primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) and T1DM disease
onset subsequent to Coxachievirus infections are seen to occur during late
summer, a finding that correlate with infectious agents' pattern of seasonality.
In this review, the effects of seasonality on the onset, relapses and activity
of various ADs were discussed. Consideration of seasonal variation patterns of
ADs can possibly provide clues to diseases pathogenesis and lead to development
of new approaches in treatment and preventative care.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaut.2017.06.001
PMID: 28624334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
