---
reference_id: "PMID:34677006"
title: Liver Disease and Risk of Hepatocellular Carcinoma in Children With Mutations in TALDO1.
authors:
- Grammatikopoulos T
- Hadzic N
- Foskett P
- Strautnieks S
- Samyn M
- Vara R
- Dhawan A
- Hertecant J
- Al Jasmi F
- Rahman O
- Deheragoda M
- Bull LN
- Thompson RJ
- University of Washington Center for Mendelian Genomics
journal: Hepatol Commun
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/hep4.1824
keywords:
- "Carbohydrate Metabolism, Inborn Errors"
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/genetics"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Liver Neoplasms/genetics
- Male
- Mutation
- Transaldolase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liver Disease and Risk of Hepatocellular Carcinoma in Children With Mutations in TALDO1.
**Authors:** Grammatikopoulos T, Hadzic N, Foskett P, Strautnieks S, Samyn M, Vara R, Dhawan A, Hertecant J, Al Jasmi F, Rahman O, Deheragoda M, Bull LN, Thompson RJ, University of Washington Center for Mendelian Genomics
**Journal:** Hepatol Commun (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/hep4.1824](https://doi.org/10.1002/hep4.1824)

## Content

1. Hepatol Commun. 2022 Mar;6(3):473-479. doi: 10.1002/hep4.1824. Epub 2021 Oct
22.

Liver Disease and Risk of Hepatocellular Carcinoma in Children With Mutations in
TALDO1.

Grammatikopoulos T(1)(2), Hadzic N(1), Foskett P(3), Strautnieks S(3), Samyn
M(1), Vara R(4), Dhawan A(1), Hertecant J(5), Al Jasmi F(5), Rahman O(3),
Deheragoda M(3), Bull LN(6), Thompson RJ(1)(2); University of Washington Center
for Mendelian Genomics.

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Liver, GI & Nutrition Center and MowatLabsKing's College
HospitalLondonUnited Kingdom.
(2)Institute of Liver StudiesKing's College LondonLondonUnited Kingdom.
(3)Institute of Liver StudiesKing's College HospitalLondonUnited Kingdom.
(4)Department of Pediatric Inherited Metabolic DiseasesEvelina Children's
HospitalLondonUnited Kingdom.
(5)Division of Genetics/MetabolicsDepartment of PediatricsTawam HospitalAl
AinUnited Arab Emirates.
(6)Institute for Human Genetics and Liver Center LaboratoryDepartment of
MedicineUniversity of California San FranciscoSan FranciscoCAUSA.

Mutations in the transaldolase 1 (TALDO1) gene have been described in a limited
number of cases. Several organs can be affected and clinical manifestations are
variable, but often include liver dysfunction and/or hepatosplenomegaly. We
report 4 patients presenting with liver disease: 2 with early-onset
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Patients with cholestasis and mutations in
TALDO1 were identified by next-generation sequencing. Clinical, laboratory, and
histological data were collected. Four (1 male) patients were identified with
variants predicted to be damaging in TALDO1. Three patients were homozygous (two
protein truncating/one missense mutations), 1 one was compound heterozygous (two
missense mutations). Median age at presentation was 4 months (range, 2-210 days)
with jaundice (3), hepatosplenomegaly (3), and pancytopaenia (1). The diagnosis
was corroborated by detection of minimal transaldolase enzyme activity in skin
fibroblasts in two cases and raised urine polyols in the third. Three patients
underwent liver transplantation (LT), 2 of whom had confirmed HCC on explanted
liver. One patient suddenly died shortly after LT. The nontransplanted case has
a chronic liver disease with multiple dysplastic liver nodules, but normal liver
biochemistry and alpha-fetoprotein. Median follow-up was 4 years (range, 1-21).
Conclusion: Transaldolase deficiency can include early-onset normal
gamma-glutamyltransferase liver disease with multisystem involvement and
variable progression. Patients with this disease are at risk of early-onset HCC
and may require early LT.

© 2021 The Authors. Hepatology Communications published by Wiley Periodicals LLC
on behalf of American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/hep4.1824
PMCID: PMC8870026
PMID: 34677006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
