---
reference_id: "PMID:36361780"
title: "Microglia and Alzheimer's Disease."
authors:
- Merighi S
- Nigro M
- Travagli A
- Gessi S
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms232112990
keywords:
- Humans
- Microglia/metabolism
- Alzheimer Disease/metabolism
- Amyloid beta-Peptides/metabolism
- Inflammasomes/metabolism
- Cytokines/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Microglia and Alzheimer's Disease.
**Authors:** Merighi S, Nigro M, Travagli A, Gessi S
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms232112990](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms232112990)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Oct 27;23(21):12990. doi: 10.3390/ijms232112990.

Microglia and Alzheimer's Disease.

Merighi S(1), Nigro M(1), Travagli A(1), Gessi S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Medicine and for Romagna, University of Ferrara,
44121 Ferrara, Italy.

There is a huge need for novel therapeutic and preventative approaches to
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and neuroinflammation seems to be one of the most
fascinating solutions. The primary cell type that performs immunosurveillance
and helps clear out unwanted chemicals from the brain is the microglia.
Microglia work to reestablish efficiency and stop further degeneration in the
early stages of AD but mainly fail in the illness's later phases. This may be
caused by a number of reasons, e.g., a protracted exposure to cytokines that
induce inflammation and an inappropriate accumulation of amyloid beta (Aβ)
peptide. Extracellular amyloid and/or intraneuronal phosphorylated tau in AD can
both activate microglia. The activation of TLRs and scavenger receptors,
inducing the activation of numerous inflammatory pathways, including the NF-kB,
JAK-STAT, and NLRP3 inflammasome, facilitates microglial phagocytosis and
activation in response to these mediators. Aβ/tau are taken up by microglia, and
their removal from the extracellular space can also have protective effects, but
if the illness worsens, an environment that is constantly inflamed and
overexposed to an oxidative environment might encourage continuous microglial
activation, which can lead to neuroinflammation, oxidative stress, iron
overload, and neurotoxicity. The complexity and diversity of the roles that
microglia play in health and disease necessitate the urgent development of new
biomarkers that identify the activity of different microglia. It is imperative
to comprehend the intricate mechanisms that result in microglial impairment to
develop new immunomodulating therapies that primarily attempt to recover the
physiological role of microglia, allowing them to carry out their core function
of brain protection.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms232112990
PMCID: PMC9657945
PMID: 36361780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
