---
reference_id: "PMID:28193245"
title: Early disease progression of Hurler syndrome.
authors:
- Kiely BT
- Kohler JL
- Coletti HY
- Poe MD
- Escolar ML
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-017-0583-7
keywords:
- Female
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Mucopolysaccharidosis I/pathology, therapy"
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early disease progression of Hurler syndrome.
**Authors:** Kiely BT, Kohler JL, Coletti HY, Poe MD, Escolar ML
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-017-0583-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-017-0583-7)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2017 Feb 14;12(1):32. doi: 10.1186/s13023-017-0583-7.

Early disease progression of Hurler syndrome.

Kiely BT(1), Kohler JL(1), Coletti HY(2), Poe MD(1), Escolar ML(3).

Author information:
(1)Program for the Study of Neurodevelopment in Rare Disorders, Children's 
Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC, 4401 Penn Ave, Pittsburgh, PA, 15224, USA.
(2)University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA.
(3)Program for the Study of Neurodevelopment in Rare Disorders, Children's 
Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC, 4401 Penn Ave, Pittsburgh, PA, 15224, USA. 
maria.escolar@chp.edu.

BACKGROUND: Newborn screening for mucopolysaccharidosis type I (MPS I) shows 
promise to improve outcomes by facilitating early diagnosis and treatment. 
However, diagnostic tests for MPS I are of limited value in predicting whether a 
child will develop severe central nervous system disease associated with Hurler 
syndrome, or minimal or no central nervous system involvement associated with 
the attenuated phenotypes (Hurler-Scheie and Scheie syndromes). Given that the 
optimal treatment differs between Hurler syndrome and the attenuated MPS I 
phenotypes, the absence of a reliable prognostic biomarker complicates clinical 
decision making for infants diagnosed through newborn screening. Information 
about the natural history of Hurler syndrome may aid in the management of 
affected infants, contribute to treatment decisions, and facilitate evaluation 
of treatment effectiveness and prognosis. Thus, the aim of this study was to 
characterize the progression and timing of symptom onset in infants with Hurler 
syndrome.
RESULTS: Clinical data from 55 patients evaluated at a single center were 
retrospectively reviewed. Information about each child's medical history was 
obtained following a standardized protocol including a thorough parent interview 
and the review of previous medical records. All patients underwent systematic 
physical and neurodevelopmental evaluations by a multidisciplinary team. Nearly 
all patients (98%) showed signs of disease during the first 6 months of life. 
Common early disease manifestations included failed newborn hearing screen, 
respiratory symptoms, difficulty latching, and otitis media. Other symptoms such 
as kyphosis, corneal clouding, cardiac disease, joint restrictions, and enlarged 
head circumference typically appeared slightly later (median age, 8-10 months). 
During the first 12 months, gross motor development was the most severely 
affected area of functioning, and a significant number of patients also 
experienced language delays. Cognition was typically preserved during this 
period.
CONCLUSIONS: In this large cohort of patients with Hurler syndrome, the vast 
majority showed signs and symptoms of disease during the first months of life. 
More research is needed to determine the extent to which early clinical 
manifestations of MPS I can predict phenotype and treatment outcomes.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-017-0583-7
PMCID: PMC5307824
PMID: 28193245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]