---
reference_id: "PMID:35715148"
title: "Leiomyosarcoma: Current Clinical Management and Future Horizons."
authors:
- Devaud N
- Vornicova O
- Abdul Razak AR
- Khalili K
- Demicco EG
- Mitric C
- Bernardini MQ
- Gladdy RA
journal: Surg Oncol Clin N Am
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.soc.2022.03.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Leiomyosarcoma: Current Clinical Management and Future Horizons.
**Authors:** Devaud N, Vornicova O, Abdul Razak AR, Khalili K, Demicco EG, Mitric C, Bernardini MQ, Gladdy RA
**Journal:** Surg Oncol Clin N Am (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.soc.2022.03.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.soc.2022.03.011)

## Content

1. Surg Oncol Clin N Am. 2022 Jul;31(3):527-546. doi: 10.1016/j.soc.2022.03.011.

Leiomyosarcoma: Current Clinical Management and Future Horizons.

Devaud N(1), Vornicova O(2), Abdul Razak AR(2), Khalili K(3), Demicco EG(4),
Mitric C(5), Bernardini MQ(5), Gladdy RA(6).

Author information:
(1)Instituto Oncologico Fundacion Arturo Lopez Perez (FALP), Santiago, Chile.
(2)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
(3)Joint Department of Medical Imaging, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, Sinai Health System,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada; Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada; Division of General Surgery, Sinai Health System, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Electronic address: Rebecca.gladdy@sinaihealth.ca.

Leiomyosarcomas are soft tissue tumors that are derived from smooth muscle
mainly in the pelvis and retroperitoneum. Percutaneous biopsy is paramount to
confirm diagnosis. Imaging is necessary to complete clinical staging. Multimodal
treatment should be directed by expert sarcoma multidisciplinary teams that see
a critical volume of these rare tumors. Surgery is the mainstay of curative
intent treatment; however due to its high metastatic progression, there may be a
benefit for neoadjuvant systemic treatment. Adjuvant systemic treatment has no
proven disease-free survival, and its main role is in the palliative setting to
potentially prolong overall survival.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.soc.2022.03.011
PMID: 35715148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
