---
reference_id: "PMID:19845697"
title: "Osteoarticular tuberculosis in Tehran, Iran: a 2-year study."
authors:
- Hadadi A
- Rasoulinejad M
- Khashayar P
- Mosavi M
- Maghighi Morad M
journal: Clin Microbiol Infect
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1111/j.1469-0691.2009.03082.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteoarticular tuberculosis in Tehran, Iran: a 2-year study.
**Authors:** Hadadi A, Rasoulinejad M, Khashayar P, Mosavi M, Maghighi Morad M
**Journal:** Clin Microbiol Infect (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1469-0691.2009.03082.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-0691.2009.03082.x)

## Content

1. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2010 Aug;16(8):1270-3. doi: 
10.1111/j.1469-0691.2009.03082.x. Epub 2009 Oct 20.

Osteoarticular tuberculosis in Tehran, Iran: a 2-year study.

Hadadi A(1), Rasoulinejad M, Khashayar P, Mosavi M, Maghighi Morad M.

Author information:
(1)Research Development Centre, Sina Hospital, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. hadadiaz@tums.ac.ir

Osteoarticular tuberculosis (TB) accounts for 1-5% of all TB cases and 10-18% of 
those with extrapulmonary infection. Diagnosis is difficult, because the lungs 
are rarely involved and there are no specific signs or symptoms. The purpose of 
this study was to assess the frequency and clinical and laboratory findings in 
osteoarticular TB in two referral hospitals in Tehran, Iran. The hospital 
dataset of patients admitted with osteoarticular TB during 2003-2005 was 
reviewed. Patients' demographic data, clinical presentation and radiological and 
pathological findings were analysed. Weight loss (50%), fever (36%) and night 
sweats (38.5%) were the most common constitutional symptoms. Knee, ankle, hip 
and shoulder joints were the most frequent sites for TB arthritis. In 
osteomyelitis, long and short bones were equally affected. In TB spondylitis, 
the lumbar (22.7%) and thoracic (50%) vertebrae were the most commonly involved 
sites. The most frequently reported complications were sphincter disorder 
(39.1%), paraplegia (28.9%) and kyphosis (19.3%). TB osteomyelitis must always 
be borne in mind in countries where TB has high prevalence.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-0691.2009.03082.x
PMID: 19845697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]