---
reference_id: "PMID:27903722"
title: Adenosine Kinase Deficiency in the Brain Results in Maladaptive Synaptic Plasticity.
authors:
- Sandau US
- Colino-Oliveira M
- Jones A
- Saleumvong B
- Coffman SQ
- Liu L
- Miranda-Lourenço C
- Palminha C
- Batalha VL
- Xu Y
- Huo Y
- Diógenes MJ
- Sebastião AM
- Boison D
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2146-16.2016
keywords:
- Adenosine/metabolism
- "Adenosine Kinase/deficiency, genetics"
- Animals
- Brain/physiopathology
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Neuronal Plasticity
- Neurotransmitter Agents/metabolism
- "Receptor, Adenosine A2A/metabolism"
- Synapses/enzymology
- Synaptic Transmission
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adenosine Kinase Deficiency in the Brain Results in Maladaptive Synaptic Plasticity.
**Authors:** Sandau US, Colino-Oliveira M, Jones A, Saleumvong B, Coffman SQ, Liu L, Miranda-Lourenço C, Palminha C, Batalha VL, Xu Y, Huo Y, Diógenes MJ, Sebastião AM, Boison D
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2146-16.2016](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2146-16.2016)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2016 Nov 30;36(48):12117-12128. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2146-16.2016.

Adenosine Kinase Deficiency in the Brain Results in Maladaptive Synaptic 
Plasticity.

Sandau US(1), Colino-Oliveira M(2)(3), Jones A(1), Saleumvong B(1), Coffman 
SQ(1), Liu L(4), Miranda-Lourenço C(2)(3), Palminha C(2)(3), Batalha VL(3), Xu 
Y(5), Huo Y(5), Diógenes MJ(2)(3), Sebastião AM(2)(3), Boison D(6).

Author information:
(1)R.S. Dow Neurobiology Laboratories and.
(2)Institute of Pharmacology and Neurosciences, Faculty of Medicine, Unit of 
Neurosciences, and.
(3)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculty of Medicine, University of Lisbon, 
1649-028 Lisbon, Portugal, and.
(4)Department of Comparative Medicine, Legacy Research Institute, Portland, 
Oregon 97232.
(5)Vascular Biology Center, Department of Cellular Biology and Anatomy, Medical 
College of Georgia, Augusta University, Augusta, Georgia 30912.
(6)R.S. Dow Neurobiology Laboratories and dboison@downeurobiology.org.

Adenosine kinase (ADK) deficiency in human patients (OMIM:614300) disrupts the 
methionine cycle and triggers hypermethioninemia, hepatic encephalopathy, 
cognitive impairment, and seizures. To identify whether this neurological 
phenotype is intrinsically based on ADK deficiency in the brain or if it is 
secondary to liver dysfunction, we generated a mouse model with a brain-wide 
deletion of ADK by introducing a Nestin-Cre transgene into a line of conditional 
ADK deficient Adkfl/fl mice. These AdkΔbrain mice developed a progressive 
stress-induced seizure phenotype associated with spontaneous convulsive seizures 
and profound deficits in hippocampus-dependent learning and memory. 
Pharmacological, biochemical, and electrophysiological studies suggest enhanced 
adenosine levels around synapses resulting in an enhanced adenosine A1 receptor 
(A1R)-dependent protective tone despite lower expression levels of the receptor. 
Theta-burst-induced LTP was enhanced in the mutants and this was dependent on 
adenosine A2A receptor (A2AR) and tropomyosin-related kinase B signaling, 
suggesting increased activation of these receptors in synaptic plasticity 
phenomena. Accordingly, reducing adenosine A2A receptor activity in AdkΔbrain 
mice restored normal associative learning and contextual memory and attenuated 
seizure risk. We conclude that ADK deficiency in the brain triggers neuronal 
adaptation processes that lead to dysregulated synaptic plasticity, cognitive 
deficits, and increased seizure risk. Therefore, ADK mutations have an intrinsic 
effect on brain physiology and may present a genetic risk factor for the 
development of seizures and learning impairments. Furthermore, our data show 
that blocking A2AR activity therapeutically can attenuate neurological symptoms 
in ADK deficiency.
SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT: A novel human genetic condition (OMIM #614300) that is 
based on mutations in the adenosine kinase (Adk) gene has been discovered 
recently. Affected patients develop hepatic encephalopathy, seizures, and severe 
cognitive impairment. To model and understand the neurological phenotype of the 
human mutation, we generated a new conditional knock-out mouse with a 
brain-specific deletion of Adk (AdkΔbrain). Similar to ADK-deficient patients, 
AdkΔbrain mice develop seizures and cognitive deficits. We identified increased 
basal synaptic transmission and enhanced adenosine A2A receptor (A2AR)-dependent 
synaptic plasticity as the underlying mechanisms that govern these phenotypes. 
Our data show that neurological phenotypes in ADK-deficient patients are 
intrinsic to ADK deficiency in the brain and that blocking A2AR activity 
therapeutically can attenuate neurological symptoms in ADK deficiency.

Copyright © 2016 the authors 0270-6474/16/3612118-12$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2146-16.2016
PMCID: PMC5148215
PMID: 27903722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]