---
reference_id: "PMID:17212793"
title: "The role of leptin and ghrelin in the regulation of food intake and body weight in humans: a review."
authors:
- Klok MD
- Jakobsdottir S
- Drent ML
journal: Obes Rev
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-789X.2006.00270.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of leptin and ghrelin in the regulation of food intake and body weight in humans: a review.
**Authors:** Klok MD, Jakobsdottir S, Drent ML
**Journal:** Obes Rev (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1467-789X.2006.00270.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-789X.2006.00270.x)

## Content

1. Obes Rev. 2007 Jan;8(1):21-34. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-789X.2006.00270.x.

The role of leptin and ghrelin in the regulation of food intake and body weight 
in humans: a review.

Klok MD(1), Jakobsdottir S, Drent ML.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands.

Leptin and ghrelin are two hormones that have been recognized to have a major 
influence on energy balance. Leptin is a mediator of long-term regulation of 
energy balance, suppressing food intake and thereby inducing weight loss. 
Ghrelin on the other hand is a fast-acting hormone, seemingly playing a role in 
meal initiation. As a growing number of people suffer from obesity, 
understanding the mechanisms by which various hormones and neurotransmitters 
have influence on energy balance has been a subject of intensive research. In 
obese subjects the circulating level of the anorexigenic hormone leptin is 
increased, whereas surprisingly, the level of the orexigenic hormone ghrelin is 
decreased. It is now established that obese patients are leptin-resistant. 
However, the manner in which both the leptin and ghrelin systems contribute to 
the development or maintenance of obesity is as yet not clear. The purpose of 
this review is to provide background information on the leptin and ghrelin 
hormones, their role in food intake and body weight in humans, and their 
mechanism of action. Possible abnormalities in the leptin and ghrelin systems 
that may contribute to the development of obesity will be mentioned. In 
addition, the potentials of leptin and ghrelin as drug targets will be 
discussed. Finally, the influence of the diet on leptin and ghrelin secretion 
and functioning will be described.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-789X.2006.00270.x
PMID: 17212793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]