---
reference_id: "PMID:38201357"
title: From Development to Place in Therapy of Lorlatinib for the Treatment of ALK and ROS1 Rearranged Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC).
authors:
- Fabbri L
- Di Federico A
- Astore M
- Marchiori V
- Rejtano A
- Seminerio R
- Gelsomino F
- De Giglio A
journal: Diagnostics (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/diagnostics14010048
content_type: abstract_only
---

# From Development to Place in Therapy of Lorlatinib for the Treatment of ALK and ROS1 Rearranged Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC).
**Authors:** Fabbri L, Di Federico A, Astore M, Marchiori V, Rejtano A, Seminerio R, Gelsomino F, De Giglio A
**Journal:** Diagnostics (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/diagnostics14010048](https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics14010048)

## Content

1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2023 Dec 25;14(1):48. doi: 10.3390/diagnostics14010048.

From Development to Place in Therapy of Lorlatinib for the Treatment of ALK and
ROS1 Rearranged Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC).

Fabbri L(1), Di Federico A(1)(2), Astore M(1), Marchiori V(1), Rejtano A(1),
Seminerio R(1), Gelsomino F(2), De Giglio A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, Alma Mater Studiorum University
of Bologna, 40126 Bologna, Italy.
(2)Division of Medical Oncology, IRCCS Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Di
Bologna, 40138 Bologna, Italy.

Following the results of the CROWN phase III trial, the third-generation
macrocyclic ALK inhibitor lorlatinib has been introduced as a salvage option
after the failure of a first-line TKI in ALK-rearranged NSCLC, while its precise
role in the therapeutic algorithm of ROS1 positive disease is still to be
completely defined. The ability to overcome acquired resistance to prior
generation TKIs (alectinib, brigatinib, ceritinib, and crizotinib) and the high
intracranial activity in brain metastatic disease thanks to increased
blood-brain barrier penetration are the reasons for the growing popularity and
interest in this molecule. Nevertheless, the major vulnerability of this drug
resides in a peculiar profile of related collateral events, with neurological
impairment being the most conflicting and debated clinical issue. The cognitive
safety concern, the susceptibility to heterogeneous resistance pathways, and the
absence of a valid alternative in the second line are strongly jeopardizing a
potential paradigm shift in this oncogene-addicted disease. So, when prescribing
lorlatinib, clinicians must face two diametrically opposed characteristics: a
great therapeutic potential without the intrinsic limitations of its precursor
TKIs, a cytotoxic activity threatened by suboptimal tolerability, and the
unavoidable onset of resistance mechanisms we cannot properly manage yet. In
this paper, we give a critical point of view on the stepwise introduction of
this promising drug into clinical practice, starting from its innovative
molecular and biochemical properties to intriguing future developments, without
forgetting its weaknesses.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics14010048
PMCID: PMC10804309
PMID: 38201357

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no conflicts of interest
related to the present work.
