---
reference_id: "PMID:22781421"
title: "[Design and implementation of Geographical Information System on prevention and control of cholera]."
authors:
- Li XJ
- Fang LQ
- Wang DC
- Wang LX
- Li YP
- Li YL
- Yang H
- Kan B
- Cao WC
journal: Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi
year: '2012'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Design and implementation of Geographical Information System on prevention and control of cholera].
**Authors:** Li XJ, Fang LQ, Wang DC, Wang LX, Li YP, Li YL, Yang H, Kan B, Cao WC
**Journal:** Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi (2012)

## Content

1. Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Apr;33(4):431-4.

[Design and implementation of Geographical Information System on prevention and 
control of cholera].

[Article in Chinese]

Li XJ(1), Fang LQ, Wang DC, Wang LX, Li YP, Li YL, Yang H, Kan B, Cao WC.

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of 
Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing 100071, China.

To build the Geographical Information System (GIS) database for prevention and 
control of cholera programs as well as using management analysis and function 
demonstration to show the spatial attribute of cholera. Data from case reporting 
system regarding diarrhoea, vibrio cholerae, serotypes of vibrio cholerae at the 
surveillance spots and seafoods, as well as surveillance data on ambient 
environment and climate were collected. All the data were imported to system 
database to show the incidence of vibrio cholerae in different provinces, 
regions and counties to support the spatial analysis through the spatial 
analysis of GIS. The epidemic trends of cholera, seasonal characteristics of the 
cholera and the variation of the vibrio cholerae with times were better 
understood. Information on hotspots, regions and time of epidemics was 
collected, and helpful in providing risk prediction on the incidence of vibrio 
cholerae. The exploitation of the software can predict and simulate the 
spatio-temporal risks, so as to provide guidance for the prevention and control 
of the disease.

PMID: 22781421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]