---
reference_id: "PMID:4723462"
title: "Acute intermittent porphyria: response of tachycardia and hypertension to propranolol."
authors:
- Beattie AD
- Moore MR
- Goldberg A
- Ward RL
journal: Br Med J
year: '1973'
doi: 10.1136/bmj.3.5874.257
keywords:
- 5-Aminolevulinate Synthetase/analysis
- "Abdomen, Acute/drug therapy"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Antihypertensive Agents
- Blood Pressure/drug effects
- Female
- Guanidines/therapeutic use
- Heart Rate/drug effects
- Humans
- Hypertension/drug therapy
- Liver/enzymology
- Male
- Porphyrias/drug therapy
- "Propranolol/administration & dosage, pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Tachycardia/drug therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute intermittent porphyria: response of tachycardia and hypertension to propranolol.
**Authors:** Beattie AD, Moore MR, Goldberg A, Ward RL
**Journal:** Br Med J (1973)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bmj.3.5874.257](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.3.5874.257)

## Content

1. Br Med J. 1973 Aug 4;3(5874):257-60. doi: 10.1136/bmj.3.5874.257.

Acute intermittent porphyria: response of tachycardia and hypertension to
propranolol.

Beattie AD, Moore MR, Goldberg A, Ward RL.

In four young adult patients with acute attacks of acute intermittent porphyria
tachycardia and hypertension were prominent features of the illness. Urinary
catecholamine excretion was increased in both patients in whom it was measured.
The effect of the beta-adrenergic blocking drug propranolol was assessed in each
case. The dose varied from 40 to 240 mg daily. A response in the form of a
reduction in heart rate and blood pressure was noted in each case, and in one
case a marked alleviation of abdominal pain followed administration of the
drug.Propranolol, when given in high dosage to rats, did not induce an increase
in hepatic delta-aminolaevulic acid synthetase, an enzyme which is raised in
human and drug-induced animal porphyria. The use of propranolol is therefore
unlikely to aggravate or precipitate an attack of acute intermittent porphyria.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.3.5874.257
PMCID: PMC1586759
PMID: 4723462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
