---
reference_id: "PMID:27604558"
title: "Identification of 15 novel partial SHOX deletions and 13 partial duplications, and a review of the literature reveals intron 3 to be a hotspot region."
authors:
- Benito-Sanz S
- Belinchon-Martínez A
- Aza-Carmona M
- de la Torre C
- Huber C
- González-Casado I
- Ross JL
- Thomas NS
- Zinn AR
- Cormier-Daire V
- Heath KE
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/jhg.2016.113
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- Gene Duplication/genetics
- Growth Disorders/genetics
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Introns/genetics
- Multiplex Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Nucleic Acid Amplification Techniques
- Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Sequence Deletion/genetics
- Short Stature Homeobox Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of 15 novel partial SHOX deletions and 13 partial duplications, and a review of the literature reveals intron 3 to be a hotspot region.
**Authors:** Benito-Sanz S, Belinchon-Martínez A, Aza-Carmona M, de la Torre C, Huber C, González-Casado I, Ross JL, Thomas NS, Zinn AR, Cormier-Daire V, Heath KE
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/jhg.2016.113](https://doi.org/10.1038/jhg.2016.113)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2017 Feb;62(2):229-234. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2016.113. Epub 2016 Sep
8.

Identification of 15 novel partial SHOX deletions and 13 partial duplications, 
and a review of the literature reveals intron 3 to be a hotspot region.

Benito-Sanz S(1)(2)(3), Belinchon-Martínez A(1)(2)(3), Aza-Carmona M(1)(2)(3), 
de la Torre C(1), Huber C(4), González-Casado I(3)(5), Ross JL(6), Thomas NS(7), 
Zinn AR(8), Cormier-Daire V(4), Heath KE(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical and Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), Hospital Universitario 
La Paz, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), 
Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), Madrid, Spain.
(3)Unidad Multidisciplinar de Displasias Esqueléticas (UMDE), Hospital 
Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Department of Genetics, Université Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité, 
Institut IMAGINE, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.
(5)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Hospital Universitario La Paz, 
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(7)Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, 
UK.
(8)Dermott Center for Human Growth and Development and Department of Internal 
Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, TX, USA.

Short stature homeobox gene (SHOX) is located in the pseudoautosomal region 1 of 
the sex chromosomes. It encodes a transcription factor implicated in the 
skeletal growth. Point mutations, deletions or duplications of SHOX or its 
transcriptional regulatory elements are associated with two skeletal dysplasias, 
Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) and Langer mesomelic dysplasia (LMD), as well 
as in a small proportion of idiopathic short stature (ISS) individuals. We have 
identified a total of 15 partial SHOX deletions and 13 partial SHOX duplications 
in LWD, LMD and ISS patients referred for routine SHOX diagnostics during a 10 
year period (2004-2014). Subsequently, we characterized these alterations using 
MLPA (multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification assay), fine-tiling array 
CGH (comparative genomic hybridation) and breakpoint PCR. Nearly half of the 
alterations have a distal or proximal breakpoint in intron 3. Evaluation of our 
data and that in the literature reveals that although partial deletions and 
duplications only account for a small fraction of SHOX alterations, intron 3 
appears to be a breakpoint hotspot, with alterations arising by non-allelic 
homologous recombination, non-homologous end joining or other complex 
mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1038/jhg.2016.113
PMID: 27604558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]