---
reference_id: "PMID:33369172"
title: "Stargardt misdiagnosis: How ocular genetics helps."
authors:
- Ibanez MB 4th
- de Guimarães TAC
- Capasso J
- Bello N
- Levin AV
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62045
keywords:
- ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- "Macular Degeneration/diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- "Stargardt Disease/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stargardt misdiagnosis: How ocular genetics helps.
**Authors:** Ibanez MB 4th, de Guimarães TAC, Capasso J, Bello N, Levin AV
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.62045](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.62045)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2021 Mar;185(3):814-819. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62045. Epub
2020  Dec 24.

Stargardt misdiagnosis: How ocular genetics helps.

Ibanez MB 4th(1), de Guimarães TAC(1), Capasso J(1), Bello N(1), Levin AV(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Ophthalmology and Ocular Genetics, Wills Eye Hospital, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Sidney Kimmel Medical College at Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA.

Ocular Genetics at Wills Eye Hospital sees a wide range of rare disorders for 
accurate diagnosis. To demonstrate how focused consultation and genetic testing 
results in precise diagnoses, we investigated false diagnosis rates for patients 
referred with a diagnosis of Stargardt disease. This is a retrospective review 
of patients over a 3 year period referred to our Ocular Genetics clinic for 
possible Stargardt disease, or already holding a diagnosis of Stargardt disease. 
Results of diagnostic and genetic testing were compared to standard definition 
of Stargardt. Of 40 patients, 14 (35%) had been misdiagnosed. Four had 
non-Stargardt phenotype of which three had ABCA4 pathogenic variants with 
phenotypes inconsistent with Stargardt disease. Two of those with pathogenic 
ABCA4 variants were related. Nine had pathogenic variants in other different 
genes with overlapping features of Stargardt disease. One had Thioridazine 
maculopathy. Our study highlights the essential role of the subspecialty field 
of ocular genetics in obtaining accurate diagnoses for the delivery of correct 
counseling and interventional trial eligibility assessment.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62045
PMID: 33369172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]