---
reference_id: "PMID:37188888"
title: Prokineticin 2 as a potential biomarker for the diagnosis of Kawasaki disease.
authors:
- Zeng L
- Wang C
- Song Z
- Liu Q
- Chen D
- Yu X
journal: Clin Exp Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10238-023-01078-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prokineticin 2 as a potential biomarker for the diagnosis of Kawasaki disease.
**Authors:** Zeng L, Wang C, Song Z, Liu Q, Chen D, Yu X
**Journal:** Clin Exp Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10238-023-01078-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10238-023-01078-1)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Med. 2023 Nov;23(7):3443-3451. doi: 10.1007/s10238-023-01078-1. Epub 
2023 May 15.

Prokineticin 2 as a potential biomarker for the diagnosis of Kawasaki disease.

Zeng L(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Wang C(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Song Z(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Liu 
Q(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Chen D(6)(7)(8)(9)(10), Yu X(11)(12)(13)(14)(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, PR China.
(2)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders, 
Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, PR China.
(3)National Clinical Research Center for Child Health and Disorders, Children's 
Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, PR China.
(4)China International Science and Technology Cooperation Base of Child 
Development and Critical Disorders, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, PR China.
(5)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Child Infection and Immunity, Chongqing, PR 
China.
(6)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, PR China. 476538577@qq.com.
(7)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders, 
Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, PR China. 
476538577@qq.com.
(8)National Clinical Research Center for Child Health and Disorders, Children's 
Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, PR China. 476538577@qq.com.
(9)China International Science and Technology Cooperation Base of Child 
Development and Critical Disorders, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, PR China. 476538577@qq.com.
(10)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Child Infection and Immunity, Chongqing, PR 
China. 476538577@qq.com.
(11)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, PR China. 347151764@qq.com.
(12)Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Child Development and Disorders, 
Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, PR China. 
347151764@qq.com.
(13)National Clinical Research Center for Child Health and Disorders, Children's 
Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, PR China. 347151764@qq.com.
(14)China International Science and Technology Cooperation Base of Child 
Development and Critical Disorders, Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, PR China. 347151764@qq.com.
(15)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Child Infection and Immunity, Chongqing, PR 
China. 347151764@qq.com.

Kawasaki disease is a pressing acute self-limiting inflammatory disorder disease 
which lack of specific biomarkers. Our research aims to investigate the serum 
expression of a novel immune regulator PK2 in children with Kawasaki disease and 
to evaluate the ability of PK2 to predict Kawasaki disease. A total of 70 
children with Kawasaki disease in the Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University who were first diagnosed, 20 children with common fever admitted to 
hospital due to bacterial infection during the same period, and 31 children 
underwent physical examination were included in this study. Venous blood was 
collected for complete blood count, CRP, ESR, PCT, and PK2 before clinical 
intervention. The predictive potential of PK2 as a biomarker for the diagnosis 
of Kawasaki disease was judged by correlation analysis, the receiver operating 
characteristic (ROC) and combined score. Compared with healthy children and 
children with common fever, children diagnosed with Kawasaki disease had 
significantly lower serum PK2 concentrations (median 28,503.7208 ng/ml, 
26,242.5484 ng/ml, and 16,890.2452 ng/ml, respectively, Kruskal-Wallis test: 
p < 0.0001). Analysis of the existing indicators in other laboratories showed 
that WBC (Kruskal-Wallis test: p < 0.0001), PLT (Kruskal-Wallis test: 
p = 0.0018), CRP (Mann-Whitney U: p < 0.0001), ESR (Mann-Whitney U: p = 0.0092), 
NLR (Kruskal-Wallis test: p < 0.0001), and other indicators were significantly 
increased compared with healthy children and children with common fever, RBC 
(Kruskal-Wallis test: p < 0.0001), and Hg (Kruskal-Wallis test: p < 0.0001) were 
significantly decreased in children with Kawasaki disease conversely. In the 
analysis of the Spearman correlation, it was found that serum PK2 concentration 
and NLR ratio were significantly negatively correlated in children with Kawasaki 
disease (rs = -0.2613, p = 0.0301). In the analysis of the ROC curves, it was 
found that the area under the PK2 curve was 0.782 (95% confidence interval 
0.683-0.862; p < 0.0001), the ESR was 0.697 (95% confidence interval 
0.582-0.796; p = 0.0120), the CRP was 0.601 (95% confidence interval 
0.683-0.862; p = 0.1805), and the NLR was 0.735 (95% confidence interval 
0.631-0.823; p = 0.0026). PK2 can significantly predict Kawasaki disease 
independently of CRP and ESR (p < 0.0001). The combined score of PK2 and ESR can 
significantly improve the diagnostic performance of PK2 (AUC = 0.827, 95% CI 
0.724-0.903, p < 0.0001). The sensitivity was 87.50%, the sensitivity was 
75.81%, the positive likelihood ratio was 6.0648, and the Youden index was 
0.6331. PK2 has the potential to be a biomarker for early diagnosis of Kawasaki 
disease, and the combined use of ESR can further improve its diagnostic 
performance. Our study identifies PK2 as an important biomarker for Kawasaki 
disease and provides a potential new diagnostic strategy for Kawasaki disease.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s10238-023-01078-1
PMID: 37188888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]