---
reference_id: "PMID:26240353"
title: Flow perfusion effects on three-dimensional culture and drug sensitivity of Ewing sarcoma.
authors:
- Santoro M
- Lamhamedi-Cherradi SE
- Menegaz BA
- Ludwig JA
- Mikos AG
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1506684112
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/chemistry"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized"
- Antineoplastic Agents/chemistry
- Biomechanical Phenomena
- Bioreactors
- Cell Survival
- "Drug Screening Assays, Antitumor"
- Equipment Design
- Flow Cytometry
- Humans
- Insulin-Like Growth Factor I/metabolism
- Ligands
- "Microscopy, Electron, Scanning"
- "Microscopy, Fluorescence"
- Perfusion
- "Receptor, IGF Type 1/antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Sarcoma, Ewing/metabolism, pathology"
- Signal Transduction
- "Stress, Mechanical"
- Tissue Engineering/methods
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured/drug effects"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Flow perfusion effects on three-dimensional culture and drug sensitivity of Ewing sarcoma.
**Authors:** Santoro M, Lamhamedi-Cherradi SE, Menegaz BA, Ludwig JA, Mikos AG
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1506684112](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1506684112)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Aug 18;112(33):10304-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1506684112. Epub 2015 Aug 3.

Flow perfusion effects on three-dimensional culture and drug sensitivity of
Ewing sarcoma.

Santoro M(1), Lamhamedi-Cherradi SE(2), Menegaz BA(2), Ludwig JA(3), Mikos
AG(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Rice University,
Houston, TX 77005; Department of Sarcoma Medical Oncology, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77054;
(2)Department of Sarcoma Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77054;
(3)Department of Sarcoma Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77054; mikos@rice.edu jaludwig@mdanderson.org.
(4)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Rice University,
Houston, TX 77005; Department of Bioengineering, Rice University, Houston, TX
77030 mikos@rice.edu jaludwig@mdanderson.org.

Three-dimensional tumor models accurately describe different aspects of the
tumor microenvironment and are readily available for mechanistic studies of
tumor biology and for drug screening. Nevertheless, these systems often overlook
biomechanical stimulation, another fundamental driver of tumor progression. To
address this issue, we cultured Ewing sarcoma (ES) cells on electrospun
poly(ε-caprolactone) 3D scaffolds within a flow perfusion bioreactor.
Flow-derived shear stress provided a physiologically relevant mechanical
stimulation that significantly promoted insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF1)
production and elicited a superadditive release in the presence of exogenous
IGF1. This finding is particularly relevant, given the central role of the
IGF1/IGF-1 receptor (IGF-1R) pathway in ES tumorigenesis and as a promising
clinical target. Additionally, flow perfusion enhanced in a rate-dependent
manner the sensitivity of ES cells to IGF-1R inhibitor dalotuzumab (MK-0646) and
showed shear stress-dependent resistance to the IGF-1R blockade. This study
demonstrates shear stress-dependent ES cell sensitivity to dalotuzumab,
highlighting the importance of biomechanical stimulation on ES-acquired drug
resistance to IGF-1R inhibition. Furthermore, flow perfusion increased nutrient
supply throughout the scaffold, enriching ES culture over static conditions. Our
use of a tissue-engineered model, rather than human tumors or xenografts,
enabled precise control of the forces experienced by ES cells, and therefore
provided at least one explanation for the remarkable antineoplastic effects
observed by some ES tumor patients from IGF-1R targeted therapies, in contrast
to the lackluster effect observed in cells grown in conventional monolayer
culture.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1506684112
PMCID: PMC4547215
PMID: 26240353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
