---
reference_id: "PMID:31536184"
title: Glutaric Acidemia Type 1.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Larson A
- Goodman S
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glutaric Acidemia Type 1.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Larson A, Goodman S

## Content

1. Glutaric Acidemia Type 1.

Larson A(1)(2), Goodman S(1)(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2019 Sep 19.

Author information:
(1)University of Colorado, Denver, Colorado
(2)Children’s Hospital Colorado, Aurora, Colorado

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: The phenotypic spectrum of untreated glutaric acidemia 
type 1 (GA-1) ranges from the more common form (infantile-onset disease) to the 
less common form (later-onset disease – i.e., after age 6 years). Of note, the 
GA-1 phenotype can vary widely between untreated family members with the same 
genotype, primarily as a function of the age at which the first acute 
encephalopathic crisis occurred: three months to six years in infantile-onset 
GA-1 and after age six years in later-onset GA-1. Characteristically these 
crises result in acute bilateral striatal injury and subsequent complex movement 
disorders. In the era of newborn screening (NBS), the prompt initiation of 
treatment of asymptomatic infants detected by NBS means that most individuals 
who would have developed manifestations of either infantile-onset or later-onset 
GA-1 remain asymptomatic; however, they may be at increased risk for other 
manifestations (e.g., renal disease) that are becoming apparent as the 
understanding of the natural history of treated GA-1 continues to evolve.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: Because the early initiation of treatment dramatically 
improved the outcome for persons with GA-1, an international guideline group has 
recommended NBS. The diagnosis of GA-1 in a proband with a positive NBS result 
or suggestive biochemical and/or clinical findings is confirmed by 
identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in GCDH or, when molecular 
genetic test results are uncertain, by detection of significantly reduced 
activity of the enzyme glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase (GCDH) in cultured fibroblasts 
or leukocytes.
MANAGEMENT: Prevention of primary manifestations: When GA-1 is suspected during 
the diagnostic evaluation of a newborn with an elevated concentration of 3-OH-GA 
in plasma or urine, metabolic treatment should be initiated immediately. 
Development and evaluation of treatment plans, training and education of 
affected individuals and their families, and avoidance of side effects of 
dietary treatment (i.e., malnutrition, growth failure) require a 
multidisciplinary approach by experienced subspecialists from a specialized 
metabolic center. The main principles of treatment are to reduce lysine 
oxidation and enhance physiologic detoxification of glutaryl-CoA. Combined 
metabolic therapy includes low-lysine diet, carnitine supplementation, and 
emergency treatment during episodes with the goal of averting catabolism and 
minimizing CNS exposure to lysine and its toxic metabolic byproducts. 
Surveillance: Regular evaluations by a metabolic specialist and metabolic 
dietician; routine evaluation of growth parameters and head circumference, 
developmental progress and educational needs, clinical signs and symptoms of 
movement disorders, biochemical parameters, and renal function (in adolescents 
and adults). Agents/circumstances to avoid: Excessive dietary protein or protein 
malnutrition inducing catabolic state, prolonged fasting, catabolic illness 
(intercurrent infection; brief febrile illness post vaccination), inadequate 
caloric provision during other stressors (e.g., surgery or procedure requiring 
fasting/anesthesia). Evaluation of relatives at risk: Testing of all at-risk 
sibs of any age to allow for early diagnosis and treatment. For at-risk newborn 
sibs when prenatal testing was not performed: in parallel with NBS either test 
for the familial GCDH pathogenic variants or measure urine organic acids, plasma 
amino acids, and acylcarnitine profile. Pregnancy management: It is recommended 
that care for a pregnant woman with GA-1 be provided by a multidisciplinary team 
including the treating obstetrician, a metabolic physician, and a specialist 
metabolic dietician.
GENETIC COUNSELING: GA-1 is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. At 
conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of being 
affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of 
being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the GCDH pathogenic variants in an 
affected family member are known, carrier testing for at-risk relatives, 
prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk, and preimplantation genetic 
testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 31536184