---
reference_id: "PMID:41091101"
title: "Long-term intranasal oxytocin therapy in patients with hypothalamic syndrome: case series and literature review."
authors:
- Wang Y
- Wang Y
- Cao B
- Li X
- Ding Y
- Meng X
- Cheng M
- Zhang Q
- Gong C
journal: Endocr Connect
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1530/EC-25-0092
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term intranasal oxytocin therapy in patients with hypothalamic syndrome: case series and literature review.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Wang Y, Cao B, Li X, Ding Y, Meng X, Cheng M, Zhang Q, Gong C
**Journal:** Endocr Connect (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1530/EC-25-0092](https://doi.org/10.1530/EC-25-0092)

## Content

1. Endocr Connect. 2025 Oct 31;14(10):e250092. doi: 10.1530/EC-25-0092. Print
2025  Oct 1.

Long-term intranasal oxytocin therapy in patients with hypothalamic syndrome: 
case series and literature review.

Wang Y(1), Wang Y(1), Cao B(2), Li X(1), Ding Y(1), Meng X(1), Cheng M(2), Zhang 
Q(1), Gong C(1).

Author information:
(1)Depart of Endocrinology, Genetics and Metabolism, Beijing Children's 
Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(2)Capital Center for Children's Health, Capital Medical University, Beijing, 
China.

CONTEXT: Hypothalamic syndrome (HS) is a rare endocrine disorder resulting from 
Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS), craniopharyngiomas, ROHHAD syndrome, and unknown 
etiologies. Oxytocin has been shown to facilitate weight loss in children with 
HS and affect behavior. In this study, we aimed to observe the efficacy and 
safety of oxytocin treatment in HS patients, including those with PWS.
CASE DESCRIPTION: We described four PWS patients and nine non-PWS patients who 
received oxytocin treatment (16-24 IU/day) for 6 months. Two patients with 
ROHHAD syndrome were followed up for 1 year. Overall, patients exhibited 
reductions in BMI z-score ((4.36 (1.16, 13.18)) vs (4.20 ± 2.62)), Hyperphagia 
Questionnaire for Clinical Trials (HQ-CT) ((16.00 ± 8.59) vs (11.3 ± 6.31)), PWS 
Behavioral Questionnaire (PWSBQ) ((56.75 ± 27.24) vs (44.25 ± 23.89)) and the 
Epworth Sleepiness Scale (ESS) ((14.63 ± 42.55) vs (12.87 ± 5.77)), but some 
reversed at 6 months. Autonomic dysregulation in non-PWS patients improved at 3 
months and remained stable at 6 months. No severe advance effects were observed.
CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrated that intranasal oxytocin administration 
improved appetite, behavioral symptoms, and sleep quality in the majority of 
patients. Notably, autonomic dysregulation was also alleviated in non-PWS cases, 
suggesting its potential as an alternative therapy for specific HS subtypes. 
However, further validation through larger-scale studies and extended follow-up 
is warranted to confirm its efficacy.

DOI: 10.1530/EC-25-0092
PMCID: PMC12583497
PMID: 41091101

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest that could be perceived as prejudicing the impartiality of the work 
reported.