---
reference_id: "PMID:19136287"
title: Toxicity of peroxisomal C27-bile acid intermediates.
authors:
- Ferdinandusse S
- Denis S
- Dacremont G
- Wanders RJ
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2008.11.165
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Toxicity of peroxisomal C27-bile acid intermediates.
**Authors:** Ferdinandusse S, Denis S, Dacremont G, Wanders RJ
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2008.11.165](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2008.11.165)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2009 Mar;96(3):121-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2008.11.165. Epub 
2009 Jan 10.

Toxicity of peroxisomal C27-bile acid intermediates.

Ferdinandusse S(1), Denis S, Dacremont G, Wanders RJ.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Academic Medical Center at the 
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. S.Ferdinandusse@amc.uva.nl

Peroxisomes play an important role in bile acid biosynthesis because the last 
steps of the synthesis pathway are performed by the beta-oxidation system 
located inside peroxisomes. As a consequence, C(27)-bile acid intermediates 
accumulate in several peroxisomal disorders. It has been suggested that 
C(27)-bile acids are especially toxic and contribute to the liver disease 
associated with peroxisomal disorders. For this reason, we investigated the 
toxicity of C(27)-bile acids and the underlying mechanisms. We studied the 
effects of conjugated and unconjugated C(27)-bile acids on cell viability, 
mitochondrial respiratory chain function and production of oxygen radicals in 
the rat hepatoma cell line McA-RH7777. Cell viability decreased progressively 
after incubation with increasing concentrations of different bile acids with 
dihydroxycholestanoic acid (DHCA) being clearly the most cytotoxic bile acid. In 
addition, the different bile acids caused a dose-dependent decrease in ATP 
synthesis by isolated mitochondria oxidizing malate and glutamate. Finally, 
there was a dose-dependent stimulation of ROS generation in the presence of 
C(27)-bile acids. In conclusion, our studies showed that C(27)-bile acids are 
more cytotoxic than mature C(24)-bile acids. In addition, C(27)-bile acids are 
potent inhibitors of oxidative phosphorylation and enhance mitochondrial ROS 
production by inhibiting the respiratory chain.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2008.11.165
PMID: 19136287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]