---
reference_id: "PMID:24413408"
title: Fulminant bacterial meningitis.
authors:
- Radetsky M
journal: Pediatr Infect Dis J
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1097/01.inf.0000435508.67490.f0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fulminant bacterial meningitis.
**Authors:** Radetsky M
**Journal:** Pediatr Infect Dis J (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.inf.0000435508.67490.f0](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.inf.0000435508.67490.f0)

## Content

1. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2014 Feb;33(2):204-7. doi: 
10.1097/01.inf.0000435508.67490.f0.

Fulminant bacterial meningitis.

Radetsky M(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Pediatrics, University of New Mexico School of 
Medicine, Presbyterian Medical Center, Albuquerque, New Mexico.

BACKGROUND: Fulminant bacterial meningitis is a rare host reaction to infection 
characterized by sudden onset, rapid deterioration, abrupt cerebral edema and 
refractory intracranial hypertension associated with an extremely high mortality 
rate.
METHODS: A search of all relevant medical literature since 1900 was conducted to 
clarify the nature of this entity and its medical management.
RESULTS: Fulminant meningitis occurs in a small percentage of all cases of 
bacterial meningitis, at all ages and with all infecting organisms. The 
mortality rate exceeds 50%. Descriptions of fulminant bacterial meningitis are 
found in medical literature from the preantibiotic era. Its incidence and 
clinical character have not changed since the introduction of antibiotics and 
advanced intensive care medicine. The explosive cerebral edema cannot be 
predicted, and the underlying molecular pathophysiology remains poorly 
understood. Vigorous neuroresuscitation and the use of adjunctive techniques to 
control the cerebral edema have not been shown to modify the extreme 
intracranial hypertension and risk of herniation.
CONCLUSION: Fulminant bacterial meningitis is an example of an aberrant host 
response to infection that challenges available medical intervention.

DOI: 10.1097/01.inf.0000435508.67490.f0
PMID: 24413408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]