---
reference_id: "PMID:23772614"
title: "CD4(+) T-cell depletion in HIV infection: mechanisms of immunological failure."
authors:
- Okoye AA
- Picker LJ
journal: Immunol Rev
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1111/imr.12066
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CD4(+) T-cell depletion in HIV infection: mechanisms of immunological failure.
**Authors:** Okoye AA, Picker LJ
**Journal:** Immunol Rev (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/imr.12066](https://doi.org/10.1111/imr.12066)

## Content

1. Immunol Rev. 2013 Jul;254(1):54-64. doi: 10.1111/imr.12066.

CD4(+) T-cell depletion in HIV infection: mechanisms of immunological failure.

Okoye AA(1), Picker LJ.

Author information:
(1)Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute and Oregon National Primate Research 
Center, Oregon Health & Science University, Beaverton, OR 97006, USA. 
okoyea@ohsu.edu

The hallmark of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) pathogenesis is a 
progressive depletion of CD4(+) T-cell populations in close association with 
progressive impairment of cellular immunity and increasing susceptibility to 
opportunistic infections (OI). Disease progression in untreated human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection can take many years, and it was 
originally hypothesized to be a consequence of slow, viral-mediated CD4(+) 
T-cell destruction. However, massive CD4(+) memory T-cell destruction is now 
known to occur quite early in infection, almost always without overt 
immunodeficiency. In most individuals, this initial destruction is countered by 
CD4(+) memory T-cell regeneration that preserves CD4(+) T-cell numbers and 
functions above the threshold associated with overt immunodeficiency. This 
regeneration, which occurs in the setting of chronic immune activation and 
immune dysregulation does not, however, restore all functionally important 
CD4(+) T-cell populations and is not stable over the long term. Ultimately, 
CD4(+) memory T-cell homeostasis fails and critical effector populations decline 
below the level necessary to prevent OI. Thus, the onset of overt immune 
deficiency appears to be intimately linked with CD4(+) memory T-cell dynamics 
and reflects the complex interplay of direct viral cytopathogenicity and the 
indirect effects of persistent immune activation on CD4(+) memory T-cell 
proliferation, differentiation, and survival.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/imr.12066
PMCID: PMC3729334
PMID: 23772614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]