---
reference_id: "PMID:41271664"
title: Fontaine progeroid syndrome with neonatal mitochondrial disease.
authors:
- Riko M
- Kawamoto D
- Hirayama K
- Tsuchihashi T
- Suzuki T
- Sugimoto T
- Okazaki Y
- Murayama K
- Tokuhara D
journal: Hum Genome Var
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41439-025-00331-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fontaine progeroid syndrome with neonatal mitochondrial disease.
**Authors:** Riko M, Kawamoto D, Hirayama K, Tsuchihashi T, Suzuki T, Sugimoto T, Okazaki Y, Murayama K, Tokuhara D
**Journal:** Hum Genome Var (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41439-025-00331-1](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41439-025-00331-1)

## Content

1. Hum Genome Var. 2025 Nov 21;12(1):26. doi: 10.1038/s41439-025-00331-1.

Fontaine progeroid syndrome with neonatal mitochondrial disease.

Riko M(1), Kawamoto D(2), Hirayama K(2), Tsuchihashi T(2), Suzuki T(2), Sugimoto
T(2), Okazaki Y(3), Murayama K(3), Tokuhara D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Wakayama Medical University, Wakayama, Japan.
mricoh@wakayama-med.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Wakayama Medical University, Wakayama, Japan.
(3)Diagnostics and Therapeutics of Intractable Diseases, Intractable Disease
Research Center, Graduate School of Medicine, Juntendo University, Bunkyo,
Tokyo, Japan.

Fontaine progeroid syndrome (FPS) is a rare condition characterized by
abnormalities in SLC25A24. Some instances of FPS have been reported to be fatal
early in life. Here we present the first case of mitochondrial disease diagnosed
with FPS in Japan. The diagnosis was based on the presence of the heterozygous
known pathogenic variant of SLC25A24, NM_013386.5: c.649C>T and decreased
activity of mitochondrial respiratory chain enzyme activity.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41439-025-00331-1
PMCID: PMC12639141
PMID: 41271664

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no
competing interests. Compliance with ethical standards: The parents of the
patient provided their informed consent for the study, and the study design was
approved by the ethical committee of the Wakayama Medical University (no. 4119).
