---
reference_id: "PMID:40146061"
title: "Stickler syndrome: associated musculoskeletal manifestations and first population-based incidence."
authors:
- Rehm A
- Newton AC
- Ashby E
- Linardatou Novak P
- Thahir A
- Clegg R
- Butt J
- Hatzantoni K
- Ngu AWT
- Kobezda T
- Shehata R
- Ong JCY
journal: J Pediatr Orthop B
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1097/BPB.0000000000001180
keywords:
- Humans
- "Connective Tissue Diseases/epidemiology, diagnosis, complications"
- Incidence
- Female
- Male
- Child
- "Arthritis/epidemiology, diagnosis"
- Musculoskeletal Diseases/epidemiology
- Adult
- Population Surveillance/methods
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural"
- Retinal Detachment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stickler syndrome: associated musculoskeletal manifestations and first population-based incidence.
**Authors:** Rehm A, Newton AC, Ashby E, Linardatou Novak P, Thahir A, Clegg R, Butt J, Hatzantoni K, Ngu AWT, Kobezda T, Shehata R, Ong JCY
**Journal:** J Pediatr Orthop B (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BPB.0000000000001180](https://doi.org/10.1097/BPB.0000000000001180)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Orthop B. 2025 May 1;34(3):294-304. doi:
10.1097/BPB.0000000000001180.  Epub 2025 Mar 25.

Stickler syndrome: associated musculoskeletal manifestations and first
population-based incidence.

Rehm A(1), Newton AC, Ashby E, Linardatou Novak P, Thahir A, Clegg R, Butt J,
Hatzantoni K, Ngu AWT, Kobezda T, Shehata R, Ong JCY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Orthopaedics, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UK.

The objective of this study is to identify musculoskeletal manifestations
associated with Stickler syndrome from an inclusive literature review and to
perform the first population study to establish its incidence. We reviewed all
for us retrievable publications linked to Stickler syndrome listed in PubMed and
publications quoted within these publications going back to 1954. From our
medical record data bases, we identified all patients with the diagnosis of
Stickler syndrome out of a population of consecutive live births born in our
maternity hospital between 2000 and 2016. We identified 504 publications of
which we managed to obtain and review 487, listing 6182 patients with Stickler
syndrome. Musculoskeletal manifestations were recorded in 161 publications (2157
patients: 649 children, 931 adults, unknown 577), providing information on
musculoskeletal findings for 1738 patients. There were 237 lower limb-, 233
spinal- and 80 upper limb abnormalities recorded for children. Hyperlaxity was
recorded for 100 and unspecified pain for 70 children and for 77 abnormalities
it was not specified if upper or lower limbs were affected. Coronal and axial
lower limb malalignment was documented 74 times. We identified four patients
with Stickler syndrome out of 87 378 consecutive live births, giving an
incidence of 1 in 21 844 live births. Patients with Stickler syndrome present
with a large variety of musculoskeletal manifestations. Assessment by a
paediatric orthopaedic surgeon in childhood would be beneficial to identify
spinal abnormalities and alignment problems, such as coxa vara/valga, abnormal
femoral version, genu valgum and distal lateral tibial dysplasia, where guided
growth or osteotomies might be useful to alleviate future function and symptoms.

Copyright © 2024 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/BPB.0000000000001180
PMID: 40146061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
