---
reference_id: "PMID:28059654"
title: "Clinical features and surgical outcomes of patients with skull base chordoma: a retrospective analysis of 238 patients."
authors:
- Wang L
- Wu Z
- Tian K
- Wang K
- Li D
- Ma J
- Jia G
- Zhang L
- Zhang J
journal: J Neurosurg
year: '2017'
doi: 10.3171/2016.9.JNS16559
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chordoma/diagnostic imaging, mortality, pathology, surgery"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Progression-Free Survival
- Retrospective Studies
- "Skull Base Neoplasms/diagnostic imaging, mortality, pathology, surgery"
- Survival Rate
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical features and surgical outcomes of patients with skull base chordoma: a retrospective analysis of 238 patients.
**Authors:** Wang L, Wu Z, Tian K, Wang K, Li D, Ma J, Jia G, Zhang L, Zhang J
**Journal:** J Neurosurg (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3171/2016.9.JNS16559](https://doi.org/10.3171/2016.9.JNS16559)

## Content

1. J Neurosurg. 2017 Dec;127(6):1257-1267. doi: 10.3171/2016.9.JNS16559. Epub
2017  Jan 6.

Clinical features and surgical outcomes of patients with skull base chordoma: a 
retrospective analysis of 238 patients.

Wang L(1)(2), Wu Z(1)(2), Tian K(1), Wang K(1)(2), Li D(1)(2), Ma J(1), Jia 
G(1)(2), Zhang L(1)(2), Zhang J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)1Department of Neurosurgery, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical 
University; and.
(2)2China National Clinical Research Center for Neurological Diseases, Beijing, 
People's Republic of China.

Comment in
    J Neurosurg. 2018 May;128(5):1598-1599. doi: 10.3171/2017.8.JNS17593.

OBJECTIVE Skull base chordoma is relatively rare, and a limited number of 
reports have been published regarding its clinical features. Moreover, the 
factors associated with extent of resection, as well as the value of marginal 
resection for long-term survival, are still in question for this disease. The 
objective of this study was to investigate these factors by evaluating their 
clinical features and surgical outcomes. METHODS A retrospective analysis of 238 
patients with skull base chordomas, who met the inclusion criteria, was 
performed. This study summarized the clinical features, selection of approaches, 
degree of resection, and postoperative complications by statistical description 
analyses; proposed modified classifications of tumor location and bone invasion; 
studied the contributions of the clinical and radiological factors to the extent 
of resection by Pearson χ2, ANOVA, rank test, and binary logistic regression 
analysis; and estimated the differences in overall survival and progression-free 
survival rates with respect to therapeutic history, classification of tumor 
location, extent of bone invasion, and extent of tumor resection by the 
Kaplan-Meier method. A p value < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. 
RESULTS The study included 140 male and 98 female patients with a mean age of 
38.1 years. Headache and neck pain (33.2%) and diplopia (29%) were the most 
common initial symptoms. Sphenoclival type accounted for the largest proportion 
of tumor location (59.2%); endophytic chordoma was the more common type of bone 
invasion (81.5%). Lateral open approaches were performed in two-thirds of the 
study population (78.6%). The rate of marginal resection was 66%, composed of 
gross-total resection (11.8%) and near-total resection (54.2%). Meningitis (8%) 
and CSF leakage (3.8%) were the most frequent complications. The mean follow-up 
period was 43.7 months. The overall survival and progression-free survival rates 
at 5 years were 76% and 45%, respectively. Recurrent tumor and larger tumor 
volume (≥ 40 cm3) were identified as risk factors of marginal resection. 
Patients who presented with recurrent tumor and underwent intralesional 
resection had a worse long-term outcome. CONCLUSIONS The classifications of both 
tumor location and bone invasion demonstrated clinical value. Marginal resection 
was more likely to be achieved for primary lesions with smaller volumes (< 40 
cm3). The rate of CSF leakage declined due to improved dura mater repair with 
free fat grafts. Marginal resection, or gross-total resection when possible, 
should be performed in patients with primary chordomas to achieve better 
long-term survival.

DOI: 10.3171/2016.9.JNS16559
PMID: 28059654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]