---
reference_id: "PMID:34211466"
title: Thymic Epithelial Cell Alterations and Defective Thymopoiesis Lead to Central and Peripheral Tolerance Perturbation in MHCII Deficiency.
authors:
- Ferrua F
- Bortolomai I
- Fontana E
- Di Silvestre D
- Rigoni R
- Marcovecchio GE
- Draghici E
- Brambilla F
- Castiello MC
- Delfanti G
- Moshous D
- Picard C
- Taghon T
- Bordon V
- Schulz AS
- Schuetz C
- Giliani S
- Soresina A
- Gennery AR
- Signa S
- Dávila Saldaña BJ
- Delmonte OM
- Notarangelo LD
- Roifman CM
- Poliani PL
- Uva P
- Mauri PL
- Villa A
- Bosticardo M
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.669943
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Animals
- "B-Lymphocytes/immunology, metabolism"
- Case-Control Studies
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Epithelial Cells/immunology, metabolism"
- Europe
- Female
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- "Histocompatibility Antigens Class II/genetics, immunology, metabolism"
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Immune Tolerance
- Infant
- Male
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- North America
- Proteome
- "Severe Combined Immunodeficiency/genetics, immunology, metabolism, surgery"
- "T-Lymphocytes, Regulatory/immunology, metabolism"
- Thymocytes
- "Thymus Gland/immunology, metabolism"
- Transcriptome
- Young Adult
- Mice
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thymic Epithelial Cell Alterations and Defective Thymopoiesis Lead to Central and Peripheral Tolerance Perturbation in MHCII Deficiency.
**Authors:** Ferrua F, Bortolomai I, Fontana E, Di Silvestre D, Rigoni R, Marcovecchio GE, Draghici E, Brambilla F, Castiello MC, Delfanti G, Moshous D, Picard C, Taghon T, Bordon V, Schulz AS, Schuetz C, Giliani S, Soresina A, Gennery AR, Signa S, Dávila Saldaña BJ, Delmonte OM, Notarangelo LD, Roifman CM, Poliani PL, Uva P, Mauri PL, Villa A, Bosticardo M
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2021.669943](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2021.669943)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2021 Jun 15;12:669943. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.669943.
eCollection 2021.

Thymic Epithelial Cell Alterations and Defective Thymopoiesis Lead to Central
and Peripheral Tolerance Perturbation in MHCII Deficiency.

Ferrua F(1)(2)(3), Bortolomai I(1), Fontana E(4)(5), Di Silvestre D(6), Rigoni
R(4)(5), Marcovecchio GE(1), Draghici E(1), Brambilla F(6), Castiello MC(1)(5),
Delfanti G(7), Moshous D(8)(9), Picard C(8)(10)(11), Taghon T(12), Bordon V(13),
Schulz AS(14), Schuetz C(14)(15), Giliani S(16), Soresina A(17), Gennery
AR(18)(19), Signa S(19)(20), Dávila Saldaña BJ(21), Delmonte OM(22), Notarangelo
LD(22), Roifman CM(23), Poliani PL(24), Uva P(25), Mauri PL(6), Villa A(1)(5),
Bosticardo M(1)(22).

Author information:
(1)San Raffaele Telethon Institute for Gene Therapy (SR-Tiget), IRCCS San
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
(2)Pediatric Immunohematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation Unit, IRCCS San
Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
(3)Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy.
(4)Human Genome Department, Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, Rozzano,
Milan, Italy.
(5)Milan Unit, Institute of Genetic and Biomedical Research, National Research
Council (CNR), Milan, Italy.
(6)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Institute for Biomedical
Technologies-National Research Council (CNR), Milan, Italy.
(7)Experimental Immunology Unit, Division of Immunology, Transplantation and
Infectious Diseases, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
(8)Department of Pediatric Immunology, Hematology and Rheumatology, Necker
Children's Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France.
(9)Laboratory "Genome Dynamics in the Immune System", INSERM UMR1163, Université
de Paris, Institut Imagine, Paris, France.
(10)Centre d'Etude des Déficits Immunitaires, Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital,
AP-HP, Paris, France.
(11)Laboratory of Lymphocyte Activation and Susceptibility to EBV infection,
Inserm UMR 1163, University Paris Descartes Sorbonne Paris Cité, Imagine
Institute, Paris, France.
(12)Department of Diagnostic Sciences, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent
University, Ghent, Belgium.
(13)Department of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation,
Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, University Medical Center Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
(15)Department of Pediatrics, Medizinische Fakultät Carl Gustav Carus,
Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(16)Cytogenetics and Medical Genetics Unit and "A. Nocivelli" Institute for
Molecular Medicine, Spedali Civili Hospital, Department of Molecular and
Translational Medicine, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(17)Unit of Pediatric Immunology, Pediatrics Clinic, University of Brescia,
ASST-Spedali Civili Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(18)Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Newcastle University,
Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
(19)Department of Pediatric Immunology and HSCT, Great North Children's
Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
(20)Autoinflammatory Diseases and Immunodeficiencies Center, IRCCS Istituto G.
Gaslini, and Department of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology,
Genetics, and Maternal and Children's Sciences, University of Genoa, Genoa,
Italy.
(21)Division of Blood and Marrow Transplantation, Children's National Hospital,
Washington, DC, United States.
(22)Laboratory of Clinical Immunology and Microbiology, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda,
MD, United States.
(23)Division of Immunology & Allergy, Department of Pediatrics, The Hospital for
Sick Children, the Canadian Centre for Primary Immunodeficiency and the
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(24)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, Pathology Unit,
University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(25)CRS4, Science and Technology Park Polaris, Pula, Cagliari, Italy.

Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) class II (MHCII) deficiency (MHCII-D),
also known as Bare Lymphocyte Syndrome (BLS), is a rare combined
immunodeficiency due to mutations in genes regulating expression of MHCII
molecules. MHCII deficiency results in impaired cellular and humoral immune
responses, leading to severe infections and autoimmunity. Abnormal cross-talk
with developing T cells due to the absence of MHCII expression likely leads to
defects in thymic epithelial cells (TEC). However, the contribution of TEC
alterations to the pathogenesis of this primary immunodeficiency has not been
well characterized to date, in particular in regard to immune dysregulation. To
this aim, we have performed an in-depth cellular and molecular characterization
of TEC in this disease. We observed an overall perturbation of thymic structure
and function in both MHCII-/- mice and patients. Transcriptomic and proteomic
profiling of murine TEC revealed several alterations. In particular, we
demonstrated that impairment of lymphostromal cross-talk in the thymus of
MHCII-/- mice affects mTEC maturation and promiscuous gene expression and causes
defects of central tolerance. Furthermore, we observed peripheral tolerance
impairment, likely due to defective Treg cell generation and/or function and B
cell tolerance breakdown. Overall, our findings reveal disease-specific TEC
defects resulting in perturbation of central tolerance and limiting the
potential benefits of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in MHCII
deficiency.

Copyright © 2021 Ferrua, Bortolomai, Fontana, Di Silvestre, Rigoni,
Marcovecchio, Draghici, Brambilla, Castiello, Delfanti, Moshous, Picard, Taghon,
Bordon, Schulz, Schuetz, Giliani, Soresina, Gennery, Signa, Dávila Saldaña,
Delmonte, Notarangelo, Roifman, Poliani, Uva, Mauri, Villa and Bosticardo.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2021.669943
PMCID: PMC8239840
PMID: 34211466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The handling editor declared a
shared affiliation with one of the authors (CRM).
