---
reference_id: "PMID:33792220"
title: Deregulation of JAK2 signaling underlies primary cutaneous CD8(+) aggressive epidermotropic cytotoxic T-cell lymphoma.
authors:
- Bastidas Torres AN
- Cats D
- Out-Luiting JJ
- Fanoni D
- Mei H
- Venegoni L
- Willemze R
- Vermeer MH
- Berti E
- Tensen CP
journal: Haematologica
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3324/haematol.2020.274506
keywords:
- CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes/metabolism
- Humans
- Janus Kinase 2/genetics
- "Lymphoma, T-Cell, Cutaneous/genetics"
- Skin/pathology
- "Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "T-Lymphocytes, Cytotoxic/metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deregulation of JAK2 signaling underlies primary cutaneous CD8(+) aggressive epidermotropic cytotoxic T-cell lymphoma.
**Authors:** Bastidas Torres AN, Cats D, Out-Luiting JJ, Fanoni D, Mei H, Venegoni L, Willemze R, Vermeer MH, Berti E, Tensen CP
**Journal:** Haematologica (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3324/haematol.2020.274506](https://doi.org/10.3324/haematol.2020.274506)

## Content

1. Haematologica. 2022 Mar 1;107(3):702-714. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2020.274506.

Deregulation of JAK2 signaling underlies primary cutaneous CD8(+) aggressive 
epidermotropic cytotoxic T-cell lymphoma.

Bastidas Torres AN(1), Cats D(2), Out-Luiting JJ(1), Fanoni D(3), Mei H(2), 
Venegoni L(3), Willemze R(1), Vermeer MH(1), Berti E(4), Tensen CP(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden.
(2)Sequencing Analysis Support Core, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden.
(3)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, University of Milan, 
Milan.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore 
Policlinico, Milan.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden. 
c.p.tensen@lumc.nl.

Primary cutaneous CD8+ aggressive epidermotropic cytotoxic T-cell lymphoma 
(pcAECyTCL) is a rare variant of cutaneous T-cell lymphoma with an aggressive 
clinical course and a very poor prognosis. Until now, neither a systematic 
characterization of genetic alterations driving pcAECyTCL has been performed, 
nor effective therapeutic regimes for patients have been defined. Here, we 
present the first highresolution genetic characterization of pcAECyTCL by using 
wholegenome and RNA sequencing. Our study provides a comprehensive description 
of genetic alterations (i.e., genomic rearrangements, copy number alterations 
and small-scale mutations) with pathogenic relevance in this lymphoma, including 
events that recurrently impact genes with important roles in the cell cycle, 
chromatin regulation and the JAKSTAT pathway. In particular, we show that 
mutually exclusive structural alterations involving JAK2 and SH2B3 predominantly 
underlie pcAECyTCL. In line with the genomic data, transcriptome analysis 
uncovered upregulation of the cell cycle, JAK2 signaling, NF-κB signaling and a 
high inflammatory response in this cancer. Functional studies confirmed 
oncogenicity of JAK2 fusions identified in pcAECyTCL and their sensitivity to 
JAK inhibitor treatment. Our findings strongly suggest that overactive JAK2 
signaling is a central driver of pcAECyTCL, and consequently, patients with this 
neoplasm would likely benefit from therapy with JAK2 inhibitors such as Food and 
Drug Adminstration-approved ruxolitinib.

DOI: 10.3324/haematol.2020.274506
PMCID: PMC8883537
PMID: 33792220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]