---
reference_id: "PMID:30298535"
title: "In vitro functional characterization of the novel DHH mutations p.(Asn337Lysfs*24) and p.(Glu212Lys) associated with gonadal dysgenesis."
authors:
- Tajouri A
- Kharrat M
- Hizem S
- Zaghdoudi H
- "M'rad R"
- Simic-Schleicher G
- Kaiser FJ
- Hiort O
- Werner R
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/humu.23664
keywords:
- Animals
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Drosophila Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Drosophila melanogaster
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Gonadal Dysgenesis, 46,XY/genetics, metabolism"
- "Hedgehog Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Protein Domains
- Proteolysis
- Species Specificity
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In vitro functional characterization of the novel DHH mutations p.(Asn337Lysfs*24) and p.(Glu212Lys) associated with gonadal dysgenesis.
**Authors:** Tajouri A, Kharrat M, Hizem S, Zaghdoudi H, M'rad R, Simic-Schleicher G, Kaiser FJ, Hiort O, Werner R
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.23664](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.23664)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2018 Dec;39(12):2097-2109. doi: 10.1002/humu.23664. Epub 2018 Oct
22.

In vitro functional characterization of the novel DHH mutations 
p.(Asn337Lysfs*24) and p.(Glu212Lys) associated with gonadal dysgenesis.

Tajouri A(1)(2), Kharrat M(1), Hizem S(1), Zaghdoudi H(1), M'rad R(1)(3), 
Simic-Schleicher G(4), Kaiser FJ(5), Hiort O(2), Werner R(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Tunis El Manar, Faculty of Medicine of Tunis, LR99ES10 Human 
Genetics Laboratory, Tunis, Tunisia.
(2)Department of Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Division of Paediatric 
Endocrinology and Diabetes, University of Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany.
(3)Department of Congenital and Hereditary Diseases, Charles Nicolle Hospital, 
Tunis, Tunisia.
(4)Children's Hospital of Bremen-Nord, Bremen, Germany.
(5)Section for Functional Genetics at the Institute of Human Genetics, 
University of Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany.

In humans, mutations of Desert Hedgehog gene (DHH) have been described in 
patients with 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis (GD), associated or not with 
polyneuropathy. In this study, we describe two patients diagnosed with GD, both 
harboring novel DHH compound heterozygous mutations p.[Tyr176*];[Asn337Lysfs*24] 
and p.[Tyr176*];[Glu212Lys]. To investigate the functional consequences of 
p.(Asn337Lysfs*24) and p.(Glu212Lys) mutations, located within the C-terminal 
part of DHh on auto-processing, we performed in vitro cleavage assays of these 
proteins in comparison with Drosophila melanogaster Hedgehog (Hh). We found that 
p.(Glu212Lys) mutation retained 50% of its activity and led to a partially 
abolished DHh auto-processing. In contrast, p.(Asn337Lysfs*24) mutation resulted 
in a complete absence of auto-proteolysis. Furthermore, we found a different 
auto-processing profile between Drosophila Hh and human DHh, which suggests 
differences in the processing mechanism between the two species. Review of the 
literature shows that proven polyneuropathy and GD is associated with complete 
disruption of DHh-N, whereas disruption of the DHh auto-processing is only 
described with GD. We propose a model that may explain the differences between 
Schwann and Leydig cell development by autocrine versus paracrine DHh signaling. 
To our knowledge, this is the first study investigating the effect of DHH 
mutations on DHh in vitro auto-processing.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.23664
PMID: 30298535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]