---
reference_id: "PMID:38013125"
title: Impact of alcohol and smoking cessation on the course of chronic pancreatitis.
authors:
- Göltl P
- Murillo K
- Simsek O
- Wekerle M
- Ebert MP
- Schneider A
- Hirth M
journal: Alcohol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.alcohol.2023.11.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of alcohol and smoking cessation on the course of chronic pancreatitis.
**Authors:** Göltl P, Murillo K, Simsek O, Wekerle M, Ebert MP, Schneider A, Hirth M
**Journal:** Alcohol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.alcohol.2023.11.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.alcohol.2023.11.006)

## Content

1. Alcohol. 2024 Sep;119:29-35. doi: 10.1016/j.alcohol.2023.11.006. Epub 2023 Nov
 25.

Impact of alcohol and smoking cessation on the course of chronic pancreatitis.

Göltl P(1), Murillo K(1), Simsek O(1), Wekerle M(1), Ebert MP(1), Schneider 
A(2), Hirth M(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine II, Medical Faculty at Mannheim, University of 
Heidelberg, Theodor-Kutzer-Ufer 1-3, 68167 Mannheim, Germany.
(2)Department of Medicine II, Medical Faculty at Mannheim, University of 
Heidelberg, Theodor-Kutzer-Ufer 1-3, 68167 Mannheim, Germany; Department of 
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Medical Center Bad Hersfeld, Seilerweg 29, 
36251 Bad Hersfeld, Germany.
(3)Department of Medicine II, Medical Faculty at Mannheim, University of 
Heidelberg, Theodor-Kutzer-Ufer 1-3, 68167 Mannheim, Germany. Electronic 
address: michael.hirth@umm.de.

OBJECTIVES: Alcohol and nicotine are the two most important risk factors of 
chronic pancreatitis, and they often occur together. It is still unclear how 
much they influence the severity of the disease and which of the two addictions 
should be treated with priority.
METHODS: We performed a single-center, retrospective, cross-sectional study in a 
mixed medicosurgical cohort of 870 patients diagnosed with chronic pancreatitis 
(CP). We analyzed the impact of the drinking pattern and abstinence for alcohol 
and nicotine on the course of the disease. Patients with alcoholic CP were 
subdivided into 1) patients with "life-time drinking history" (LTDH), 2) 
"current drinkers" with current alcohol abuse without signs of LTDH, and 3) 
"former drinkers" who stopped or reduced alcohol intake dramatically.
RESULTS: Compared to patients with LTDH, "former drinkers" had a lower rate of 
exocrine insufficiency (29% vs. 59%) and pseudocysts (33% vs. 49%), were more 
often relapse-free (37% vs. 5%), and had less abdominal pain. There was no 
correlation detected between the quantity of alcohol consumption and the 
severity or progression of the disease. Regarding nicotine, 29 pack-years are 
the threshold for developing the early stage of CP. Under nicotine abstinence, 
only slightly more patients were relapse-free (37% vs. 22%). In contrast, the 
cumulative amount of nicotine consumed correlated with overall disease severity 
and the development of pseudocysts. The need for surgery was increased, with 
odds ratios of 1.8, for both alcohol and nicotine abuse.
CONCLUSIONS: Alcohol cessation in chronic pancreatitis reduces exocrine 
insufficiency, abdominal pain, and local complications. The effect of nicotine 
cessation is less pronounced in our cohort. However, nicotine abuse represents 
an important factor for the development of the disease.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.alcohol.2023.11.006
PMID: 38013125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]