---
reference_id: "PMID:22126705"
title: Evidence of central inflammation in fibromyalgia-increased cerebrospinal fluid interleukin-8 levels.
authors:
- Kadetoff D
- Lampa J
- Westman M
- Andersson M
- Kosek E
journal: J Neuroimmunol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2011.10.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evidence of central inflammation in fibromyalgia-increased cerebrospinal fluid interleukin-8 levels.
**Authors:** Kadetoff D, Lampa J, Westman M, Andersson M, Kosek E
**Journal:** J Neuroimmunol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jneuroim.2011.10.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroim.2011.10.013)

## Content

1. J Neuroimmunol. 2012 Jan 18;242(1-2):33-8. doi:
10.1016/j.jneuroim.2011.10.013.  Epub 2011 Nov 29.

Evidence of central inflammation in fibromyalgia-increased cerebrospinal fluid 
interleukin-8 levels.

Kadetoff D(1), Lampa J, Westman M, Andersson M, Kosek E.

Author information:
(1)Osher Center for Integrative Medicine, Department of Clinical Neuroscience, 
Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

Activation of glia cells resulting in intrathecal elevation of cytokines and 
chemokines has been hypothesized in chronic pain syndromes such as fibromyalgia. 
To our knowledge, this is the first study assessing intrathecal concentrations 
of pro-inflammatory substances in fibromyalgia. We report elevated cerebrospinal 
fluid and serum concentrations of interleukin-8, but not interleukin-1beta, in 
FM patients. This profile is in accordance with FM symptoms being mediated by 
sympathetic activity rather than dependent on prostaglandin associated 
mechanisms and supports the hypothesis of glia cell activation in response to 
pain mechanisms.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2011.10.013
PMID: 22126705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]