---
reference_id: "PMID:30665120"
title: "Global burden of cancer and coronary heart disease resulting from dietary exposure to arsenic, 2015."
authors:
- Oberoi S
- Devleesschauwer B
- Gibb HJ
- Barchowsky A
journal: Environ Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2019.01.025
keywords:
- Arsenic
- Coronary Disease/epidemiology
- "Dietary Exposure/statistics & numerical data"
- Female
- Global Health
- Humans
- Male
- Quality-Adjusted Life Years
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Global burden of cancer and coronary heart disease resulting from dietary exposure to arsenic, 2015.
**Authors:** Oberoi S, Devleesschauwer B, Gibb HJ, Barchowsky A
**Journal:** Environ Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.envres.2019.01.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envres.2019.01.025)

## Content

1. Environ Res. 2019 Apr;171:185-192. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2019.01.025. Epub
2019  Jan 11.

Global burden of cancer and coronary heart disease resulting from dietary
exposure to arsenic, 2015.

Oberoi S(1), Devleesschauwer B(2), Gibb HJ(3), Barchowsky A(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, Graduate School of
Public Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Sciensano, Brussels, Belgium;
Department of Veterinary Public Health and Food Safety, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Ghent University, Merelbeke, Belgium. Electronic address:
brecht.devleesschauwer@sciensano.be.
(3)Gibb Epidemiology Consulting LLC, Arlington, VA, USA; George Washington
University Milken Institute School of Public Health, Washington, D.C., USA.
(4)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA; Department of Environmental and
Occupational Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Arsenic is a ubiquitous, naturally occurring metalloid that poses a significant
risk for human cancer and non-cancer diseases. It is now evident that arsenic
contamination in food, especially rice and grains, presents a significant
exposure to hundreds of millions of individuals worldwide. However, the disease
risk from chronic exposure to the low amounts of arsenic found in food remains
to be established. Thus, this research estimates the global burdens of disease
expressed as Disability-Adjusted Life Years (DALYs) for lung, skin and bladder
cancers, as well as coronary heart disease (CHD) attributable to inorganic
arsenic in food. To determine foodborne inorganic arsenic exposures worldwide,
we used the World Health Organization (WHO) estimates of food consumption in 17
country clusters, in conjunction with the reported measurements of total and
inorganic arsenic in different foods. We estimated cancer potency factors for
arsenic related bladder and lung cancers, and from US Environmental Protection
Agency risk estimates for skin cancer to calculate the cancer incidence in males
and females within each of the WHO member states. Summary relative risk
estimates and population attributable fractions were developed to estimate the
YLD, YLL, and DALYs for arsenic-induced CHD. The findings indicate that,
globally, each year the combined DALYs for all cancers attributable to inorganic
arsenic in food are approximately 1.4 million with variation in global
distribution based on population and food consumption patterns. The global
burden of CHD attributable to foodborne inorganic arsenic also varied with WHO
region and may contribute as much as 49 million DALYs. However, in contrast to
cancer burden, there is a threshold effect for arsenic-associated CHD with no
increased risk of heart disease at the expected lower bound of arsenic
consumption in food. These estimates indicate that foodborne arsenic exposure
causes a significant yet avoidable global burden of human disease.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envres.2019.01.025
PMID: 30665120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
