---
reference_id: "PMID:33194357"
title: Usefulness of the cytokines expression of Th1/Th2/Th17 and urinary CD80 excretion in adult-onset minimal change disease.
authors:
- Chen P
- Chen Y
- Jiang M
- Mo Y
- Ying H
- Tang X
- Zhang J
journal: PeerJ
year: '2020'
doi: 10.7717/peerj.9854
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Usefulness of the cytokines expression of Th1/Th2/Th17 and urinary CD80 excretion in adult-onset minimal change disease.
**Authors:** Chen P, Chen Y, Jiang M, Mo Y, Ying H, Tang X, Zhang J
**Journal:** PeerJ (2020)
**DOI:** [10.7717/peerj.9854](https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.9854)

## Content

1. PeerJ. 2020 Sep 8;8:e9854. doi: 10.7717/peerj.9854. eCollection 2020.

Usefulness of the cytokines expression of Th1/Th2/Th17 and urinary CD80 
excretion in adult-onset minimal change disease.

Chen P(1)(2), Chen Y(3), Jiang M(4), Mo Y(5), Ying H(5), Tang X(1), Zhang J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Zhujiang Hospital of Southern Medical University, 
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(2)Department of Nephrology, Ningbo First Hospital, Ningbo, Zhejiang, China.
(3)Department of Physical Examination, Ningbo First hospital, Ningbo, Zhejiang, 
China.
(4)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Ningbo First Hospital, Ningbo, Zhejiang, 
China.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Ningbo First Hospital, Ningbo, Zhejiang, 
China.

BACKGROUND: Minimal change disease (MCD) is a common form of nephrotic syndrome 
in adults. However, the molecular mechanism underlying the pathogenesis of MCD 
remains incompletely understood. In this study, we aimed to investigate the role 
of the cytokines expression of Th1/Th2/Th17 and urinary CD80 excretion in 
adult-onset MCD patients.
METHODS: The lymphocyte subsets, 34 cytokine levels of Th1/Th2/Th17, serum and 
urine concentrations of CD80, and expression of CD80 in glomeruli were analyzed 
in 28 cases (15 males and 13 females; average age: 34.1 years, age range: 18-56 
years), including 10 patients with MCD in relapse, nine patients with MCD in 
remission and nine healthy controls.
RESULTS: There was no significant difference of CD3+CD4+ cells proportion among 
patients with MCD in relapse, MCD in remission and healthy controls (P = 0.802). 
The cytokine levels of GM-CSF and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-related 
activation-induced cytokine (TRANCE) in patients with MCD in relapse increased 
1.5 times higher than those in remission. An evident increase in the excretion 
of urinary CD80 was found in patients with relapsed MCD compared with those in 
remission (598.4 ± 115.8 vs 81.78 ± 7.04 ng/g creatinine, P < 0.001) and healthy 
controls (598.4 ± 115.8 vs 67.44 ±  8.94  ng/g creatinine, P < 0.001). CD80 
expression was observed in podocyte of MCD patient in relapse by 
immunofluorescence technique.
CONCLUSIONS: The cytokines GM-CSF and TRANCE are increased and the urinary CD80 
levels are elevated in adult-onset MCD patients in relapse, indicating a 
disorder of Th1/Th2/Th17 balance and that the elevated excretion of CD80 may 
underlie the pathogenesis and development of adult-onset MCD.

©2020 Chen et al.

DOI: 10.7717/peerj.9854
PMCID: PMC7485503
PMID: 33194357

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare there are no competing 
interests.