---
reference_id: "PMID:38343041"
title: "Vasospastic angina: a review on diagnostic approach and management."
authors:
- Jenkins K
- Pompei G
- Ganzorig N
- Brown S
- Beltrame J
- Kunadian V
journal: Ther Adv Cardiovasc Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1177/17539447241230400
keywords:
- Humans
- "Angina Pectoris, Variant/diagnosis, therapy, complications"
- "Coronary Vasospasm/diagnosis, therapy, complications"
- Quality of Life
- Coronary Angiography/adverse effects
- Coronary Artery Disease
- Myocardial Infarction
- Chest Pain/complications
- Spasm/complications
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vasospastic angina: a review on diagnostic approach and management.
**Authors:** Jenkins K, Pompei G, Ganzorig N, Brown S, Beltrame J, Kunadian V
**Journal:** Ther Adv Cardiovasc Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1177/17539447241230400](https://doi.org/10.1177/17539447241230400)

## Content

1. Ther Adv Cardiovasc Dis. 2024 Jan-Dec;18:17539447241230400. doi: 
10.1177/17539447241230400.

Vasospastic angina: a review on diagnostic approach and management.

Jenkins K(1), Pompei G(1)(2), Ganzorig N(1), Brown S(3), Beltrame J(4), Kunadian 
V(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, 
Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(2)Cardiovascular Institute, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Ferrara, Cona, 
Italy.
(3)Cardiovascular Care Partnership, British Cardiovascular Society, London, UK.
(4)Basil Hetzel Institute for Translational Health Research, Adelaide Medical 
School, University of Adelaide and Royal Adelaide Hospital and The Queen 
Elizabeth Hospital, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(5)Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, 
Newcastle University Medical School, 4th Floor William Leech Building, Newcastle 
upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK.
(6)Cardiothoracic Centre, Freeman Hospital, Newcastle Upon Tyne Hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK.

Vasospastic angina (VSA) refers to chest pain experienced as a consequence of 
myocardial ischaemia caused by epicardial coronary spasm, a sudden narrowing of 
the vessels responsible for an inadequate supply of blood and oxygen. Coronary 
artery spasm is a heterogeneous phenomenon that can occur in patients with 
non-obstructive coronary arteries and obstructive coronary artery disease, with 
transient spasm causing chest pain and persistent spasm potentially leading to 
acute myocardial infarction (MI). VSA was originally described as Prinzmetal 
angina or variant angina, classically presenting at rest, unlike most cases of 
angina (though in some patients, vasospasm may be triggered by exertion, 
emotional, mental or physical stress), and associated with transient 
electrocardiographic changes (transient ST-segment elevation, depression and/or 
T-wave changes). Ischaemia with non-obstructive coronary arteries (INOCA) is not 
a benign condition, as patients are at elevated risk of cardiovascular events 
including acute coronary syndrome, hospitalization due to heart failure, stroke 
and repeat cardiovascular procedures. INOCA patients also experience impaired 
quality of life and associated increased healthcare costs. VSA, an endotype of 
INOCA, is associated with major adverse events, including sudden cardiac death, 
acute MI and syncope, necessitating the study of the most effective treatment 
options currently available. The present literature review aims to summarize 
current data relating to the diagnosis and management of VSA and provide details 
on the sequence that treatment should follow.

Plain Language Summary: Diagnosis and treatment of epicardial coronary artery 
spasmVasospastic angina (VSA) refers to chest pain experienced as a consequence 
of a sudden narrowing of the epicardial coronary arteries. VSA can occur in 
patients with non-obstructive coronary arteries and obstructive coronary artery 
disease, with transient spasm causing chest pain and persistent spasm 
potentially leading to acute myocardial infarction. Reduced blood and oxygen 
supply in patients with non-obstructive coronary arteries is not a benign 
condition, as patients are at elevated risk of adverse cardiovascular events. 
These patients also experience impaired quality of life and associated increased 
healthcare costs. This review aims to summarise current data relating to the 
diagnosis of VSA and provides details on treatment strategies.

DOI: 10.1177/17539447241230400
PMCID: PMC10860484
PMID: 38343041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest.