---
reference_id: "PMID:11479731"
title: Genetic basis of mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase deficiency.
authors:
- Aledo R
- Zschocke J
- Pié J
- Mir C
- Fiesel S
- Mayatepek E
- Hoffmann GF
- Casals N
- Hegardt FG
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1007/s004390100554
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- CHO Cells
- Cricetinae
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- DNA Primers/genetics
- "DNA, Complementary/genetics"
- Female
- Gene Expression
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- "Hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA Synthase/deficiency, genetics"
- In Vitro Techniques
- Infant
- Male
- Mitochondria/enzymology
- "Mutagenesis, Site-Directed"
- "Mutation, Missense"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic basis of mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase deficiency.
**Authors:** Aledo R, Zschocke J, Pié J, Mir C, Fiesel S, Mayatepek E, Hoffmann GF, Casals N, Hegardt FG
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s004390100554](https://doi.org/10.1007/s004390100554)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2001 Jul;109(1):19-23. doi: 10.1007/s004390100554.

Genetic basis of mitochondrial HMG-CoA synthase deficiency.

Aledo R(1), Zschocke J, Pié J, Mir C, Fiesel S, Mayatepek E, Hoffmann GF, Casals
N, Hegardt FG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, International University of Catalonia,
Barcelona, Spain.

Deficiency of mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase (mHMGS) is a
recessive disorder of ketogenesis that has been previously diagnosed in two
children with hypoglycaemic hypoketotic coma during fasting periods. Here, we
report the results of molecular investigations in a third patient affected by
this disease. Sequencing of the entire coding region of the HMGCS2 gene revealed
two missense mutations, G212R and R500H. Mendelian inheritance was confirmed by
the analysis of parental samples and neither of the mutations was found on 200
control chromosomes. Functional relevance was confirmed by in vitro expression
studies in cytosolic HMGS-deficient cells. Whereas wild-type cDNA of the HMGCS2
gene reverted the auxotrophy for mevalonate, the cDNAs of the mutants did not.
The disease may be recognised by specific clinical and biochemical features but
it is difficult to confirm enzymatically since the gene is expressed only in
liver and testis. Molecular studies may facilitate or confirm future diagnoses
in affected patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s004390100554
PMID: 11479731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
