---
reference_id: "PMID:38728365"
title: "Epidemiology of tularemia in the countries of the WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region (EMRO): A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Sholeh M
- Moradkasani S
- Esmaeili S
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0012141
keywords:
- "Tularemia/epidemiology, microbiology"
- Humans
- Animals
- "Francisella tularensis/isolation & purification"
- Mediterranean Region/epidemiology
- Prevalence
- Seroepidemiologic Studies
- World Health Organization
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Ticks/microbiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of tularemia in the countries of the WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region (EMRO): A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Sholeh M, Moradkasani S, Esmaeili S
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0012141](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0012141)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2024 May 10;18(5):e0012141. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0012141. eCollection 2024 May.

Epidemiology of tularemia in the countries of the WHO Eastern Mediterranean 
Region (EMRO): A systematic review and meta-analysis.

Sholeh M(1), Moradkasani S(2), Esmaeili S(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bacteriology, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Research Center for Emerging 
and Reemerging Infectious Diseases, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran.
(3)National Reference Laboratory for Plague, Tularemia and Q Fever, Research 
Centre for Emerging and Reemerging Infectious Diseases, Pasteur Institute of 
Iran, Akanlu, KabudarAhang, Hamadan, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Francisella tularensis, the bacterium that causes tularemia, has 
been a persistent and widespread pathogen in various regions of the world for 
centuries. Francisella tularensis can affect humans and various domestic and 
wild animals. The current study aimed to determine the epidemiological status of 
tularemia in countries of the WHO Eastern Mediterranean Region (EMRO) through a 
systematic review and meta-analysis.
METHODS: All included studies were identified through a systematic search of 
online databases, including Scopus, PubMed, Web of Science, and EMBASE, through 
July 26, 2022, using keywords and suitable combinations. We focused on 
cross-sectional studies investigating the prevalence of F. tularensis. The 
weighted pooled prevalence was calculated using a random-effects model.
RESULTS: A total of 206 studies were identified, of which 20 were finally 
included in the analysis. The human seroprevalence of tularemia in WHO-EMRO 
countries was 6.2% (95% CI, 4.2 9.2). In the subgroup analysis, anti-F. 
tularensis antibodies were found in 6.92% and 5.5% of the high-risk individuals 
and Iran, respectively. The pooled prevalence of F. tularensis in environmental 
samples (water and soil) from the WHO-EMRO countries was 5.8% (9.4% by PCR and 
0.5% by culture). In addition, 2.5% (95% CI, 0.2 0.22.7) of ticks in WHO-EMRO 
countries were positive for F. tularensis. The pooled prevalence of F. 
tularensis in rodents is 2.0% (1.1% by PCR and 3.7% by serology). In addition, 
0.6% of domestic ruminants (0.4% by PCR and 2.4% by serology) were positive for 
F. tularensis in WHO-EMRO countries.
CONCLUSION: According to the results of the present study, tularemia is an 
endemic but neglected disease in the WHO-EMRO region. However, most studies on 
tularemia are limited to a few countries in this region. Studies on tularemia in 
human populations, reservoirs, and vectors have been conducted in all countries 
in the WHO-EMRO region to obtain more detailed information about the 
epidemiology of tularemia in these regions.

Copyright: © 2024 Sholeh et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0012141
PMCID: PMC11086863
PMID: 38728365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.