---
reference_id: "PMID:28836573"
title: "Stress and stability: applying the Anna Karenina principle to animal microbiomes."
authors:
- Zaneveld JR
- McMinds R
- Vega Thurber R
journal: Nat Microbiol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/nmicrobiol.2017.121
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stress and stability: applying the Anna Karenina principle to animal microbiomes.
**Authors:** Zaneveld JR, McMinds R, Vega Thurber R
**Journal:** Nat Microbiol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nmicrobiol.2017.121](https://doi.org/10.1038/nmicrobiol.2017.121)

## Content

1. Nat Microbiol. 2017 Aug 24;2:17121. doi: 10.1038/nmicrobiol.2017.121.

Stress and stability: applying the Anna Karenina principle to animal 
microbiomes.

Zaneveld JR(1), McMinds R(2), Vega Thurber R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, School of Science, Technology, Education, 
and Mathematics, University of Washington, UWBB 249, Bothell, Washington 
98011-8246, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Oregon State University, 226 Nash Hall, 
Corvallis, Oregon 97331, USA.

All animals studied to date are associated with symbiotic communities of 
microorganisms. These animal microbiotas often play important roles in normal 
physiological function and susceptibility to disease; predicting their responses 
to perturbation represents an essential challenge for microbiology. Most studies 
of microbiome dynamics test for patterns in which perturbation shifts animal 
microbiomes from a healthy to a dysbiotic stable state. Here, we consider a 
complementary alternative: that the microbiological changes induced by many 
perturbations are stochastic, and therefore lead to transitions from stable to 
unstable community states. The result is an 'Anna Karenina principle' for animal 
microbiomes, in which dysbiotic individuals vary more in microbial community 
composition than healthy individuals-paralleling Leo Tolstoy's dictum that "all 
happy families look alike; each unhappy family is unhappy in its own way". We 
argue that Anna Karenina effects are a common and important response of animal 
microbiomes to stressors that reduce the ability of the host or its microbiome 
to regulate community composition. Patterns consistent with Anna Karenina 
effects have been found in systems ranging from the surface of threatened corals 
exposed to above-average temperatures, to the lungs of patients suffering from 
HIV/AIDs. However, despite their apparent ubiquity, these patterns are easily 
missed or discarded by some common workflows, and therefore probably 
underreported. Now that a substantial body of research has established the 
existence of these patterns in diverse systems, rigorous testing, intensive 
time-series datasets and improved stochastic modelling will help to explore 
their importance for topics ranging from personalized medicine to theories of 
the evolution of host-microorganism symbioses.

DOI: 10.1038/nmicrobiol.2017.121
PMID: 28836573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]