---
reference_id: "PMID:29723307"
title: Contributions from the silent majority dominate dengue virus transmission.
authors:
- Ten Bosch QA
- Clapham HE
- Lambrechts L
- Duong V
- Buchy P
- Althouse BM
- Lloyd AL
- Waller LA
- Morrison AC
- Kitron U
- Vazquez-Prokopec GM
- Scott TW
- Perkins TA
journal: PLoS Pathog
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006965
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Contributions from the silent majority dominate dengue virus transmission.
**Authors:** Ten Bosch QA, Clapham HE, Lambrechts L, Duong V, Buchy P, Althouse BM, Lloyd AL, Waller LA, Morrison AC, Kitron U, Vazquez-Prokopec GM, Scott TW, Perkins TA
**Journal:** PLoS Pathog (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.ppat.1006965](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1006965)

## Content

1. PLoS Pathog. 2018 May 3;14(5):e1006965. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006965. 
eCollection 2018 May.

Contributions from the silent majority dominate dengue virus transmission.

Ten Bosch QA(1), Clapham HE(2), Lambrechts L(3)(4), Duong V(5), Buchy P(5)(6), 
Althouse BM(7)(8)(9), Lloyd AL(10), Waller LA(11), Morrison AC(12), Kitron 
U(13), Vazquez-Prokopec GM(13), Scott TW(12), Perkins TA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Eck Institute for Global Health, 
University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, United States.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins School of Public Health, Baltimore, 
MD, United States.
(3)Insect-Virus Interactions Group, Department of Genomes and Genetics, Institut 
Pasteur, Paris, France.
(4)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche 2000, 
Paris, France.
(5)Virology Unit, Institut Pasteur du Cambodge, Institut Pasteur International 
Network, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
(6)GlaxoSmithKline, Vaccines R&D, Singapore.
(7)Institute for Disease Modeling, Bellevue, WA, United States.
(8)Information School, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States.
(9)Department of Biology, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM, United 
States.
(10)Department of Mathematics, Biomathematics Graduate Program and Center for 
Quantitative Sciences in Biomedicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, 
NC, United States.
(11)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Rollins School of Public 
Health, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United States.
(12)Department of Entomology and Nematology, University of California, Davis, 
CA, United States.
(13)Department of Environmental Sciences, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United 
States.

Despite estimates that, each year, as many as 300 million dengue virus (DENV) 
infections result in either no perceptible symptoms (asymptomatic) or symptoms 
that are sufficiently mild to go undetected by surveillance systems 
(inapparent), it has been assumed that these infections contribute little to 
onward transmission. However, recent blood-feeding experiments with Aedes 
aegypti mosquitoes showed that people with asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic DENV 
infections are capable of infecting mosquitoes. To place those findings into 
context, we used models of within-host viral dynamics and human demographic 
projections to (1) quantify the net infectiousness of individuals across the 
spectrum of DENV infection severity and (2) estimate the fraction of 
transmission attributable to people with different severities of disease. Our 
results indicate that net infectiousness of people with asymptomatic infections 
is 80% (median) that of people with apparent or inapparent symptomatic 
infections (95% credible interval (CI): 0-146%). Due to their numerical 
prominence in the infectious reservoir, clinically inapparent infections in 
total could account for 84% (CI: 82-86%) of DENV transmission. Of infections 
that ultimately result in any level of symptoms, we estimate that 24% (95% CI: 
0-79%) of onward transmission results from mosquitoes biting individuals during 
the pre-symptomatic phase of their infection. Only 1% (95% CI: 0.8-1.1%) of DENV 
transmission is attributable to people with clinically detected infections after 
they have developed symptoms. These findings emphasize the need to (1) reorient 
current practices for outbreak response to adoption of pre-emptive strategies 
that account for contributions of undetected infections and (2) apply 
methodologies that account for undetected infections in surveillance programs, 
when assessing intervention impact, and when modeling mosquito-borne virus 
transmission.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1006965
PMCID: PMC5933708
PMID: 29723307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal's policy and the authors 
of the manuscript have the following competing interests: QAtB and TAP receive 
support from GlaxoSmithKline for unrelated work on dengue vaccine modeling. 
Philippe Buchy is currently an employee of GlaxoSmithKline vaccines.