---
reference_id: "PMID:17001159"
title: "Gastrointestinal involvement in mantle cell lymphoma: a prospective clinic, endoscopic, and pathologic study."
authors:
- Salar A
- Juanpere N
- Bellosillo B
- Domingo-Domenech E
- Espinet B
- Seoane A
- Romagosa V
- Gonzalez-Barca E
- Panades A
- Pedro C
- Nieto M
- Abella E
- Solé F
- Ariza A
- Fernández-Sevilla A
- Besses C
- Serrano S
journal: Am J Surg Pathol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1097/01.pas.0000208899.15859.cb
keywords:
- Aged
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/metabolism"
- Bone Marrow Cells/pathology
- Clone Cells
- Cyclin D1/metabolism
- "Endoscopy, Gastrointestinal"
- Female
- "Gastric Mucosa/metabolism, pathology"
- "Gastrointestinal Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- "Intestinal Mucosa/metabolism, pathology"
- "Lymphoma, Mantle-Cell/metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prognosis
- Prospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gastrointestinal involvement in mantle cell lymphoma: a prospective clinic, endoscopic, and pathologic study.
**Authors:** Salar A, Juanpere N, Bellosillo B, Domingo-Domenech E, Espinet B, Seoane A, Romagosa V, Gonzalez-Barca E, Panades A, Pedro C, Nieto M, Abella E, Solé F, Ariza A, Fernández-Sevilla A, Besses C, Serrano S
**Journal:** Am J Surg Pathol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.pas.0000208899.15859.cb](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.pas.0000208899.15859.cb)

## Content

1. Am J Surg Pathol. 2006 Oct;30(10):1274-80. doi: 
10.1097/01.pas.0000208899.15859.cb.

Gastrointestinal involvement in mantle cell lymphoma: a prospective clinic, 
endoscopic, and pathologic study.

Salar A(1), Juanpere N, Bellosillo B, Domingo-Domenech E, Espinet B, Seoane A, 
Romagosa V, Gonzalez-Barca E, Panades A, Pedro C, Nieto M, Abella E, Solé F, 
Ariza A, Fernández-Sevilla A, Besses C, Serrano S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Hematology, Hospital del Mar, Barcelona, Spain. 
asalar@imas.imim.es

The frequency of gastrointestinal (GI) tract involvement in mantle cell lymphoma 
(MCL) at diagnosis is reported to be below 30%. To investigate the actual 
frequency of GI involvement by MCL, upper and lower endoscopy was prospectively 
performed on 13 untreated MCL patients at diagnosis. Multiple biopsies from 
endoscopically normal and abnormal gastric and colonic mucosa were studied with 
immunohistochemistry (IHC) for CD20, CD5, and cyclin D1, as well as fluorescence 
in situ hybridization (FISH) for t(11;14) and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 
for immunoglobulin heavy chain gene. Abnormal mucosa was identified in 38% of 
cases by upper endoscopy (mainly mild nonspecific gastritis) and in 54% of cases 
by lower endoscopy (mostly micropolyps). Histologically, infiltration by MCL was 
demonstrated in the stomach in 77% of cases and in the colon in 77% of cases. As 
a whole, 92% of patients showed upper or lower GI tract infiltration by MCL. 
Histologic evidence of MCL involvement was present in all cases with 
endoscopically abnormal mucosa, but it was also observed in two-thirds of cases 
with endoscopically unremarkable mucosa. Positive cyclin D1 IHC was seen in all 
instances displaying CD20 and CD5-positive lymphoid infiltrates, whereas 
t(11;14) was demonstrated by FISH in 63.5% and PCR was clonal in 64% of those 
instances. In conclusion, the great majority of MCL patients showed GI tract 
involvement at the time of diagnosis, not uncommonly in the form of minute 
lymphoid infiltrates. IHC for cyclin D1 was significantly more sensitive than 
FISH t(11;14) or PCR for immunoglobulin heavy chain gene to confirm MCL in this 
setting.

DOI: 10.1097/01.pas.0000208899.15859.cb
PMID: 17001159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]