---
reference_id: "PMID:21905019"
title: Large candidate gene association study reveals genetic risk factors and therapeutic targets for fibromyalgia.
authors:
- Smith SB
- Maixner DW
- Fillingim RB
- Slade G
- Gracely RH
- Ambrose K
- Zaykin DV
- Hyde C
- John S
- Tan K
- Maixner W
- Diatchenko L
journal: Arthritis Rheum
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/art.33338
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Large candidate gene association study reveals genetic risk factors and therapeutic targets for fibromyalgia.
**Authors:** Smith SB, Maixner DW, Fillingim RB, Slade G, Gracely RH, Ambrose K, Zaykin DV, Hyde C, John S, Tan K, Maixner W, Diatchenko L
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheum (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/art.33338](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.33338)

## Content

1. Arthritis Rheum. 2012 Feb;64(2):584-93. doi: 10.1002/art.33338.

Large candidate gene association study reveals genetic risk factors and 
therapeutic targets for fibromyalgia.

Smith SB(1), Maixner DW, Fillingim RB, Slade G, Gracely RH, Ambrose K, Zaykin 
DV, Hyde C, John S, Tan K, Maixner W, Diatchenko L.

Author information:
(1)Algynomics, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27514, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Fibromyalgia (FM) represents a complex disorder that is characterized 
by widespread pain and tenderness and is frequently accompanied by additional 
somatic and cognitive/affective symptoms. Genetic risk factors are known to 
contribute to the etiology of the syndrome. The aim of this study was to examine 
>350 genes for association with FM, using a large-scale candidate gene approach.
METHODS: The study group comprised 496 patients with FM (cases) and 348 
individuals with no chronic pain (controls). Genotyping was performed using a 
dedicated gene array chip, the Pain Research Panel, which assays variants 
characterizing >350 genes known to be involved in the biologic pathways relevant 
to nociception, inflammation, and mood. Association testing was performed using 
logistic regression.
RESULTS: Significant differences in allele frequencies between cases and 
controls were observed for 3 genes: GABRB3 (rs4906902; P = 3.65 × 10(-6)), TAAR1 
(rs8192619; P = 1.11 × 10(-5)), and GBP1 (rs7911; P = 1.06 × 10(-4)). These 3 
genes and 7 other genes with suggestive evidence for association were examined 
in a second, independent cohort of patients with FM and control subjects who 
were genotyped using the Perlegen 600K platform. Evidence of association in the 
replication cohort was observed for TAAR1, RGS4, CNR1, and GRIA4.
CONCLUSION: Variation in these 4 replicated genes may serve as a basis for 
development of new diagnostic approaches, and the products of these genes may 
contribute to the pathophysiology of FM and represent potential targets for 
therapeutic action.

Copyright © 2012 by the American College of Rheumatology.

DOI: 10.1002/art.33338
PMCID: PMC3237946
PMID: 21905019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement: This study was 
conceived jointly by Pfizer, Inc., and Algynomics, Inc., and funded by Pfizer. 
Genotyping and analysis was directed by Algynomics, which holds patent claims on 
diagnostic use of genes investigated in the study. Authors are employees and/or 
stock holders of their respective institutions.