---
reference_id: "PMID:28738819"
title: Increased biological activity of protein Kinase C gamma is not required in Spinocerebellar ataxia 14.
authors:
- Shimobayashi E
- Kapfhammer JP
journal: Mol Brain
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s13041-017-0313-z
keywords:
- Animals
- Catalytic Domain
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Dendrites/metabolism
- Humans
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Mutant Proteins/metabolism
- Mutation/genetics
- Protein Domains
- "Protein Kinase C/chemistry, metabolism"
- Purkinje Cells/pathology
- Spinocerebellar Ataxias/enzymology
- Tissue Culture Techniques
- Transfection
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increased biological activity of protein Kinase C gamma is not required in Spinocerebellar ataxia 14.
**Authors:** Shimobayashi E, Kapfhammer JP
**Journal:** Mol Brain (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13041-017-0313-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13041-017-0313-z)

## Content

1. Mol Brain. 2017 Jul 24;10(1):34. doi: 10.1186/s13041-017-0313-z.

Increased biological activity of protein Kinase C gamma is not required in 
Spinocerebellar ataxia 14.

Shimobayashi E(1), Kapfhammer JP(2).

Author information:
(1)Anatomical Institute, Department of Biomedicine Basel, University of Basel, 
Pestalozzistrasse 20, 4056, Basel, Switzerland. etsuko.shimobayashi@unibas.ch.
(2)Anatomical Institute, Department of Biomedicine Basel, University of Basel, 
Pestalozzistrasse 20, 4056, Basel, Switzerland.

Spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA) is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disorder 
characterized by slowly progressive cerebellar dysfunction. Currently, 42 SCA 
types are known, some of which are caused by CAG repeat expansions, but others 
are caused by point mutations or deletions. Spinocerebellar ataxia type 14 
(SCA14) is caused by missense mutations or deletions in the PRKCG gene, coding 
for protein kinase C gamma (PKCγ). It is still not well understood how these 
mutations eventually cause Purkinje cell dysfunction and death. Because PKCγ is 
a well characterized signaling protein highly expressed in Purkinje cells SCA14 
offers the chance to better understand the pathogenesis of Purkinje cell 
dysfunction and death. Altered biological activity of PKCγ would be the simplest 
explanation for the disease phenotype. There are indeed indications that the 
enzymatic activity of mutated PKCγ proteins could be changed. Many mutations 
found in SCA14 families are located in the regulatory C1B and C1A domain, while 
a few mutations are also found in the C2 and in the catalytic C3 and C4 domains. 
For many of these mutations an increased enzymatic activity could be 
demonstrated in cell-based assays, but it remains unclear whether there is 
indeed an altered biological activity of the mutated PKCγ proteins within living 
Purkinje cells. In this study we used the dendritic morphology of developing 
Purkinje cells to detect increased biological activity of PKCγ after expression 
of different mutated PKCγ proteins. Our results indicate that two out of three 
known mutations in the catalytic domain of PKCγ did indeed show increased 
biological activity. On the other hand, none of the five tested mutations 
located in the regulatory C1 or the C2 domain showed an increased biological 
activity. Our findings indicate that SCA14 mutations located in different 
domains of the PRKCG gene cause SCA14 by different mechanisms and that an 
increased constitutive activity of PKCγ may be one, but cannot be the only 
mechanism to cause disease in SCA14.

DOI: 10.1186/s13041-017-0313-z
PMCID: PMC5525338
PMID: 28738819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: All 
experiments were carried out in accordance with the EU Directive 2010/63/EU for 
animal experiments and were reviewed and permitted by Swiss authorities. CONSENT 
FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains 
neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional 
affiliations.