---
reference_id: "PMID:32973344"
title: "Hypophosphatasia: a genetic-based nosology and new insights in genotype-phenotype correlation."
authors:
- Mornet E
- Taillandier A
- Domingues C
- Dufour A
- Benaloun E
- Lavaud N
- Wallon F
- Rousseau N
- Charle C
- Guberto M
- Muti C
- Simon-Bouy B
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41431-020-00732-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypophosphatasia: a genetic-based nosology and new insights in genotype-phenotype correlation.
**Authors:** Mornet E, Taillandier A, Domingues C, Dufour A, Benaloun E, Lavaud N, Wallon F, Rousseau N, Charle C, Guberto M, Muti C, Simon-Bouy B
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41431-020-00732-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-020-00732-6)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2021 Feb;29(2):289-299. doi: 10.1038/s41431-020-00732-6. Epub
 2020 Sep 24.

Hypophosphatasia: a genetic-based nosology and new insights in 
genotype-phenotype correlation.

Mornet E(1), Taillandier A(2), Domingues C(2), Dufour A(2), Benaloun E(2), 
Lavaud N(2), Wallon F(2), Rousseau N(2), Charle C(2), Guberto M(2), Muti C(2), 
Simon-Bouy B(2).

Author information:
(1)Unité de Génétique Constitutionnelle, Service de Biologie, Centre Hospitalier 
de Versailles, 78150, Le Chesnay, France. emornet@ch-versailles.fr.
(2)Unité de Génétique Constitutionnelle, Service de Biologie, Centre Hospitalier 
de Versailles, 78150, Le Chesnay, France.

Hypophosphatasia (HPP) is caused by pathogenic variants in the ALPL gene. There 
is a large continuum in the severity, ranging from a lethal perinatal form to 
dental issues. We analyzed a cohort of 424 HPP patients from European geographic 
origin or ancestry. Using 3D modeling and results of functional tests we 
classified ALPL pathogenic variants according to their dominant negative effect 
(DNE) and their severity. The cohort was described by the genotypes resulting 
from alleles s (severe recessive), Sd (severe dominant), and m (moderate). Many 
recurrent variants showed a regional anchor pointing out founder effects rather 
than multiple mutational events. Homozygosity was an aggravating factor of the 
severity and moderate alleles were rare both in number and frequency. Pathogenic 
variants with DNE were found in both recessive and dominant HPP. Sixty percent 
of the adults tested were heterozygous for a variant showing no DNE, suggesting 
another mechanism of dominance like haploinsufficiency. Adults with dominant HPP 
without DNE were found statistically less severely affected than adults with DNE 
variants. Adults with dominant HPP without DNE represent a new clinical entity 
mostly diagnosed from 2010s, characterized by nonspecific signs of HPP and low 
alkaline phosphatase, and for which a high prevalence is expected. In 
conclusion, the genetic composition of our cohort suggests a nosology with 3 
clinical forms: severe HPP is recessive and rare, moderate HPP is recessive or 
dominant and more common, and mild HPP, characterized by low alkaline 
phosphatase and unspecific clinical signs, is dominantly inherited and very 
common.

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-020-00732-6
PMCID: PMC7868366
PMID: 32973344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: EM received honoraria from Alexion 
Pharmaceutical for expertize and presentations.