---
reference_id: "PMID:28078798"
title: "Systematic review with meta-analysis: rifaximin is effective and safe for the treatment of small intestine bacterial overgrowth."
authors:
- Gatta L
- Scarpignato C
journal: Aliment Pharmacol Ther
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/apt.13928
keywords:
- Adult
- "Bacteria/isolation & purification"
- Bacterial Infections/drug therapy
- Female
- Gastroenterology
- Humans
- "Intestine, Small/microbiology"
- "Rifamycins/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Rifaximin
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systematic review with meta-analysis: rifaximin is effective and safe for the treatment of small intestine bacterial overgrowth.
**Authors:** Gatta L, Scarpignato C
**Journal:** Aliment Pharmacol Ther (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/apt.13928](https://doi.org/10.1111/apt.13928)

## Content

1. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2017 Mar;45(5):604-616. doi: 10.1111/apt.13928. Epub
2017 Jan 12.

Systematic review with meta-analysis: rifaximin is effective and safe for the
treatment of small intestine bacterial overgrowth.

Gatta L(1)(2), Scarpignato C(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Pharmacology and Digestive Pathophysiology Unit, Department of
Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(2)Gastroenterology and Endoscopy Unit, Versilia Hospital, Azienda USL Toscana
Nord-Ovest, Lido di Camaiore, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) is a heterogeneous
syndrome, characterised by an increased number and/or abnormal type of bacteria
in the small bowel. Over the past decades, rifaximin has gained popularity for
this indication despite its use is not evidence based.
AIM: To perform a systematic review and meta-analysis to summarise evidence
about the efficacy and safety of rifaximin to eradicate SIBO in adult patients.
METHODS: MEDLINE, EMBASE, CCRCT, Scopus and Web of Science were searched from
inception to March 16, 2015 for RCTs and observational studies. Furthermore,
abstract books of major European, American and Asian gastroenterological
meetings were also examined.
RESULTS: Thirty-two studies involving 1331 patients were included. The overall
eradication rate according to intention-to-treat analysis was 70.8% (95% CI:
61.4-78.2; I2 = 89.4%) and to per protocol analysis 72.9% (95% CI: 65.5-79.8; I2
= 87.5%). Meta-regression identified three covariates (drug dose, study design
and co-therapy) independently associated with an increased eradication rate. The
overall rate of adverse events was 4.6% (95% CI: 2.3-7.5; I2 = 63.6%). In the
subset of studies (n= 10) allowing the analysis, improvement or resolution of
symptoms in patients with eradicated SIBO was found to be 67.7% (95% CI:
44.7-86.9; I2 = 91.3%).
CONCLUSIONS: Rifaximin treatment seems to be effective and safe for the
treatment of SIBO. However, the quality of the available studies is generally
poor. Well-designed RCTs are needed to substantiate these findings and to
establish the optimal regimen.

© 2017 The Authors. Alimentary Pharmacology and Therapeutics Published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/apt.13928
PMCID: PMC5299503
PMID: 28078798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
