---
reference_id: "PMID:29670999"
title: Mechanisms involved in normal and pathological osteoclastogenesis.
authors:
- Park-Min KH
journal: Cell Mol Life Sci
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s00018-018-2817-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms involved in normal and pathological osteoclastogenesis.
**Authors:** Park-Min KH
**Journal:** Cell Mol Life Sci (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00018-018-2817-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-018-2817-9)

## Content

1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2018 Jul;75(14):2519-2528. doi: 10.1007/s00018-018-2817-9. 
Epub 2018 Apr 18.

Mechanisms involved in normal and pathological osteoclastogenesis.

Park-Min KH(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Arthritis and Tissue Degeneration Program, David Z. Rosensweig Genomics 
Research Center, Hospital for Special Surgery, 535 East 70th Street, New York, 
10021, NY, USA. ParkminK@hss.edu.
(2)Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, 10065, NY, 
USA. ParkminK@hss.edu.

Osteoclasts are bone-resorbing cells that play an essential role in bone 
remodeling. Defects in osteoclasts result in unbalanced bone remodeling and are 
linked to many bone diseases including osteoporosis, rheumatoid arthritis, 
primary bone cancer, and skeletal metastases. Receptor activator of NF-kappaB 
ligand (RANKL) is a classical inducer of osteoclast formation. In the presence 
of macrophage-colony-stimulating factor, RANKL and co-stimulatory signals 
synergistically regulate osteoclastogenesis. However, recent discoveries of 
alternative pathways for RANKL-independent osteoclastogenesis have led to a 
reassessment of the traditional mechanisms that regulate osteoclast formation. 
In this review, we provide an overview of signaling pathways and other 
regulatory elements governing osteoclastogenesis. We also identify how 
osteoclastogenesis is altered in pathological conditions and discuss therapeutic 
targets in osteoclasts for the treatment of skeletal diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-018-2817-9
PMCID: PMC9809143
PMID: 29670999 [Indexed for MEDLINE]