---
reference_id: "PMID:25308556"
title: Improvement of Cardiomyopathy After High-Fat Diet in Two Siblings with Glycogen Storage Disease Type III.
authors:
- Brambilla A
- Mannarino S
- Pretese R
- Gasperini S
- Galimberti C
- Parini R
journal: JIMD Rep
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/8904_2014_343
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Improvement of Cardiomyopathy After High-Fat Diet in Two Siblings with Glycogen Storage Disease Type III.
**Authors:** Brambilla A, Mannarino S, Pretese R, Gasperini S, Galimberti C, Parini R
**Journal:** JIMD Rep (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/8904_2014_343](https://doi.org/10.1007/8904_2014_343)

## Content

1. JIMD Rep. 2014;17:91-5. doi: 10.1007/8904_2014_343. Epub 2014 Oct 12.

Improvement of Cardiomyopathy After High-Fat Diet in Two Siblings with Glycogen
Storage Disease Type III.

Brambilla A(1), Mannarino S, Pretese R, Gasperini S, Galimberti C, Parini R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, San Gerardo Hospital, University of Milano Bicocca,
Monza, Italy.

Glycogenosis type III (GSD III) is an autosomal recessive disorder due to
amylo-1,6-glucosidase deficiency. This disease causes limit dextrin storage in
affected tissues: liver, skeletal muscles, and heart in GSD IIIa and only liver
in GSD IIIb. Cardiomyopathy is quite frequent in GSD IIIa with variable severity
and progression of manifestations. It is not clear if diet manipulation may
interfere with cardiomyopathy's progression. Recent case reports showed
improvement of cardiomyopathy following a ketogenic diet.Two siblings (girl and
boy), 7- and 5-year-old, both affected with GSD IIIa, developed severe and
rapidly worsening left ventricular hypertrophy in the first years of life, while
treated with frequent diurnal and nocturnal hyperproteic meals followed by
orally administered uncooked cornstarch. Subsequently they were treated with
high-fat (60%) and high-protein (25%), low-carbohydrate (15%) diet. After
12 months exertion dyspnea disappeared in the girl and biochemical blood tests,
cardiac enzymes, and congestive heart failure markers improved in both (CK
3439→324, 1304→581 U/L; NT-proBNP 2084→206, 782→135 pg/mL, respectively);
ultrasound assessment in both patients showed a relevant reduction of the
thickness of interventricular septum (30→16, 16→11 mm, respectively) and left
ventricle posterior wall (18→7, 13→8 mm, respectively) and an improvement of the
outflow obstruction. A diet rich in fats as well as proteins and poor in
carbohydrates could be a beneficial therapeutic choice for GSD III with
cardiomyopathy. Future research is needed to confirm the beneficial effect of
this treatment and to design treatment strategies with the aim to provide
alternative source of energy and prevent glycogen accumulation.

DOI: 10.1007/8904_2014_343
PMCID: PMC4241197
PMID: 25308556
