---
reference_id: "PMID:32502625"
title: "Anterior Spinal Artery Syndrome: Rare Precedented Reason of Postoperative Plegia After Spinal Deformity Surgery: Report of 2 Cases."
authors:
- Bahadır S
- Nabi V
- Adhikari P
- Ayhan S
- Acaroglu E
journal: World Neurosurg
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.wneu.2020.05.216
keywords:
- "Anterior Spinal Artery Syndrome/etiology, physiopathology"
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- Intervertebral Disc Displacement/surgery
- Middle Aged
- Paralysis/etiology
- "Postoperative Complications/etiology, physiopathology"
- Scoliosis/surgery
- Spinal Fusion/adverse effects
- Spinal Stenosis/surgery
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anterior Spinal Artery Syndrome: Rare Precedented Reason of Postoperative Plegia After Spinal Deformity Surgery: Report of 2 Cases.
**Authors:** Bahadır S, Nabi V, Adhikari P, Ayhan S, Acaroglu E
**Journal:** World Neurosurg (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.wneu.2020.05.216](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wneu.2020.05.216)

## Content

1. World Neurosurg. 2020 Sep;141:203-209. doi: 10.1016/j.wneu.2020.05.216. Epub
2020 Jun 2.

Anterior Spinal Artery Syndrome: Rare Precedented Reason of Postoperative Plegia
After Spinal Deformity Surgery: Report of 2 Cases.

Bahadır S(1), Nabi V(1), Adhikari P(1), Ayhan S(1), Acaroglu E(2).

Author information:
(1)ARTES Spine Center, Acibadem Ankara Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Orthopedic Spine Section, Ankara Spine Center, Ankara, Turkey. Electronic
address: acaroglue@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Complications in spinal deformity surgery vary from insignificant to
severe. Apart from direct mechanical insult, ischemia can also cause spinal cord
injury. Ischemic injury may be detected during surgery or may manifest itself
postoperatively. We present 2 cases of anterior spinal artery syndrome.
CASE DESCRIPTION: In the first case, a 12-year-old girl developed anterior
spinal artery syndrome resulting in total quadriplegia 8 hours after spinal
deformity surgery. She was treated with a steroid, immunoglobulin, and
low-molecular-weight heparin. She showed complete recovery at 1 year
postoperatively both clinically and radiographically. In the second case, a
62-year-old woman experienced sudden loss of motor evoked potentials
intraoperatively during dural tear repair after sagittal and coronal alignment
was established. The paraplegic patient was diagnosed with anterior spinal
artery syndrome at the thoracic level postoperatively. She was treated with a
steroid and heparin. At 1 year postoperatively, she has gained much of her
strength and has myelomalacia in her spinal cord.
CONCLUSIONS: Anterior spinal artery syndrome is a serious condition with a
generally poor prognosis. Though treatment should be directed at the underlying
cause, the best strategy is to prevent it from occurring. Peroperative blood
pressure control, intraoperative neuromonitoring, avoidance from mechanical
stress during surgery, and close neurologic and hemodynamic monitorization
postoperatively should be performed.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2020.05.216
PMID: 32502625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
