---
reference_id: "PMID:31666021"
title: Viable Mycobacterium tuberculosis in sputum after pulmonary tuberculosis cure.
authors:
- Ambreen A
- Jamil M
- Rahman MAU
- Mustafa T
journal: BMC Infect Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s12879-019-4561-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Viable Mycobacterium tuberculosis in sputum after pulmonary tuberculosis cure.
**Authors:** Ambreen A, Jamil M, Rahman MAU, Mustafa T
**Journal:** BMC Infect Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12879-019-4561-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12879-019-4561-7)

## Content

1. BMC Infect Dis. 2019 Oct 30;19(1):923. doi: 10.1186/s12879-019-4561-7.

Viable Mycobacterium tuberculosis in sputum after pulmonary tuberculosis cure.

Ambreen A(1), Jamil M(2), Rahman MAU(2), Mustafa T(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Gulab Devi Hospital, Lahore, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Tuberculosis and Chest Medicine, Gulab Devi Hospital, Lahore, 
Pakistan.
(3)Centre for International Health, Department of Global Public Health and 
Primary Care, University of Bergen, P.O. Box 7804, N-5020, Bergen, Norway. 
Tehmina.mustafa@uib.no.
(4)Department of Thoracic medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, 
Norway. Tehmina.mustafa@uib.no.

BACKGROUND: Pulmonary tuberculosis (TB) with detectable Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis in the sputum is a major source of transmission. In resource 
limited TB endemic settings, cure is declared through sputum smear examination 
for acid fast bacilli without performing culture. This may lead to erroneous 
treatment outcomes as viable bacteria may be missed due to the low sensitivity 
of direct smear method. The aim of this study was to investigate if sterilizing 
cure is achieved among the new pulmonary TB cases declared cured by sputum smear 
conversion and to evaluate the impact of addition of ethambutol in the 
continuation phase in achieving it.
METHODS: New sputum smear-positive pulmonary TB patients registered at a 
tertiary care hospital in Pakistan from November 2013 to March 2014 were 
followed under standard Directly Observed Treatment Short Course strategy for 6 
months. Half of these patients received ethambutol in addition to isoniazid and 
rifampicin in the continuation phase. Sputum specimens were examined on 
microscopy at 2 months and at the end of treatment. Sputa of patients with 
negative direct smear examination at the end of treatment were cultured.
RESULTS: Among 5746 TB suspects, 1595 were new sputum smear positive pulmonary 
TB cases, and 533 were registered at our hospital. Among these, 504 converted 
sputum negative at 2 months and 348 converted at the end of 6 months of 
treatment and were declared cured. Sputa of 204/348 patients were cultured, and 
12/204 (6%) were culture-positive. Culture positivity at 6 months was not 
associated with bacterial load, smoking, diabetes, presence of cavities, history 
of contact with TB patients, age, sex, socioeconomic status, or addition of 
ethambutol in the continuation phase.
CONCLUSION: Viable cultivable bacilli were detected in 6% of cured patients, 
which would have significant impact on the control of TB. This highlights the 
need for an inexpensive and accurate surrogate marker for culture as it is not 
feasible to perform culture in routine for monitoring treatment response in the 
low-resource settings. The treatment outcome did not improve by addition of 
ethambutol emphasizing the need to find the optimal duration of treatment for 
individual or carefully selected groups of patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-019-4561-7
PMCID: PMC6822412
PMID: 31666021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.