---
reference_id: "PMID:35118398"
title: Pathophysiology and management of classic galactosemic primary ovarian insufficiency.
authors:
- Hagen-Lillevik S
- Rushing JS
- Appiah L
- Longo N
- Andrews A
- Lai K
- Johnson J
journal: Reprod Fertil
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1530/RAF-21-0014
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Fertility
- Galactose
- Galactosemias
- Humans
- Mice
- Ovary
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology and management of classic galactosemic primary ovarian insufficiency.
**Authors:** Hagen-Lillevik S, Rushing JS, Appiah L, Longo N, Andrews A, Lai K, Johnson J
**Journal:** Reprod Fertil (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1530/RAF-21-0014](https://doi.org/10.1530/RAF-21-0014)

## Content

1. Reprod Fertil. 2021 Jun 25;2(3):R67-R84. doi: 10.1530/RAF-21-0014. eCollection
 2021 Jul.

Pathophysiology and management of classic galactosemic primary ovarian 
insufficiency.

Hagen-Lillevik S(1)(2), Rushing JS(3), Appiah L(4), Longo N(1)(2), Andrews A(1), 
Lai K(1)(2), Johnson J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake 
City, Utah, USA.
(2)Department of Nutrition and Integrative Physiology, University of Utah 
College of Health, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(3)Divisions of Reproductive Sciences, Reproductive Endocrinology and 
Infertility, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Colorado 
Denver (AMC), Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(4)Division of General Obstetrics and Gynecology, Department of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, University of Colorado Denver (AMC), Anschutz Outpatient Pavilion, 
Aurora, Colorado, USA.

Classic galactosemia is an inborn error of carbohydrate metabolism associated 
with early-onset primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) in young women. Our 
understanding of the consequences of galactosemia upon fertility and fecundity 
of affected women is expanding, but there are important remaining gaps in our 
knowledge and tools for its management, and a need for continued dialog so that 
the special features of the condition can be better managed. Here, we review 
galactosemic POI and its reproductive endocrinological clinical sequelae and 
summarize current best clinical practices for its management. Special 
consideration is given to the very early-onset nature of the condition in the 
pediatric/adolescent patient. Afterward, we summarize our current understanding 
of the reproductive pathophysiology of galactosemia, including the potential 
action of toxic galactose metabolites upon the ovary. Our work establishing that 
ovarian cellular stress reminiscent of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is 
present in a mouse model of galactosemia, as well as work by other groups, are 
summarized.
LAY SUMMARY: Patients with the condition of classic galactosemia need to 
maintain a strict lifelong diet that excludes the sugar galactose. This is due 
to having mutations in enzymes that process galactose, resulting in the buildup 
of toxic metabolic by-products of the sugar. Young women with classic 
galactosemia often lose the function of their ovaries very early in life (termed 
'primary ovarian insufficiency'), despite adherence to a galactose-restricted 
diet. This means that in addition to the consequences of the disease, these 
women also face infertility and the potential need for hormone replacement 
therapy. This article summarizes current strategies for managing the care of 
galactosemic girls and women and also what is known of how the condition leads 
to early primary ovarian insufficiency.

© The authors.

DOI: 10.1530/RAF-21-0014
PMCID: PMC8788619
PMID: 35118398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]