---
reference_id: "PMID:40611538"
title: "Patterns of Care and Survival of Wilms Tumor in Children in India: A Retrospective Multicentric INPHOG Study."
authors:
- Siddaiahgari SR
- Vaddadi S
- Bandi V
- Trivedi D
- Bhattacharya A
- Radhakrishnan V
- Patil V
- Mahajan A
- Kapoor G
- Mishra S
- Raj R
- Uppuluri R
- Prakash A
- Scott J
- Jayaram D
- Kurkure P
- Misra R
- Mehdi I
- Shekhar S
- Bafna V
- M V A
- Bhat V
- Krishnan Y
- Arora RS
journal: Pediatr Blood Cancer
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/pbc.31871
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- "Wilms Tumor/therapy, mortality, pathology"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Child, Preschool"
- Infant
- India/epidemiology
- "Kidney Neoplasms/therapy, mortality, pathology"
- Child
- Survival Rate
- Adolescent
- Follow-Up Studies
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Patterns of Care and Survival of Wilms Tumor in Children in India: A Retrospective Multicentric INPHOG Study.
**Authors:** Siddaiahgari SR, Vaddadi S, Bandi V, Trivedi D, Bhattacharya A, Radhakrishnan V, Patil V, Mahajan A, Kapoor G, Mishra S, Raj R, Uppuluri R, Prakash A, Scott J, Jayaram D, Kurkure P, Misra R, Mehdi I, Shekhar S, Bafna V, M V A, Bhat V, Krishnan Y, Arora RS
**Journal:** Pediatr Blood Cancer (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pbc.31871](https://doi.org/10.1002/pbc.31871)

## Content

1. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2025 Sep;72(9):e31871. doi: 10.1002/pbc.31871. Epub 2025
 Jul 3.

Patterns of Care and Survival of Wilms Tumor in Children in India: A 
Retrospective Multicentric INPHOG Study.

Siddaiahgari SR(1), Vaddadi S(1), Bandi V(1), Trivedi D(2), Bhattacharya A(3), 
Radhakrishnan V(4), Patil V(5), Mahajan A(6), Kapoor G(7), Mishra S(7), Raj 
R(8), Uppuluri R(8), Prakash A(9), Scott J(10), Jayaram D(10), Kurkure P(11), 
Misra R(11), Mehdi I(12), Shekhar S(12), Bafna V(13), M V A(14), Bhat V(14), 
Krishnan Y(15), Arora RS(16).

Author information:
(1)Rainbow Children's Hospital, Hyderabad, India.
(2)Hemato-Oncology Clinic, Ahmedabad, India.
(3)Tata Medical Center, Kolkata, India.
(4)Cancer Institute, Adyar, India.
(5)Indo American Cancer Hospital, Hyderabad, India.
(6)Indraprastha Apollo Hospital, Delhi, India.
(7)Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Institute, Delhi, India.
(8)Apollo Hospital, Chennai, India.
(9)St John's Medical Institute, Bengaluru, India.
(10)Sri Ramachandra Medical College, Chennai, India.
(11)SRCC Children's Hospital, Mumbai, India.
(12)HCG Cancer Institute, Bengaluru, India.
(13)Bharatiya Vidya Peeth, Pune, India.
(14)Kasturba Medical College, Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, 
India.
(15)MVR Cancer Centre and Research Institute, Kozhikode, India.
(16)Pediatric Oncology Disease Management Group, Max Super Specialty Hospital, 
New Delhi, India.

Renal cancers are rare in children, accounting 6-7% of childhood tumors. In 
India, there is paucity of data on renal tumors including Wilms tumor (WT).
AIMS: To describe the patterns of care of children with WT; 1, 3, and 5 year 
event-free survival (EFS) and overall survival (OS).
METHODS: Retrospective analysis (InPOG-WT-18-02) of data of children (<18 years) 
with WT from 17 pediatric-oncology centers between January 2010 and June 2021.
RESULTS: A total of 404 children (male:female, 1.4:1) with WT were included in 
the study. The majority (74%) were less than 4 years of age (median age 27 
months). The most common presentation was abdominal distension/incidental mass 
(91%). Other presentations (9%) included fever, weight loss, hematuria, 
hypertension, and others. Unilateral tumors were seen in 91.6%, bilateral tumors 
in 7.4%. Metastatic disease was seen in 63 (15.6%) children, common sites being 
lung (82.5%), liver (17.5%), and bone (6.4%). The International Society of 
Pediatric Oncology protocol was used in 58% of patients. Twelve children (3%) 
abandoned the treatment. For the remaining 392 cases, follow-up ranged from 1 to 
144 months. Relapse/progression was seen in 44 children (10.9%). Mortality was 
6.7%. Relapse with discontinuation of treatment was the most common cause of 
death (3.7%), followed by death from progression on treatment (1.3%). 
Treatment-related mortality was 1.7%. The 1, 3, and 5 year OS was 95.3, 92.4, 
and 91.5%, respectively. The 1, 3, and 5 year EFS was 91.8, 87.2, and 85.9%, 
respectively. Older age at diagnosis (>4 years), stage IV disease, site of 
metastasis other than lung, no chemotherapy, and no surgery were associated with 
unfavorable outcomes.
CONCLUSION: A multidisciplinary approach with surgery, chemotherapy, supportive 
care, and radiotherapy results in good outcomes for WT in India.

© 2025 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/pbc.31871
PMID: 40611538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]