---
reference_id: "PMID:28349734"
title: Impact of health education based intervention on community's awareness of dengue and its prevention in Delhi, India.
authors:
- Kusuma YS
- Burman D
- Kumari R
- Lamkang AS
- Babu BV
journal: Glob Health Promot
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1177/1757975916686912
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of health education based intervention on community's awareness of dengue and its prevention in Delhi, India.
**Authors:** Kusuma YS, Burman D, Kumari R, Lamkang AS, Babu BV
**Journal:** Glob Health Promot (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1757975916686912](https://doi.org/10.1177/1757975916686912)

## Content

1. Glob Health Promot. 2019 Mar;26(1):50-59. doi: 10.1177/1757975916686912. Epub 
2017 Mar 28.

Impact of health education based intervention on community's awareness of dengue 
and its prevention in Delhi, India.

Kusuma YS(1), Burman D(1), Kumari R(1), Lamkang AS(1), Babu BV(2).

Author information:
(1)1 Centre for Community Medicine, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New 
Delhi, India.
(2)2 Health Systems Research Division, Indian Council of Medical Research, New 
Delhi, India.

Dengue is endemic in India. The capital, Delhi, continues to witness a higher 
number of cases due to urbanization-related factors. This study is intended to 
implement health education towards prevention of dengue, and to assess its 
impact on people's knowledge and practices related to causes and prevention of 
dengue among urban poor in Delhi. Pre- ( n = 484) and post- ( n = 496) 
intervention surveys from 15 sub-clusters from five slums/slum-like settlements 
in Delhi were carried out. Health education based intervention was carried out 
through partnership with the municipal bodies and non-governmental 
organizations. Socio-demographic characteristics of participants were similar in 
both surveys. Intervention resulted in significant increase in knowledge on 
cause, symptom perception and mosquito behaviour in terms of breeding and biting 
habits. Practice of personal protection measures increased significantly. The 
participation of people increased during intervention compared to the routine 
programme. Health education based interventions are instrumental in improving 
people's knowledge and behaviour. Hence, routine health educational activities 
as a supportive strategy in the health system need to be strengthened. New 
integrated approaches such as eco-bio-social approaches with community 
participation are to be developed and tested in endemic settings like Delhi.

DOI: 10.1177/1757975916686912
PMID: 28349734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]