---
reference_id: "PMID:28593008"
title: "Meckel-Gruber syndrome: ultrasonographic and fetal autopsy correlation."
authors:
- Khurana S
- Saini V
- Wadhwa V
- Kaur H
journal: J Ultrasound
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s40477-016-0231-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Meckel-Gruber syndrome: ultrasonographic and fetal autopsy correlation.
**Authors:** Khurana S, Saini V, Wadhwa V, Kaur H
**Journal:** J Ultrasound (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40477-016-0231-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40477-016-0231-4)

## Content

1. J Ultrasound. 2017 Jan 4;20(2):167-170. doi: 10.1007/s40477-016-0231-4. 
eCollection 2017 Jun.

Meckel-Gruber syndrome: ultrasonographic and fetal autopsy correlation.

Khurana S(1), Saini V(2), Wadhwa V(3), Kaur H(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, University of Texas 
Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030 USA.
(2)Center for Tuberculosis Research, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD USA.
(3)University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR USA.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Maulana Azad Medical College, New 
Delhi, India.

Meckel-Gruber syndrome (MGS) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder which is 
characterized by a classic triad of occipital encephalocele, polycystic kidneys 
and postaxial polydactyly. We describe a case of classic MGS, diagnosed on 
ultrasonography and genetic analysis, with subsequent confirmation and 
correlation by fetal autopsy.

Publisher: La sindrome di Meckel–Gruber (MGS) è una rara anomalia autosomatica 
recessiva caratterizzata dalla triade classica composta da encefalo occipitale, 
reni policistici e polidattilìa postassiale. Descriviamo un caso di MGS 
classica, diagnosticata con ecografia ed analisi genetiche, successivamente 
confermata dal test autoptico del feto.

DOI: 10.1007/s40477-016-0231-4
PMCID: PMC5440330
PMID: 28593008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: There are no conflicts of 
interest. ETHICAL APPROVAL: This study involves postmortem autopsy of the fetal 
human specimen. No animals were involved in the study. INFORMED CONSENT: An 
informed consent was obtained from the patient for the termination of pregnancy, 
fetal autopsy and histopathological examination of the specimens.