---
reference_id: "PMID:30945156"
title: "Responses of testosterone hormone concentration, semen quality, and its related pro-inflammatory cytokines in bucks following Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis and its mycolic acid infection."
authors:
- Faeza NMN
- Jesse FFA
- Hambali IU
- Odhah MN
- Umer M
- Wessam MMS
- Mohd-Azmi ML
- Wahid AH
journal: Trop Anim Health Prod
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s11250-019-01878-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Responses of testosterone hormone concentration, semen quality, and its related pro-inflammatory cytokines in bucks following Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis and its mycolic acid infection.
**Authors:** Faeza NMN, Jesse FFA, Hambali IU, Odhah MN, Umer M, Wessam MMS, Mohd-Azmi ML, Wahid AH
**Journal:** Trop Anim Health Prod (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11250-019-01878-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11250-019-01878-2)

## Content

1. Trop Anim Health Prod. 2019 Sep;51(7):1855-1866. doi: 
10.1007/s11250-019-01878-2. Epub 2019 Apr 3.

Responses of testosterone hormone concentration, semen quality, and its related 
pro-inflammatory cytokines in bucks following Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis 
and its mycolic acid infection.

Faeza NMN(1)(2), Jesse FFA(3)(4)(5), Hambali IU(1)(6), Odhah MN(1), Umer M(7), 
Wessam MMS(8), Mohd-Azmi ML(9), Wahid AH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Clinical Studies, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, 
Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400, Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
(2)Makmal BioSerasi, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM), 43600, Bangi, 
Malaysia.
(3)Department of Veterinary Clinical Studies, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, 
Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400, Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia. jesse@upm.edu.my.
(4)Institute of Tropical Agriculture and Food Security (ITAFoS), Universiti 
Putra Malaysia, 43400, Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia. jesse@upm.edu.my.
(5)University Community Transformation Centre (UCTC), Universiti Putra Malaysia 
(UPM), 43400, Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia. jesse@upm.edu.my.
(6)Department of Veterinary Public health and Preventive Medicine, University of 
Maiduguri, Maiduguri, 600233, Nigeria.
(7)Lasbela University of Agriculture Water and Marine Sciences Uthal Pakistan, 
Uthal, Pakistan.
(8)Department of Internal and Preventive Medicine, University of Basra, Basra 
State, Iraq.
(9)Department of Veterinary Pathology and Microbiology, Faculty of Veterinary 
Medicine, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400, Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.

Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis is the causative agent of caseous 
lymphadenitis, a debilitating chronic disease of sheep and goats. Little is 
known about the buck's reproductive pathophysiology with respect to inoculation 
with Corynebacterium pseudotuberculois and its immunogen mycolic acid extract. 
Therefore, this present study was designed to determine the concentration of 
testosterone hormone, pro-inflammatory cytokines, and semen quality of the 
experimental animals. A total of 12 bucks, divided into groups 1, 2, and 3 
(Negative control group, Positive control group and Mycolic acid group 
respectively), were enrolled in this study. Following inoculation, all goats 
were observed for clinical responses and monitored for 60 days post-challenge 
and were then sacrificed. Blood samples were collected via the jugular once 
before inoculation and on a weekly basis post-challenge. Semen samples were 
collected 2 weeks post-challenge and prior to the sacrifice of the experimental 
animals. During the post inoculation period of 60 days, the concentration of 
testosterone hormone for group 2 was increased significantly (p < 0.05) in weeks 
5, 6, and 9 but decreased in weeks 2 and 7 post inoculation. In group 3, the 
mean concentration of testosterone was increased significantly (p < 0.05) in 
weeks 5, 6, 7, and 9 post inoculation but decreased in week 2. The concentration 
of interleukin 6 (IL 6) in treated group 2 did not show any significant 
difference (p > 0.05) but increased significantly (p < 0.05) in week 2 post 
inoculation in group 3. For concentration of interleukin 1β (IL1β) in both 
treated groups 2 and 3 showed significant difference (p < 0.05) in weeks 2 and 3 
post inoculation. The tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) concentration in both 
treated groups 2 and 3 did not show any significant difference (p > 0.05) as 
compared to group 1. The concentration of interferon-γ (IFNγ) significantly 
increased (p < 0.05) for group 2 for weeks 2, 3, 4, and 5 where else for group 3 
was not in significant difference (p > 0.05) compared to group 1. Both group 2 
and group 3 showed a reduction in semen qualities as compared to group 1, but 
the severity was more intense in group 2 if compared to group 3. In conclusion, 
therefore, the present study concluded that the mycolic acid group revealed 
significant responses of testosterone hormone concentration, semen quality, and 
its related pro-inflammatory cytokines in bucks following infection but the 
severity lesser compared to Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis group.

DOI: 10.1007/s11250-019-01878-2
PMID: 30945156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]