---
reference_id: "PMID:39326415"
title: Mechanisms of long COVID and the path toward therapeutics.
authors:
- Peluso MJ
- Deeks SG
journal: Cell
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.07.054
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms of long COVID and the path toward therapeutics.
**Authors:** Peluso MJ, Deeks SG
**Journal:** Cell (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2024.07.054](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2024.07.054)

## Content

1. Cell. 2024 Oct 3;187(20):5500-5529. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.07.054. Epub 2024
 Sep 25.

Mechanisms of long COVID and the path toward therapeutics.

Peluso MJ(1), Deeks SG(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of HIV, Infectious Diseases, and Global Medicine, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address: 
michael.peluso@ucsf.edu.
(2)Division of HIV, Infectious Diseases, and Global Medicine, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address: 
steven.deeks@ucsf.edu.

Long COVID, a type of post-acute sequelae of severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) (PASC) defined by medically unexplained symptoms 
following infection with SARS-CoV-2, is a newly recognized infection-associated 
chronic condition that causes disability in some people. Substantial progress 
has been made in defining its epidemiology, biology, and pathophysiology. 
However, there is no cure for the tens of millions of people believed to be 
experiencing long COVID, and industry engagement in developing therapeutics has 
been limited. Here, we review the current state of knowledge regarding the 
biology and pathophysiology of long COVID, focusing on how the proposed 
mechanisms explain the physiology of the syndrome and how they provide a 
rationale for the implementation of a broad experimental medicine and clinical 
trials agenda. Progress toward preventing and curing long COVID and other 
infection-associated chronic conditions will require deep and sustained 
investment by funders and industry.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2024.07.054
PMCID: PMC11455603
PMID: 39326415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests M.J.P. has received 
consulting fees from Gilead Sciences, AstraZeneca, BioVie, Apellis 
Pharmaceuticals, and BioNTech and research support from Aerium Therapeutics and 
Shionogi outside the submitted work. S.G.D. reports consulting for Enanta 
Pharmaceuticals, BioVie, and Pfizer and reports research support from Aerium 
Therapeutics outside the submitted work.