---
reference_id: "PMID:28786388"
title: "Wolman's disease and cholesteryl ester storage disorder: the phenotypic spectrum of lysosomal acid lipase deficiency."
authors:
- Pericleous M
- Kelly C
- Wang T
- Livingstone C
- Ala A
journal: Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/S2468-1253(17)30052-3
keywords:
- "Cholesterol Ester Storage Disease/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology, therapy"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- Prevalence
- "Wolman Disease/diagnosis, epidemiology, etiology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wolman's disease and cholesteryl ester storage disorder: the phenotypic spectrum of lysosomal acid lipase deficiency.
**Authors:** Pericleous M, Kelly C, Wang T, Livingstone C, Ala A
**Journal:** Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2468-1253(17)30052-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2468-1253(17)30052-3)

## Content

1. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2017 Sep;2(9):670-679. doi:
10.1016/S2468-1253(17)30052-3.

Wolman's disease and cholesteryl ester storage disorder: the phenotypic spectrum
of lysosomal acid lipase deficiency.

Pericleous M(1), Kelly C(1), Wang T(2), Livingstone C(2), Ala A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Royal Surrey County Hospital
NHS Foundation Trust, Guildford, Surrey, UK; Department of Clinical and
Experimental Medicine, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey, UK.
(2)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Royal Surrey County Hospital NHS
Foundation Trust, Guildford, Surrey, UK; School of Biosciences and Medicine,
University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey, UK.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Royal Surrey County Hospital
NHS Foundation Trust, Guildford, Surrey, UK; Department of Clinical and
Experimental Medicine, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey, UK. Electronic
address: aftabala@nhs.net.

Lysosomal acid lipase deficiency is a rare, autosomal recessive condition caused
by mutations in the gene encoding lysosomal acid lipase (LIPA) that result in
reduced or absent activity of this essential enzyme. The severity of the
resulting disease depends on the nature of the underlying mutation and magnitude
of its effect on enzymatic function. Wolman's disease is a severe disorder that
presents during infancy, resulting in failure to thrive, hepatomegaly, and
hepatic failure, and an average life expectancy of less than 4 months.
Cholesteryl ester storage disorder arises later in life and is less severe,
although the two diseases share many common features, including dyslipidaemia
and transaminitis. The prevalence of these diseases has been estimated at one in
40 000 to 300 000, but many cases are undiagnosed and unreported, and awareness
among clinicians is low. Lysosomal acid lipase deficiency-which can be diagnosed
using dry blood spot testing-is often misdiagnosed as non-alcoholic fatty liver
disease (NAFLD), non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), hereditary dyslipidaemia,
or cryptogenic cirrhosis. There are no formal guidelines for treatment of these
patients, and treatment options are limited. In this Review we appraise the
existing literature on Wolman's disease and cholesteryl ester storage disease,
and discuss available treatments, including enzyme replacement therapy, oral
lipid-lowering therapy, stem-cell transplantation, and liver transplantation.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2468-1253(17)30052-3
PMID: 28786388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
