---
reference_id: "PMID:22507308"
title: A common mechanism and a new categorization for anti-ganglioside antibody-mediated neuropathies.
authors:
- Uncini A
journal: Exp Neurol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2012.03.023
keywords:
- Animals
- "Autoantibodies/classification, physiology"
- Gangliosides/immunology
- "Guillain-Barre Syndrome/classification, immunology, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Polyneuropathies/classification, immunology, metabolism"
- Sphingolipid Activator Proteins/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A common mechanism and a new categorization for anti-ganglioside antibody-mediated neuropathies.
**Authors:** Uncini A
**Journal:** Exp Neurol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.expneurol.2012.03.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expneurol.2012.03.023)

## Content

1. Exp Neurol. 2012 Jun;235(2):513-6. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2012.03.023. Epub 
2012 Apr 6.

A common mechanism and a new categorization for anti-ganglioside 
antibody-mediated neuropathies.

Uncini A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Imaging, University G. d'Annunzio, 
Chieti-Pescara, Italy. uncini@unich.it

Serum antibodies to different gangliosides have been identified in some 
Guillain-Barré (GBS) subtypes and variants. In the January issue of Experimental 
Neurology Susuki and colleagues (2012) showed that in experimental neuropathies 
associated with antibodies to GM1, GD1a and GD1b the common mechanism is a 
complement mediated dysfunction and disruption of the nodes of Ranvier which 
causes a pathophysiological continuum from early reversible conduction failure 
to axonal degeneration. These observations, correlated and integrated with 
electrophysiological and pathological findings in humans indicate that the GBS 
subtypes acute motor conduction block neuropathy, acute motor axonal neuropathy, 
acute motor and sensory neuropathy and acute sensory neuropathy and possibly 
also a chronic disorder as multifocal motor neuropathy represent a spectrum of 
the same immunopathologic process. Being the nodal axolemma and the paranode the 
focus of the nerve injury, these immune mediated neuropathies could be more 
properly classified as nodo-paranodopathies.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2012.03.023
PMID: 22507308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]