---
reference_id: "PMID:18855094"
title: Severity and progression rate of cerebellar ataxia in 16q-linked autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia (16q-ADCA) in the endemic Nagano Area of Japan.
authors:
- Yoshida K
- Shimizu Y
- Morita H
- Okano T
- Sakai H
- Ohata T
- Matsumoto N
- Nakamura K
- Tazawa K
- Ohara S
- Tabata K
- Inoue A
- Sato S
- Shimojima Y
- Hattori T
- Ushiyama M
- Ikeda S
journal: Cerebellum
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1007/s12311-008-0062-8
keywords:
- "5' Untranslated Regions/genetics"
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- "Cerebellar Ataxia/classification, epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 16"
- Cognition Disorders/genetics
- Disease Progression
- Family
- Female
- Guanine Nucleotide Exchange Factors/genetics
- Humans
- Interviews as Topic
- Japan/epidemiology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Reflex, Babinski"
- Severity of Illness Index
- Spectrin/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Severity and progression rate of cerebellar ataxia in 16q-linked autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia (16q-ADCA) in the endemic Nagano Area of Japan.
**Authors:** Yoshida K, Shimizu Y, Morita H, Okano T, Sakai H, Ohata T, Matsumoto N, Nakamura K, Tazawa K, Ohara S, Tabata K, Inoue A, Sato S, Shimojima Y, Hattori T, Ushiyama M, Ikeda S
**Journal:** Cerebellum (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12311-008-0062-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12311-008-0062-8)

## Content

1. Cerebellum. 2009 Mar;8(1):46-51. doi: 10.1007/s12311-008-0062-8.

Severity and progression rate of cerebellar ataxia in 16q-linked autosomal
dominant cerebellar ataxia (16q-ADCA) in the endemic Nagano Area of Japan.

Yoshida K(1), Shimizu Y, Morita H, Okano T, Sakai H, Ohata T, Matsumoto N,
Nakamura K, Tazawa K, Ohara S, Tabata K, Inoue A, Sato S, Shimojima Y, Hattori
T, Ushiyama M, Ikeda S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (Neurology and Rheumatology), Shinshu University
School of Medicine, Asahi, Matsumoto, Japan. kyoshida@shinshu-u.ac.jp

16q22.1-linked autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia (16q-ADCA) is a recently
defined subtype of ADCA identified by a disease-specific C/T substitution in the
5' untranslated region of the puratrophin-1 gene. In Nagano, the central
mountainous district of the main island of Japan, 16q-ADCA and spinocerebellar
ataxia type 6 (SCA6) are the most and second most prevalent subtypes of ADCA,
respectively. Both subtypes are classified into Harding's ADCA III, but little
attention has been given to the differences in the severity and progression rate
of cerebellar ataxia between 16q-ADCA and SCA6. We investigated the clinical
severity and progression rate of cerebellar ataxia of 16q-ADCA patients using
international cooperative ataxia rating scale and scale for the assessment and
rating of ataxia and compared them with those of SCA6 patients. The age at onset
was much higher in 16q-ADCA patients (60.1 +/- 9.8 years, n = 66) than in SCA6
patients (41.1 +/- 8.7 years, n = 35). Clinical features of 16q-ADCA were
basically consistent with pure cerebellar ataxia, as well as in SCA6, but
gaze-evoked nystagmus was observed less frequently in 16q-ADCA patients than in
SCA6 patients. When compared at almost the same disease duration after onset,
the severity of cerebellar ataxia was a little higher, and the progression rate
seemed more rapid in 16q-ADCA patients than in SCA6 patients, but the
differences were not significant.

DOI: 10.1007/s12311-008-0062-8
PMID: 18855094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
