---
reference_id: "PMID:34114641"
title: The pathologic diagnosis of mantle cell lymphoma.
authors:
- Li S
- Xu J
- You MJ
journal: Histol Histopathol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.14670/HH-18-351
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The pathologic diagnosis of mantle cell lymphoma.
**Authors:** Li S, Xu J, You MJ
**Journal:** Histol Histopathol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.14670/HH-18-351](https://doi.org/10.14670/HH-18-351)

## Content

1. Histol Histopathol. 2021 Oct;36(10):1037-1051. doi: 10.14670/HH-18-351. Epub 
2021 Jun 11.

The pathologic diagnosis of mantle cell lymphoma.

Li S(1), Xu J(2), You MJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematopathology, the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX, USA. sli6@mdanderson.org.
(2)Department of Hematopathology, the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is a mature B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma usually 
characterized by t(11;14) (q13;q32), or CCND1 translocation and Cyclin D1 over 
expression. A very small subset of MCL may lack the t(11;14) (q13;q32) 
translocation and Cyclin D1 over expression, but show alternative translocations 
involving CCND2 and CCND3, and over expression of SOX11. In general, MCL has 
been considered a very aggressive and incurable lymphoma and patients with MCL 
usually have a poor prognosis. However, indolent variants, including in situ 
mantle cell neoplasm and the recently recognized leukemic non-nodal MCL do 
exist. In recent years, genome-wide molecular genetic studies have revealed a 
characteristic MCL genetic profile. This review will focus on the pathologic 
diagnosis of MCL using the traditional morphological and immunophenotypic 
strategies combined with cytogenetic characteristics and recently identified 
molecular profile. Morphological subtypes, immunophenotypic variants, recently 
recognized indolent variants, as well as MCL risk stratification will also be 
discussed.

DOI: 10.14670/HH-18-351
PMID: 34114641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]