---
reference_id: "PMID:29914387"
title: "A de novo KMT2D mutation in a girl with Kabuki syndrome associated with endocrine symptoms: a case report."
authors:
- Moon JE
- Lee SJ
- Ko CW
journal: BMC Med Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s12881-018-0606-9
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Child
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Endocrine System Diseases/genetics
- Face/abnormalities
- Female
- Hematologic Diseases/genetics
- Humans
- Mutation/genetics
- Neoplasm Proteins/genetics
- Vestibular Diseases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A de novo KMT2D mutation in a girl with Kabuki syndrome associated with endocrine symptoms: a case report.
**Authors:** Moon JE, Lee SJ, Ko CW
**Journal:** BMC Med Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12881-018-0606-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12881-018-0606-9)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genet. 2018 Jun 18;19(1):102. doi: 10.1186/s12881-018-0606-9.

A de novo KMT2D mutation in a girl with Kabuki syndrome associated with 
endocrine symptoms: a case report.

Moon JE(1), Lee SJ(1), Ko CW(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kyungpook National University School of Medicine, 
Kyungpook National University Children's Hospital, 807, Hoguk-ro, Buk-gu, Daegu, 
41404, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Kyungpook National University School of Medicine, 
Kyungpook National University Children's Hospital, 807, Hoguk-ro, Buk-gu, Daegu, 
41404, Republic of Korea. cwko@knu.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Kabuki syndrome is characterized by distinctive facial features and 
varying degrees of growth retardation. It leads to malformations in skeletal, 
urogenital and cardiac structures; moreover, endocrine conditions such as 
premature thelarche, precocious puberty, growth hormone deficiency, diabetes 
insipidus, thyroid dysfunction and obesity have been reported. Kabuki syndrome 
is caused by a heterozygous mutation in the KMT2D or KDM6A genes.
CASE PRESENTATION: An 11-year-old girl with the typical facial features of 
Kabuki syndrome visited our hospital due to her short stature. She was found to 
have the de novo heterozygous mutation of c.8200C > T, p(Arg2734*) in exon 32 of 
the KMT2D gene and was diagnosed with Kabuki syndrome. The patient also 
exhibited endocrine abnormalities such as a constitutional delay of puberty, 
transiently congenial hypothyroidism, obesity and growth hormone deficiency.
CONCLUSIONS: This is a case of a mutation in the KMT2D gene in a girl with 
Kabuki syndrome who presented with endocrine symptoms (constitutional delay of 
puberty, hypothyroidism, obesity and growth hormone deficiency).

DOI: 10.1186/s12881-018-0606-9
PMCID: PMC6007063
PMID: 29914387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: This 
study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the Kyungpook National 
University Chilgok Hospital. Written informed consent for the molecular studies 
was obtained from the patient’s parents. A copy of the consent is available for 
review by the editor of this journal. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: The patient’s 
parents consented to the publication of the case and any accompanying images in 
writing. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.