---
reference_id: "PMID:20194327"
title: Early mortality and cardiorespiratory failure in patients with fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva.
authors:
- Kaplan FS
- Zasloff MA
- Kitterman JA
- Shore EM
- Hong CC
- Rocke DM
journal: J Bone Joint Surg Am
year: '2010'
doi: 10.2106/JBJS.I.00705
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Cause of Death
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Heart Failure/mortality
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Myositis Ossificans/mortality
- Pneumonia/mortality
- Registries
- Survival Rate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early mortality and cardiorespiratory failure in patients with fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva.
**Authors:** Kaplan FS, Zasloff MA, Kitterman JA, Shore EM, Hong CC, Rocke DM
**Journal:** J Bone Joint Surg Am (2010)
**DOI:** [10.2106/JBJS.I.00705](https://doi.org/10.2106/JBJS.I.00705)

## Content

1. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2010 Mar;92(3):686-91. doi: 10.2106/JBJS.I.00705.

Early mortality and cardiorespiratory failure in patients with fibrodysplasia
ossificans progressiva.

Kaplan FS(1), Zasloff MA, Kitterman JA, Shore EM, Hong CC, Rocke DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Hospital of the University of
Pennsylvania, Silverstein-2, 3400 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
Frederick.Kaplan@uphs.upenn.edu

BACKGROUND: Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva, a rare genetic disorder of
progressive extraskeletal ossification, is the most disabling form of
heterotopic ossification in humans. However, little is known about the lifespan
or causes of mortality in these patients. We undertook this study to determine
the lifespan and causes of mortality in individuals who had fibrodysplasia
ossificans progressiva.
METHODS: We reviewed comprehensive mortality reports from two large registries
of patients with fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva. Together, these
registries comprise >90% of all known patients with this condition in the world.
We noted the sex, dates of birth and death, and the cause of death for each
individual. We verified the cause of death with extensive medical records, when
available. We also collected date of birth, current age, and sex information for
each living patient member of the International Fibrodysplasia Ossificans
Progressiva Association.
RESULTS: Sixty deaths (thirty male and thirty female patients) were reported in
the fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva community during a
thirty-three-year-period. For all sixty patients, the median age at the time of
death was forty years (range, three to seventy-seven years). Data were
sufficient to establish the cause of death in forty-eight (80%) of the sixty
individuals. The median age at the time of death for the forty-eight patients
(twenty-four male and twenty-four female patients) with an established cause of
death was also forty years. The median lifespan estimated from the 371
individuals in the international fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva community
who were alive and the sixty who had died was fifty-six years (95% confidence
interval, fifty-one to sixty years). The most common causes of death in patients
with fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva were cardiorespiratory failure from
thoracic insufficiency syndrome (54%; median age, forty-two years) and pneumonia
(15%; median age, forty years).
CONCLUSIONS: Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva is not only an extremely
disabling disease but also a condition of considerably shortened lifespan. The
most common cause of death in patients with fibrodysplasia ossificans
progressiva is cardiorespiratory failure from thoracic insufficiency syndrome.

DOI: 10.2106/JBJS.I.00705
PMCID: PMC2827822
PMID: 20194327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
