---
reference_id: "PMID:9837813"
title: Mutations of SURF-1 in Leigh disease associated with cytochrome c oxidase deficiency.
authors:
- Tiranti V
- Hoertnagel K
- Carrozzo R
- Galimberti C
- Munaro M
- Granatiero M
- Zelante L
- Gasparini P
- Marzella R
- Rocchi M
- Bayona-Bafaluy MP
- Enriquez JA
- Uziel G
- Bertini E
- Dionisi-Vici C
- Franco B
- Meitinger T
- Zeviani M
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1086/302150
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Fusion/genetics
- Cell Line
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 9/genetics"
- Cricetinae
- Cytochrome-c Oxidase Deficiency
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/genetics"
- Electron Transport Complex IV/genetics
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- Fibroblasts
- Genetic Complementation Test
- Genotype
- Humans
- Hybrid Cells
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- "Leigh Disease/genetics, metabolism"
- Lod Score
- Male
- Membrane Proteins
- Mice
- Mitochondrial Proteins
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- "Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Rho Factor/genetics
- Telomere/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations of SURF-1 in Leigh disease associated with cytochrome c oxidase deficiency.
**Authors:** Tiranti V, Hoertnagel K, Carrozzo R, Galimberti C, Munaro M, Granatiero M, Zelante L, Gasparini P, Marzella R, Rocchi M, Bayona-Bafaluy MP, Enriquez JA, Uziel G, Bertini E, Dionisi-Vici C, Franco B, Meitinger T, Zeviani M
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1086/302150](https://doi.org/10.1086/302150)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1998 Dec;63(6):1609-21. doi: 10.1086/302150.

Mutations of SURF-1 in Leigh disease associated with cytochrome c oxidase 
deficiency.

Tiranti V(1), Hoertnagel K, Carrozzo R, Galimberti C, Munaro M, Granatiero M, 
Zelante L, Gasparini P, Marzella R, Rocchi M, Bayona-Bafaluy MP, Enriquez JA, 
Uziel G, Bertini E, Dionisi-Vici C, Franco B, Meitinger T, Zeviani M.

Author information:
(1)Istituto Nazionale Neurologico, Divisione di Biochimica e Genetica, 20133 
Milano, Italy.

Comment in
    Am J Hum Genet. 1998 Dec;63(6):1594-7. doi: 10.1086/302169.

Leigh disease associated with cytochrome c oxidase deficiency (LD[COX-]) is one 
of the most common disorders of the mitochondrial respiratory chain, in infancy 
and childhood. No mutations in any of the genes encoding the COX-protein 
subunits have been identified in LD(COX-) patients. Using complementation assays 
based on the fusion of LD(COX-) cell lines with several rodent/human rho0 
hybrids, we demonstrated that the COX phenotype was rescued by the presence of a 
normal human chromosome 9. Linkage analysis restricted the disease locus to the 
subtelomeric region of chromosome 9q, within the 7-cM interval between markers 
D9S1847 and D9S1826. Candidate genes within this region include SURF-1, the 
yeast homologue (SHY-1) of which encodes a mitochondrial protein necessary for 
the maintenance of COX activity and respiration. Sequence analysis of SURF-1 
revealed mutations in numerous DNA samples from LD(COX-) patients, indicating 
that this gene is responsible for the major complementation group in this 
important mitochondrial disorder.

DOI: 10.1086/302150
PMCID: PMC1377632
PMID: 9837813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]