---
reference_id: "PMID:20012385"
title: "From manganism to manganese-induced parkinsonism: a conceptual model based on the evolution of exposure."
authors:
- Lucchini RG
- Martin CJ
- Doney BC
journal: Neuromolecular Med
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1007/s12017-009-8108-8
keywords:
- "Basal Ganglia/drug effects, metabolism"
- Environmental Exposure
- "Globus Pallidus/drug effects, metabolism"
- Humans
- Male
- "Manganese/metabolism, toxicity"
- "Manganese Poisoning/complications, metabolism"
- Occupational Exposure
- "Parkinson Disease, Secondary/chemically induced, pathology"
- "Proton-Translocating ATPases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Substantia Nigra/drug effects, metabolism"
- "Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics, metabolism"
- Welding
- Workforce
- "alpha-Synuclein/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# From manganism to manganese-induced parkinsonism: a conceptual model based on the evolution of exposure.
**Authors:** Lucchini RG, Martin CJ, Doney BC
**Journal:** Neuromolecular Med (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12017-009-8108-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12017-009-8108-8)

## Content

1. Neuromolecular Med. 2009;11(4):311-21. doi: 10.1007/s12017-009-8108-8. Epub
2009  Dec 10.

From manganism to manganese-induced parkinsonism: a conceptual model based on 
the evolution of exposure.

Lucchini RG(1), Martin CJ, Doney BC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental and Applied Medicine, Section of Occupational 
Health and Industrial Hygiene, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.

Manganism is a distinct medical condition from Parkinson's disease. Manganese 
exposure scenarios in the last century generally have changed from the acute, 
high-level exposure conditions responsible for the occurrence of manganism to 
chronic exposure to much lower levels. Such chronic exposures may progressively 
extend the site of manganese deposition and toxicity from the globus pallidus to 
the entire area of the basal ganglia, including the substantia nigra pars 
compacta involved in Parkinson's disease. The mechanisms of manganese 
neurotoxicity from chronic exposure to very low levels are not well understood, 
but promising information is based on the concept of susceptibility that may 
place individuals exposed to manganese at a higher risk for developing 
Parkinsonian disturbances. These conditions include mutations of genes which 
play important pathogenetic roles in both Parkinsonism and in the regulation of 
manganese transport and metabolism. Liver function is also important in 
manganese-related neurotoxicity and sub-clinical impairment may increase the 
risk of Parkinsonism. The purpose and scope of this report are to explore the 
literature concerning manganese exposure and potential subclinical effects and 
biological pathways, impairment, and development of diseases such as 
Parkinsonism and manganism. Inhalation and ingestion of manganese will be the 
focus of this report.

DOI: 10.1007/s12017-009-8108-8
PMCID: PMC12409775
PMID: 20012385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]