---
reference_id: "PMID:8853987"
title: "Expression of the T-box family genes, Tbx1-Tbx5, during early mouse development."
authors:
- Chapman DL
- Garvey N
- Hancock S
- Alexiou M
- Agulnik SI
- Gibson-Brown JJ
- Cebra-Thomas J
- Bollag RJ
- Silver LM
- Papaioannou VE
journal: Dev Dyn
year: '1996'
doi: "10.1002/(SICI)1097-0177(199608)206:4<379::AID-AJA4>3.0.CO;2-F"
keywords:
- Animals
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Embryonic and Fetal Development/genetics
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- In Situ Hybridization
- Mice
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- T-Box Domain Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expression of the T-box family genes, Tbx1-Tbx5, during early mouse development.
**Authors:** Chapman DL, Garvey N, Hancock S, Alexiou M, Agulnik SI, Gibson-Brown JJ, Cebra-Thomas J, Bollag RJ, Silver LM, Papaioannou VE
**Journal:** Dev Dyn (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1002/(SICI)1097-0177(199608)206:4<379::AID-AJA4>3.0.CO;2-F](https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0177(199608)206:4<379::AID-AJA4>3.0.CO;2-F)

## Content

1. Dev Dyn. 1996 Aug;206(4):379-90. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1097-0177(199608)206:4<379::AID-AJA4>3.0.CO;2-F.

Expression of the T-box family genes, Tbx1-Tbx5, during early mouse development.

Chapman DL(1), Garvey N, Hancock S, Alexiou M, Agulnik SI, Gibson-Brown JJ, 
Cebra-Thomas J, Bollag RJ, Silver LM, Papaioannou VE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, College of Physicans and Surgeons, 
Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

A novel family of genes, characterized by the presence of a region of homology 
to the DNA-binding domain of the Brachyury (T) locus product, has recently been 
identified. The region of homology has been named the T-box, and the new mouse 
genes that contain the T-box domain have been named T-box 1-6 (Tbx1 through 
Tbx6). As the basis for further study of the function and evolution of these 
genes, we have examined the expression of 5 of these genes, Tbx1-Tbx5, across a 
wide range of embryonic stages from blastocyst through gastrulation and early 
organogenesis by in situ hybridization of wholemounts and tissue sections. Tbx3 
is expressed earliest, in the inner cell mass of the blastocyst. Four of the 
genes are expressed in different components of the mesoderm or mesoderm/endoderm 
during gastrulation (Tbx1 and Tbx3-5). All of these genes have highly specific 
patterns of expression during later embryogenesis, notably in areas undergoing 
inductive tissue interactions. In several cases there is complementary 
expression of different genes in 2 interacting tissues, as in the lung 
epithelium (Tbx1) and lung mesenchyme (Tbx2-5), and in mammary buds (Tbx3) and 
mammary stroma (Tbx2). Tbx1 shows very little overlap in the sites of expression 
with the other 4 genes, in contrast to a striking similarity in expression 
between members of the 2 cognate gene sets, Tbx2/Tbx3 and Tbx4/Tbx5. This is a 
clear reflection of the evolutionary relationship between the 5 genes since the 
divergence of Tbx1 occurred long before the relatively recent divergence of Tbx2 
and 3 and Tbx4 and 5 from common ancestral genes. These studies are a good 
indication that the T-box family of genes has important roles in inductive 
interactions in many stages of mammalian embryogenesis.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1097-0177(199608)206:4<379::AID-AJA4>3.0.CO;2-F
PMID: 8853987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]