---
reference_id: "PMID:36610382"
title: Astrocyte Ca(2+) signaling is facilitated in Scn1a(+/-) mouse model of Dravet syndrome.
authors:
- Uchino K
- Tanaka Y
- Ikezawa W
- Deshimaru M
- Kubota K
- Watanabe T
- Katsurabayashi S
- Iwasaki K
- Hirose S
journal: Biochem Biophys Res Commun
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2022.12.084
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- Astrocytes/metabolism
- "Epilepsies, Myoclonic/genetics"
- Epilepsy
- "NAV1.1 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel/genetics, metabolism"
- Neurons/metabolism
- Calcium Signaling
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Astrocyte Ca(2+) signaling is facilitated in Scn1a(+/-) mouse model of Dravet syndrome.
**Authors:** Uchino K, Tanaka Y, Ikezawa W, Deshimaru M, Kubota K, Watanabe T, Katsurabayashi S, Iwasaki K, Hirose S
**Journal:** Biochem Biophys Res Commun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbrc.2022.12.084](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2022.12.084)

## Content

1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2023 Feb 5;643:169-174. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2022.12.084. Epub 2023 Jan 1.

Astrocyte Ca(2+) signaling is facilitated in Scn1a(+/-) mouse model of Dravet 
syndrome.

Uchino K(1), Tanaka Y(2), Ikezawa W(1), Deshimaru M(3), Kubota K(1), Watanabe 
T(1), Katsurabayashi S(4), Iwasaki K(1), Hirose S(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropharmacology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Fukuoka 
University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(2)Department of Advanced Pharmacology, Daiichi University of Pharmacy, Fukuoka, 
Japan; iONtarget, Co. Inc, Fukuoka, Japan; Research Institute for the Molecular 
Pathogeneses of Epilepsy, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(3)Research Institute for the Molecular Pathogeneses of Epilepsy, Fukuoka 
University, Fukuoka, Japan.
(4)Department of Neuropharmacology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Fukuoka 
University, Fukuoka, Japan; Research Institute for the Molecular Pathogeneses of 
Epilepsy, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka, Japan. Electronic address: 
shutarok@fukuoka-u.ac.jp.
(5)iONtarget, Co. Inc, Fukuoka, Japan; Research Institute for the Molecular 
Pathogeneses of Epilepsy, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka, Japan; General Medical 
Research Center, School of Medicine, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka, Japan. 
Electronic address: hirose@fukuoka-u.ac.jp.

Dravet syndrome (DS) is an infantile-onset epileptic encephalopathy. More than 
80% of DS patients have a heterozygous mutation in SCN1A, which encodes a 
subunit of the voltage-gated sodium channel, Nav1.1, in neurons. The roles 
played by astrocytes, the most abundant glial cell type in the brain, have been 
investigated in the pathogenesis of epilepsy; however, the specific involvement 
of astrocytes in DS has not been clarified. In this study, we evaluated Ca2+ 
signaling in astrocytes using genetically modified mice that have a 
loss-of-function mutation in Scn1a. We found that the slope of spontaneous Ca2+ 
spiking was increased without a change in amplitude in Scn1a+/- astrocytes. In 
addition, ATP-induced transient Ca2+ influx and the slope of Ca2+ spiking were 
also increased in Scn1a+/- astrocytes. These data indicate that perturbed Ca2+ 
dynamics in astrocytes may be involved in the pathogenesis of DS.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2022.12.084
PMID: 36610382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.