---
reference_id: "PMID:38618951"
title: "Central conducting lymphatic anomaly: from bench to bedside."
authors:
- Garlisi Torales LD
- Sempowski BA
- Krikorian GL
- Woodis KM
- Paulissen SM
- Smith CL
- Sheppard SE
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1172/JCI172839
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Central conducting lymphatic anomaly: from bench to bedside.
**Authors:** Garlisi Torales LD, Sempowski BA, Krikorian GL, Woodis KM, Paulissen SM, Smith CL, Sheppard SE
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI172839](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI172839)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2024 Apr 15;134(8):e172839. doi: 10.1172/JCI172839.

Central conducting lymphatic anomaly: from bench to bedside.

Garlisi Torales LD(1), Sempowski BA(1), Krikorian GL(1), Woodis KM(1), Paulissen 
SM(1), Smith CL(2), Sheppard SE(1).

Author information:
(1)Unit on Vascular Malformations, Division of Intramural Research, Eunice 
Kennedy Shriver, National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, NIH, 
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Jill and Mark Fishman Center for Lymphatic Disorders, 
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Central conducting lymphatic anomaly (CCLA) is a complex lymphatic anomaly 
characterized by abnormalities of the central lymphatics and may present with 
nonimmune fetal hydrops, chylothorax, chylous ascites, or lymphedema. CCLA has 
historically been difficult to diagnose and treat; however, recent advances in 
imaging, such as dynamic contrast magnetic resonance lymphangiography, and in 
genomics, such as deep sequencing and utilization of cell-free DNA, have 
improved diagnosis and refined both genotype and phenotype. Furthermore, in 
vitro and in vivo models have confirmed genetic causes of CCLA, defined the 
underlying pathogenesis, and facilitated personalized medicine to improve 
outcomes. Basic, translational, and clinical science are essential for a 
bedside-to-bench and back approach for CCLA.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI172839
PMCID: PMC11014661
PMID: 38618951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors have declared 
that no conflict of interest exists.