---
reference_id: "PMID:29955068"
title: Influenza.
authors:
- Krammer F
- Smith GJD
- Fouchier RAM
- Peiris M
- Kedzierska K
- Doherty PC
- Palese P
- Shaw ML
- Treanor J
- Webster RG
- García-Sastre A
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-018-0002-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Influenza.
**Authors:** Krammer F, Smith GJD, Fouchier RAM, Peiris M, Kedzierska K, Doherty PC, Palese P, Shaw ML, Treanor J, Webster RG, García-Sastre A
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-018-0002-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-018-0002-y)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2018 Jun 28;4(1):3. doi: 10.1038/s41572-018-0002-y.

Influenza.

Krammer F(1), Smith GJD(2)(3), Fouchier RAM(4), Peiris M(5)(6), Kedzierska K(7), 
Doherty PC(7)(8), Palese P(1)(9), Shaw ML(1), Treanor J(10), Webster RG(11), 
García-Sastre A(12)(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY, USA.
(2)Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore, Singapore.
(3)Duke Global Health Institute, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA.
(4)Department of Viroscience, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(5)WHO Collaborating Centre for Infectious Disease Epidemiology and Control, 
School of Public Health, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, Hong Kong, China.
(6)Center of Influenza Research, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University 
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, Hong Kong, China.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne at the 
Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia.
(8)Department of Immunology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 
USA.
(9)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(10)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of 
Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY, USA.
(11)Department of Infectious Diseases, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, TN, USA.
(12)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New 
York, NY, USA. adolfo.garcia-sastre@mssm.edu.
(13)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. adolfo.garcia-sastre@mssm.edu.
(14)Global Health and Emerging Pathogens Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. adolfo.garcia-sastre@mssm.edu.

Influenza is an infectious respiratory disease that, in humans, is caused by 
influenza A and influenza B viruses. Typically characterized by annual seasonal 
epidemics, sporadic pandemic outbreaks involve influenza A virus strains of 
zoonotic origin. The WHO estimates that annual epidemics of influenza result in 
~1 billion infections, 3–5 million cases of severe illness and 300,000–500,000 
deaths. The severity of pandemic influenza depends on multiple factors, 
including the virulence of the pandemic virus strain and the level of 
pre-existing immunity. The most severe influenza pandemic, in 1918, resulted 
in >40 million deaths worldwide. Influenza vaccines are formulated every year to 
match the circulating strains, as they evolve antigenically owing to antigenic 
drift. Nevertheless, vaccine efficacy is not optimal and is dramatically low in 
the case of an antigenic mismatch between the vaccine and the circulating virus 
strain. Antiviral agents that target the influenza virus enzyme neuraminidase 
have been developed for prophylaxis and therapy. However, the use of these 
antivirals is still limited. Emerging approaches to combat influenza include the 
development of universal influenza virus vaccines that provide protection 
against antigenically distant influenza viruses, but these vaccines need to be 
tested in clinical trials to ascertain their effectiveness.

Influenza is an infectious respiratory disease that, in humans, is caused by 
influenza A and influenza B viruses. This Primer discusses the biological 
features of influenza viruses, their effects on human and animal health and the 
mitigation strategies to reduce the burden of this disease.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-018-0002-y
PMCID: PMC7097467
PMID: 29955068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: F.K., P.P., A.G.-S. and R.G.W. are inventors of 
influenza vaccine technologies owned by the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, USA. All other authors declare no competing interests.