---
reference_id: "PMID:36768210"
title: "Not to Miss: Intronic Variants, Treatment, and Review of the Phenotypic Spectrum in VPS13D-Related Disorder."
authors:
- Pauly MG
- Brüggemann N
- Efthymiou S
- Grözinger A
- Diaw SH
- Chelban V
- Turchetti V
- Vona B
- Tadic V
- Houlden H
- Münchau A
- Lohmann K
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms24031874
keywords:
- Muscle Spasticity
- Spinocerebellar Ataxias
- Optic Atrophy
- Paraplegia
- Mutation
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability
- Tremor
- "Spastic Paraplegia, Hereditary/genetics"
- Proteins/genetics
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Not to Miss: Intronic Variants, Treatment, and Review of the Phenotypic Spectrum in VPS13D-Related Disorder.
**Authors:** Pauly MG, Brüggemann N, Efthymiou S, Grözinger A, Diaw SH, Chelban V, Turchetti V, Vona B, Tadic V, Houlden H, Münchau A, Lohmann K
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms24031874](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24031874)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Jan 18;24(3):1874. doi: 10.3390/ijms24031874.

Not to Miss: Intronic Variants, Treatment, and Review of the Phenotypic Spectrum 
in VPS13D-Related Disorder.

Pauly MG(1)(2)(3), Brüggemann N(1)(2), Efthymiou S(4), Grözinger A(1), Diaw 
SH(1), Chelban V(4), Turchetti V(4), Vona B(5)(6), Tadic V(1)(2), Houlden H(4), 
Münchau A(3), Lohmann K(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neurogenetics, University of Lübeck, 23562 Lübeck, Germany.
(2)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Schleswig Holstein, 23562 
Lübeck, Germany.
(3)Institute of Systems Motor Science, University of Lübeck, 23562 Lübeck, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Neuromuscular Disease, UCL Queen Square Institute of Neurology, 
London WC1N 3BG, UK.
(5)Institute for Auditory Neuroscience and InnerEarLab, University Medical 
Center Göttingen, 37075 Göttingen, Germany.
(6)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Göttingen, 37073 
Göttingen, Germany.

VPS13D is one of four human homologs of the vacuolar sorting protein 13 gene 
(VPS13). Biallelic pathogenic variants in the gene are associated with spastic 
ataxia or spastic paraplegia. Here, we report two patients with intronic 
pathogenic variants: one patient with early onset severe spastic ataxia and 
debilitating tremor, which is compound-heterozygous for a canonical 
(NM_018156.4: c.2237-1G > A) and a non-canonical (NM_018156.4: c.941+3G>A) 
splice site variant. The second patient carries the same non-canonical splice 
site variant in the homozygous state and is affected by late-onset spastic 
paraplegia. We confirmed altered splicing as a result of the intronic variants 
and demonstrated disturbed mitochondrial integrity. Notably, tremor in the first 
patient improved significantly by bilateral deep brain stimulation (DBS) in the 
ventralis intermedius (VIM) nucleus of the thalamus. We also conducted a 
literature review and summarized the phenotypical spectrum of reported 
VPS13D-related disorders. Our study underscores that looking for mutations 
outside the canonical splice sites is important not to miss a genetic diagnosis, 
especially in disorders with a highly heterogeneous presentation without 
specific red flags.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24031874
PMCID: PMC9953040
PMID: 36768210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.