---
reference_id: "PMID:37919864"
title: Ocular findings in vitiligo and recommendations for dermatologists.
authors:
- Poondru S
- Alvi S
- LeWitt TM
- Haddadin R
- Kundu RV
journal: Int J Dermatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/ijd.16883
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ocular findings in vitiligo and recommendations for dermatologists.
**Authors:** Poondru S, Alvi S, LeWitt TM, Haddadin R, Kundu RV
**Journal:** Int J Dermatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ijd.16883](https://doi.org/10.1111/ijd.16883)

## Content

1. Int J Dermatol. 2023 Dec;62(12):1433-1436. doi: 10.1111/ijd.16883. Epub 2023
Nov  2.

Ocular findings in vitiligo and recommendations for dermatologists.

Poondru S(1)(2), Alvi S(2), LeWitt TM(1), Haddadin R(3), Kundu RV(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.
(2)School of Medicine, University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, MO, USA.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.

Since extracutaneous melanocytes in the eye may also be affected in vitiligo, a 
systematic review was conducted to explore the ocular manifestations of 
vitiligo. Studies point to a higher risk of ocular findings in periorbital 
vitiligo. Dry eye disease is the most reported ocular abnormality in vitiligo. 
Additionally, several small studies have found potential links to uveitis and 
glaucoma. Various other chorioretinal pigmentary changes are also reported, but 
without accompanying functional consequences or changes in vision. Although 
there is a need for larger studies to further elucidate these associations, 
dermatologists should be aware of potential ocular comorbidities in vitiligo and 
refer to ophthalmology accordingly.

© 2023 the International Society of Dermatology.

DOI: 10.1111/ijd.16883
PMID: 37919864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]