---
reference_id: "PMID:25597339"
title: A global perspective on the epidemiology of acne.
authors:
- Tan JK
- Bhate K
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/bjd.13462
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A global perspective on the epidemiology of acne.
**Authors:** Tan JK, Bhate K
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bjd.13462](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjd.13462)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2015 Jul;172 Suppl 1:3-12. doi: 10.1111/bjd.13462.

A global perspective on the epidemiology of acne.

Tan JK(1), Bhate K(2).

Author information:
(1)Windsor Clinical Research Inc. and Western University, London, ON, Canada.
(2)Centre of Evidence Based Dermatology, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, 
U.K.

Acne is estimated to affect 9.4% of the global population, making it the eighth 
most prevalent disease worldwide. Epidemiological studies have demonstrated that 
acne is most common in postpubescent teens, with boys most frequently affected, 
particularly with more severe forms of the disease. This paper aims to provide 
an update on the epidemiology of acne worldwide. Recent general and 
institutional studies from around the world have shown that the prevalence of 
acne is broadly consistent globally (with the exception of specific populations, 
which are discussed). However, this review highlights that there is a wide range 
of disparate outcome measures being applied in epidemiology studies, and we 
emphasize the need to develop a widely accepted, credible, standard assessment 
scale to address this in the future. In addition we discuss special populations, 
such as those devoid of acne, as well as the impact of potential determinants of 
acne on disease epidemiology.

© 2015 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/bjd.13462
PMID: 25597339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]