---
reference_id: "PMID:38752190"
title: "Management of Combined Fracture Neck of Femur and Femoral Deformity in Osteogenesis Imperfecta Patient: A Case Report."
authors:
- Elbaseet HM
- Ibrahim AH
- Oyoun NA
- Abdelzaher MA
- Khaled M
journal: Strategies Trauma Limb Reconstr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.5005/jp-journals-10080-1611
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of Combined Fracture Neck of Femur and Femoral Deformity in Osteogenesis Imperfecta Patient: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Elbaseet HM, Ibrahim AH, Oyoun NA, Abdelzaher MA, Khaled M
**Journal:** Strategies Trauma Limb Reconstr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.5005/jp-journals-10080-1611](https://doi.org/10.5005/jp-journals-10080-1611)

## Content

1. Strategies Trauma Limb Reconstr. 2024 Jan-Apr;19(1):56-59. doi: 
10.5005/jp-journals-10080-1611.

Management of Combined Fracture Neck of Femur and Femoral Deformity in 
Osteogenesis Imperfecta Patient: A Case Report.

Elbaseet HM(1), Ibrahim AH(1), Oyoun NA(1), Abdelzaher MA(1), Khaled M(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Orthopedic Unit, Department of Orthopedic Surgery and Traumatology, 
Assiut University, Egypt.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) patients usually sustain repeated fractures from 
trivial trauma and also have skeletal deformities that affect walking. The bone 
fragility and repeated fractures produce deformities of the long bones 
especially in femur and tibia. However, neck of femur (NOF) fractures in OI are 
rarely described. A 11-year-old male patient known to have OI (Sillence type IV) 
sustained a NOF fracture after a fall. He also had proximal femoral 
anterolateral bowing proximally and over an intramedullary (IM) rod inserted 4 
years back. He was treated by corrective osteotomy and stabilisation with an IM 
telescoping nail for the deformed femur and the Wagner technique for the NOF 
fracture. One year after operation, the patient had recovered satisfactory 
functional outcome with union of the NOF fracture and correction of the femoral 
deformity.
CONCLUSION: The method of the Wagner technique can achieve stable fixation for 
femoral neck fractures and introduces the least interference with concurrent 
telescoping nail insertion.
HOW TO CITE THIS ARTICLE: Elbaseet HM, Ibrahim AH, Abol Oyoun N, et al. 
Management of Combined Fracture Neck of Femur and Femoral Deformity in 
Osteogenesis Imperfecta Patient: A Case Report. Strategies Trauma Limb Reconstr 
2024;19(1):56-59.

Copyright © 2024; The Author(s).

DOI: 10.5005/jp-journals-10080-1611
PMCID: PMC11091891
PMID: 38752190

Conflict of interest statement: Source of support: Nil Conflict of interest: 
None Patient consent statement: The author(s) have obtained written informed 
consent from the patient's parents/legal guardians for publication of the case 
report details and related images.