---
reference_id: "PMID:23770606"
title: Frequent mutation of the major cartilage collagen gene COL2A1 in chondrosarcoma.
authors:
- Tarpey PS
- Behjati S
- Cooke SL
- Van Loo P
- Wedge DC
- Pillay N
- Marshall J
- "O'Meara S"
- Davies H
- Nik-Zainal S
- Beare D
- Butler A
- Gamble J
- Hardy C
- Hinton J
- Jia MM
- Jayakumar A
- Jones D
- Latimer C
- Maddison M
- Martin S
- McLaren S
- Menzies A
- Mudie L
- Raine K
- Teague JW
- Tubio JM
- Halai D
- Tirabosco R
- Amary F
- Campbell PJ
- Stratton MR
- Flanagan AM
- Futreal PA
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1038/ng.2668
keywords:
- "Bone Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Chondrosarcoma/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Collagen Type II/genetics, metabolism"
- Computational Biology
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- "Databases, Genetic"
- "Hedgehog Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Grading
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Retinoblastoma Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frequent mutation of the major cartilage collagen gene COL2A1 in chondrosarcoma.
**Authors:** Tarpey PS, Behjati S, Cooke SL, Van Loo P, Wedge DC, Pillay N, Marshall J, O'Meara S, Davies H, Nik-Zainal S, Beare D, Butler A, Gamble J, Hardy C, Hinton J, Jia MM, Jayakumar A, Jones D, Latimer C, Maddison M, Martin S, McLaren S, Menzies A, Mudie L, Raine K, Teague JW, Tubio JM, Halai D, Tirabosco R, Amary F, Campbell PJ, Stratton MR, Flanagan AM, Futreal PA
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.2668](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.2668)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2013 Aug;45(8):923-6. doi: 10.1038/ng.2668. Epub 2013 Jun 16.

Frequent mutation of the major cartilage collagen gene COL2A1 in chondrosarcoma.

Tarpey PS(1), Behjati S, Cooke SL, Van Loo P, Wedge DC, Pillay N, Marshall J,
O'Meara S, Davies H, Nik-Zainal S, Beare D, Butler A, Gamble J, Hardy C, Hinton
J, Jia MM, Jayakumar A, Jones D, Latimer C, Maddison M, Martin S, McLaren S,
Menzies A, Mudie L, Raine K, Teague JW, Tubio JM, Halai D, Tirabosco R, Amary F,
Campbell PJ, Stratton MR, Flanagan AM, Futreal PA.

Author information:
(1)Cancer Genome Project, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome
Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, UK.

Chondrosarcoma is a heterogeneous collection of malignant bone tumors and is the
second most common primary malignancy of bone after osteosarcoma. Recent work
has identified frequent, recurrent mutations in IDH1 or IDH2 in nearly half of
central chondrosarcomas. However, there has been little systematic genomic
analysis of this tumor type, and, thus, the contribution of other genes is
unclear. Here we report comprehensive genomic analyses of 49 individuals with
chondrosarcoma (cases). We identified hypermutability of the major cartilage
collagen gene COL2A1, with insertions, deletions and rearrangements identified
in 37% of cases. The patterns of mutation were consistent with selection for
variants likely to impair normal collagen biosynthesis. In addition, we
identified mutations in IDH1 or IDH2 (59%), TP53 (20%), the RB1 pathway (33%)
and Hedgehog signaling (18%).

DOI: 10.1038/ng.2668
PMCID: PMC3743157
PMID: 23770606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
