---
reference_id: "PMID:17055079"
title: Peroxisome biogenesis disorders.
authors:
- Steinberg SJ
- Dodt G
- Raymond GV
- Braverman NE
- Moser AB
- Moser HW
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2006.09.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peroxisome biogenesis disorders.
**Authors:** Steinberg SJ, Dodt G, Raymond GV, Braverman NE, Moser AB, Moser HW
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbamcr.2006.09.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbamcr.2006.09.010)

## Content

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Dec;1763(12):1733-48. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2006.09.010. Epub 2006 Sep 14.

Peroxisome biogenesis disorders.

Steinberg SJ(1), Dodt G, Raymond GV, Braverman NE, Moser AB, Moser HW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA. Steven.Steinberg@kennedykrieger.org

Defects in PEX genes impair peroxisome assembly and multiple metabolic pathways 
confined to this organelle, thus providing the biochemical and molecular bases 
of the peroxisome biogenesis disorders (PBD). PBD are divided into two 
types--Zellweger syndrome spectrum (ZSS) and rhizomelic chondrodysplasia 
punctata (RCDP). Biochemical studies performed in blood and urine are used to 
screen for the PBD. DNA testing is possible for all of the disorders, but is 
more challenging for the ZSS since 12 PEX genes are known to be associated with 
this spectrum of PBD. In contrast, PBD-RCDP is associated with defects in the 
PEX7 gene alone. Studies of the cellular and molecular defects in PBD patients 
have contributed significantly to our understanding of the role of each PEX gene 
in peroxisome assembly.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2006.09.010
PMID: 17055079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]