---
reference_id: "PMID:20711859"
title: "Heavy metal concentrations in some macrobenthic fauna of the Sundarbans mangrove forest, south west coast of Bangladesh."
authors:
- Ahmed K
- Mehedi Y
- Haque R
- Mondol P
journal: Environ Monit Assess
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s10661-010-1651-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heavy metal concentrations in some macrobenthic fauna of the Sundarbans mangrove forest, south west coast of Bangladesh.
**Authors:** Ahmed K, Mehedi Y, Haque R, Mondol P
**Journal:** Environ Monit Assess (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10661-010-1651-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10661-010-1651-9)

## Content

1. Environ Monit Assess. 2011 Jun;177(1-4):505-14. doi:
10.1007/s10661-010-1651-9.  Epub 2010 Aug 17.

Heavy metal concentrations in some macrobenthic fauna of the Sundarbans mangrove 
forest, south west coast of Bangladesh.

Ahmed K(1), Mehedi Y, Haque R, Mondol P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Fisheries, University of Dhaka, Dhaka 1000, Bangladesh. 
kawser@univdhaka.edu

Heavy metal concentrations in some macrobenthic fauna have been reported for the 
first time from the Sundarbans mangrove forest, south west coast of Bangladesh, 
in the northern part of Bay of Bengal. The concentration of Fe, Cu, Zn, Cd and 
Pb in macrobenthos ranged from 235 ± 10.11 to 1,051 ± 38.42, 3.66 ± 0.89 to 7.55 
± 1.29, 76.8 ± 8.55 to 98.5 ± 6.49, 0.46 ± 0.11 to 0.859 ± 0.2 and 4.66 ± 1.17 
to 6.77 ± 2.1 μg/g, respectively. Significant variations (p ≤ 0.05) in heavy 
metal concentrations have been observed among the mud crab, mudskipper and 
gastropod. However, heavy metal burdens did not vary significantly among the 
hermit and horseshoe crabs. In mud crab, horseshoe crab and gastropod, heavy 
metal concentrations were recorded in the sequence: Fe > Zn > Pb > Cu > Cd. 
Hermit crab and mudskipper contained heavy metals in the order of Fe > Zn > Cu > 
Pb > Cd. Fe and Zn concentrations were found significantly (p ≤ 0.05) higher in 
macrobenthos. The lead (Pb) concentration found in the edible portion of 
macrobenthos exceeded the international permissible limits certified by the WHO. 
Bioconcentration factors >1.00 obtained for Fe (17.05 in mudskipper) and Cd 
(1.87 in gastropod) indicated that these metals were highly bioaccumulated and 
biomagnified in benthic fauna of Sundarbans. The findings of this study refer to 
the potential impact of heavy metals in the mangrove ecosystem of Bangladesh.

DOI: 10.1007/s10661-010-1651-9
PMID: 20711859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]