---
reference_id: "PMID:15055357"
title: Body mass index and hypothalamic morphology on MRI in children with congenital midline cerebral abnormalities.
authors:
- Traggiai C
- Stanhope R
journal: J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1515/jpem.2004.17.2.219
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Age of Onset
- Body Mass Index
- "Brain/abnormalities, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Endocrine System Diseases/etiology, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Hypothalamus/pathology
- Infant
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Pituitary Hormones/deficiency
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Body mass index and hypothalamic morphology on MRI in children with congenital midline cerebral abnormalities.
**Authors:** Traggiai C, Stanhope R
**Journal:** J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1515/jpem.2004.17.2.219](https://doi.org/10.1515/jpem.2004.17.2.219)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Feb;17(2):219-21. doi:
10.1515/jpem.2004.17.2.219.

Body mass index and hypothalamic morphology on MRI in children with congenital
midline cerebral abnormalities.

Traggiai C(1), Stanhope R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Institute G. Gaslini, Genoa, Italy.

Obesity is common in children with congenital midline defects of the brain, due
to various endocrine reasons: hypothyroidism, growth hormone deficiency and
inappropriate cortisol replacement. However, obesity occurs more often in the
absence of an endocrinopathy. We reviewed 31 patients (10 females, 21 males)
with midline intracranial defects (holoprosencephaly, absence of septum
pellucidum, absence of corpus callosum, optic nerve hypoplasia) and correlated
the morphology of the hypothalamus with body mass index (BMI), as BMI SDS.
Endocrinopathies were present in 16 out of the 31 patients. We conclude that
there was a trend of increasing mean BMI SDS with increasing hypothalamic
abnormality, although this was not statistically significant.

DOI: 10.1515/jpem.2004.17.2.219
PMID: 15055357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
