---
reference_id: "PMID:37160197"
title: A Practical Approach to Echocardiographic Imaging in Patients With Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Mitchell CC
- Frye C
- Jankowski M
- Symanski J
- Lester SJ
- Woo A
- Gilliland Y
- Dragulescu A
- Abraham T
- Desai M
- Martinez MW
- Nagueh SF
- Phelan D
journal: J Am Soc Echocardiogr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.echo.2023.04.020
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Practical Approach to Echocardiographic Imaging in Patients With Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Mitchell CC, Frye C, Jankowski M, Symanski J, Lester SJ, Woo A, Gilliland Y, Dragulescu A, Abraham T, Desai M, Martinez MW, Nagueh SF, Phelan D
**Journal:** J Am Soc Echocardiogr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.echo.2023.04.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.echo.2023.04.020)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2023 Sep;36(9):913-932. doi:
10.1016/j.echo.2023.04.020.  Epub 2023 May 7.

A Practical Approach to Echocardiographic Imaging in Patients With Hypertrophic 
Cardiomyopathy.

Mitchell CC(1), Frye C(2), Jankowski M(3), Symanski J(2), Lester SJ(4), Woo 
A(5), Gilliland Y(6), Dragulescu A(7), Abraham T(8), Desai M(9), Martinez 
MW(10), Nagueh SF(11), Phelan D(12).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine and Public Health Department of Medicine, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin.
(2)Sanger Heart and Vascular Institute, Atrium Health, Charlotte, North 
Carolina.
(3)Division of Cardiology, Northwestern Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois.
(4)Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, Arizona.
(5)Toronto General Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(6)Ochsner Medical Center, New Orleans, Louisiana.
(7)Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(8)University of California, San Francisco, California.
(9)Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio.
(10)Atlantic Health, Morristown Medical Center, Morristown, New Jersey.
(11)Houston Methodist Hospital, Houston, Texas.
(12)Sanger Heart and Vascular Institute, Atrium Health, Charlotte, North 
Carolina. Electronic address: dermot.phelan@atriumhealth.org.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is frequently unrecognized or misdiagnosed. 
The recently published consensus recommendations from the American Society of 
Echocardiography provided recommendations for the utilization of multimodality 
imaging in the care of patients with HCM. This document provides an additional 
practical framework for optimal image and measurement acquisition and guidance 
on how to tailor the echocardiography examination for individuals with HCM. It 
also provides resources for physicians and sonographers to use to develop HCM 
imaging protocols.

Copyright © 2023 American Society of Echocardiography. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.echo.2023.04.020
PMID: 37160197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]