---
reference_id: PMID:18094050
title: MKKS is a centrosome-shuttling protein degraded by disease-causing mutations via CHIP-mediated ubiquitination.
authors:
- Hirayama S
- Yamazaki Y
- Kitamura A
- Oda Y
- Morito D
- Okawa K
- Kimura H
- Cyr DM
- Kubota H
- Nagata K
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1091/mbc.e07-07-0631
keywords:
- Animals
- Bardet-Biedl Syndrome/genetics
- Cell Line
- Centrosome/metabolism
- Cytosol/metabolism
- Glutamic Acid/genetics
- Glycine/genetics
- Group II Chaperonins
- Humans
- Mice
- Microtubules/metabolism
- Molecular Chaperones/metabolism
- Mutant Proteins/metabolism
- Mutation/genetics
- Proteasome Inhibitors
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational"
- "Protein Structure, Quaternary"
- Protein Transport
- Solubility
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/metabolism
- Ubiquitination
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MKKS is a centrosome-shuttling protein degraded by disease-causing mutations via CHIP-mediated ubiquitination.
**Authors:** Hirayama S, Yamazaki Y, Kitamura A, Oda Y, Morito D, Okawa K, Kimura H, Cyr DM, Kubota H, Nagata K
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.e07-07-0631](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.e07-07-0631)

## Content

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2008 Mar;19(3):899-911. doi: 10.1091/mbc.e07-07-0631. Epub 2007
 Dec 19.

MKKS is a centrosome-shuttling protein degraded by disease-causing mutations via 
CHIP-mediated ubiquitination.

Hirayama S(1), Yamazaki Y, Kitamura A, Oda Y, Morito D, Okawa K, Kimura H, Cyr 
DM, Kubota H, Nagata K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biolog, Kyoto University, Kyoto 
606-8397, Japan.

McKusick-Kaufman syndrome (MKKS) is a recessively inherited human genetic 
disease characterized by several developmental anomalies. Mutations in the MKKS 
gene also cause Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS), a genetically heterogeneous 
disorder with pleiotropic symptoms. However, little is known about how MKKS 
mutations lead to disease. Here, we show that disease-causing mutants of MKKS 
are rapidly degraded via the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway in a manner dependent 
on HSC70 interacting protein (CHIP), a chaperone-dependent ubiquitin ligase. 
Although wild-type MKKS quickly shuttles between the centrosome and cytosol in 
living cells, the rapidly degraded mutants often fail to localize to the 
centrosome. Inhibition of proteasome functions causes MKKS mutants to form 
insoluble structures at the centrosome. CHIP and partner chaperones, including 
heat-shock protein (HSP)70/heat-shock cognate 70 and HSP90, strongly recognize 
MKKS mutants. Modest knockdown of CHIP by RNA interference moderately inhibited 
the degradation of MKKS mutants. These results indicate that the MKKS mutants 
have an abnormal conformation and that chaperone-dependent degradation mediated 
by CHIP is a key feature of MKKS/BBS diseases.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.e07-07-0631
PMCID: PMC2262992
PMID: 18094050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]