---
reference_id: "PMID:31704329"
title: Cadmium-binding proteins in human blood plasma.
authors:
- Li Y
- Huang YS
- He B
- Liu R
- Qu G
- Yin Y
- Shi J
- Hu L
- Jiang G
journal: Ecotoxicol Environ Saf
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2019.109896
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cadmium-binding proteins in human blood plasma.
**Authors:** Li Y, Huang YS, He B, Liu R, Qu G, Yin Y, Shi J, Hu L, Jiang G
**Journal:** Ecotoxicol Environ Saf (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ecoenv.2019.109896](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2019.109896)

## Content

1. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2020 Jan 30;188:109896. doi: 
10.1016/j.ecoenv.2019.109896. Epub 2019 Nov 6.

Cadmium-binding proteins in human blood plasma.

Li Y(1), Huang YS(2), He B(1), Liu R(1), Qu G(1), Yin Y(1), Shi J(1), Hu L(3), 
Jiang G(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Environmental Chemistry and Ecotoxicology, Research 
Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 
100085, China.
(2)Department of Occupational Medicine, Guangdong Province Hospital for 
Occupational Disease Prevention and Treatment, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510300, 
China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Environmental Chemistry and Ecotoxicology, Research 
Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 
100085, China; Institute of Environment and Health, Jianghan University, Wuhan, 
430056, China. Electronic address: lghu@rcees.ac.cn.

Blood is the transmission medium for metal contaminants to and from bodily 
organs; as such, it can provide useful and reliable information about their 
bio-kinetics as they're distributed throughout the body. Metals can interact 
with endogenous proteins present in the blood, and these metal-protein complexes 
often dictate the fates of the introduced metals. The aim of this study was to 
investigate cadmium-binding protein characteristics in normal human plasma. 
Cadmium-binding plasma proteins in two different groups: normal human plasma 
(n = 29), and normal paired maternal and fetal umbilical cord plasmas (n = 3), 
were analyzed. In order to detect cadmium-binding plasma proteins present in low 
concentrations, blood plasma samples were first depleted of their two most 
abundant proteins - albumin and immunoglobulin G. Both the crude and depleted 
plasma samples were analyzed using column gel electrophoresis in conjunction 
with Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS). One cadmium-binding 
protein was detected in 11 of 29 normal plasma samples and all three paired 
maternal and cord plasma samples. This protein was further identified as 
apolipoprotein A-I by high-resolution mass spectrometry. To the best of our 
knowledge, this is the first study to reveal cadmium-binding proteins in real 
human blood plasma, which is extremely critical to our understanding of cadmium 
transportation and accumulation in human blood.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2019.109896
PMID: 31704329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]