---
reference_id: "PMID:34926353"
title: "Occurrence of Esophageal Atresia With Tracheoesophageal Fistula in Siblings From Three-Generation Family Affected by Variable Expressivity MYCN Mutation: A Case Report."
authors:
- Klaniewska M
- Toczewski K
- Rozensztrauch A
- Bloch M
- Dzielendziak A
- Gasperowicz P
- Slezak R
- Ploski R
- Rydzanicz M
- Smigiel R
- Patkowski D
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2021.783553
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Occurrence of Esophageal Atresia With Tracheoesophageal Fistula in Siblings From Three-Generation Family Affected by Variable Expressivity MYCN Mutation: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Klaniewska M, Toczewski K, Rozensztrauch A, Bloch M, Dzielendziak A, Gasperowicz P, Slezak R, Ploski R, Rydzanicz M, Smigiel R, Patkowski D
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2021.783553](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2021.783553)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2021 Dec 2;9:783553. doi: 10.3389/fped.2021.783553. eCollection
 2021.

Occurrence of Esophageal Atresia With Tracheoesophageal Fistula in Siblings From 
Three-Generation Family Affected by Variable Expressivity MYCN Mutation: A Case 
Report.

Klaniewska M(1), Toczewski K(2), Rozensztrauch A(1), Bloch M(1), Dzielendziak 
A(2), Gasperowicz P(3), Slezak R(4), Ploski R(3), Rydzanicz M(3), Smigiel R(1), 
Patkowski D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Rare Disorders, Medical University, Wroclaw, 
Poland.
(2)Department of Pediatric Surgery and Urology, Medical University, Wroclaw, 
Poland.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University, Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Genetics, Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland.

The MYCN oncogene encodes a transcription factor belonging to the MYC family. It 
is primarily expressed in normal developing embryos and is thought to be 
critical in brain and other neural development. Loss-of-function variants 
resulting in haploinsufficiency of MYCN, which encodes a protein with a basic 
helix-loop-helix domain causes Feingold syndrome (OMIM 164280, ORPHA 391641). We 
present an occurrence of esophageal atresia (EA) with tracheoesophageal fistula 
in siblings from a three-generation family affected by variable expressivity of 
MYCN mutation p.(Ser90GlnfsTer176) as a diagnostic effect of searching the cause 
of familial esophageal atresia using NGS-based whole-exome sequencing (WES). All 
of our affected patients showed microcephaly and toe syndactyly, which were 
frequently reported in the literature. Just one patient exhibited clinodactyly. 
None of the patients exhibited brachymesophalangy or hypoplastic thumbs. The 
latest report noted that patients with EA and Feingold syndrome were also those 
with the more complex and severe phenotype. However, following a thorough review 
of the present literature, the same association was not found, which is also 
confirmed by the case we described. The variable phenotypic expression of the 
patients we described and the data from the literature guide a careful 
differential diagnosis of Feingold syndrome even in cases of poorly expressed 
and non-specific symptoms.

Copyright © 2021 Klaniewska, Toczewski, Rozensztrauch, Bloch, Dzielendziak, 
Gasperowicz, Slezak, Ploski, Rydzanicz, Smigiel and Patkowski.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2021.783553
PMCID: PMC8674716
PMID: 34926353

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.