---
reference_id: "PMID:8270934"
title: "Eyelid myoclonia with typical absences: an epilepsy syndrome."
authors:
- Appleton RE
- Panayiotopoulos CP
- Acomb BA
- Beirne M
journal: J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1136/jnnp.56.12.1312
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Eyelid myoclonia with typical absences: an epilepsy syndrome.
**Authors:** Appleton RE, Panayiotopoulos CP, Acomb BA, Beirne M
**Journal:** J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jnnp.56.12.1312](https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.56.12.1312)

## Content

1. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1993 Dec;56(12):1312-6. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.56.12.1312.

Eyelid myoclonia with typical absences: an epilepsy syndrome.

Appleton RE(1), Panayiotopoulos CP, Acomb BA, Beirne M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurophysiology, Royal Liverpool Children's NHS 
Trust Alder Hey, UK.

Five unrelated patients are described with the clinical and electrical features 
of eyelid myoclonia with absences (EMA). In this syndrome brief, typical 
absences occur with rapid eyelid myoclonia associated with retropulsive 
movements of the eyeballs and occasionally of the head. The seizures are of 
shorter duration than in childhood absence epilepsy, and are accompanied by less 
profound impairment of consciousness. The electroencephalogram demonstrates high 
amplitude discharges consisting of spikes, multiple spikes and slow waves at a 
fluctuating frequency of 3-5 Hz and following eye closure, which disappear in 
darkness. Photosensitivity is also seen. Onset is in early childhood and EMA 
appears to persist into adult life. Treatment is sodium valproate in combination 
with either ethosuximide or a benzodiazepine. On the basis of the clinical 
features, EEG findings, and the response to treatment and prognosis, it is 
suggested that EMA be classified as a specific epilepsy syndrome.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.56.12.1312
PMCID: PMC1015381
PMID: 8270934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]