---
reference_id: "PMID:16770791"
title: "Entries in the Leiden Duchenne muscular dystrophy mutation database: an overview of mutation types and paradoxical cases that confirm the reading-frame rule."
authors:
- Aartsma-Rus A
- Van Deutekom JC
- Fokkema IF
- Van Ommen GJ
- Den Dunnen JT
journal: Muscle Nerve
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1002/mus.20586
keywords:
- "Databases, Genetic"
- Gene Frequency
- Germany
- Humans
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Duchenne/genetics"
- Mutation/genetics
- Phenotype
- Reading Frames/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Entries in the Leiden Duchenne muscular dystrophy mutation database: an overview of mutation types and paradoxical cases that confirm the reading-frame rule.
**Authors:** Aartsma-Rus A, Van Deutekom JC, Fokkema IF, Van Ommen GJ, Den Dunnen JT
**Journal:** Muscle Nerve (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mus.20586](https://doi.org/10.1002/mus.20586)

## Content

1. Muscle Nerve. 2006 Aug;34(2):135-44. doi: 10.1002/mus.20586.

Entries in the Leiden Duchenne muscular dystrophy mutation database: an overview
of mutation types and paradoxical cases that confirm the reading-frame rule.

Aartsma-Rus A(1), Van Deutekom JC, Fokkema IF, Van Ommen GJ, Den Dunnen JT.

Author information:
(1)Leiden University Medical Center, Department of Human Genetics, P.O. Box
9600, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands. a.m.rus@lumc.nl

The severe Duchenne and milder Becker muscular dystrophy are both caused by
mutations in the DMD gene. This gene codes for dystrophin, a protein important
for maintaining the stability of muscle-fiber membranes. In 1988, Monaco and
colleagues postulated an explanation for the phenotypic difference between
Duchenne and Becker patients in the reading-frame rule: In Duchenne patients,
mutations induce a shift in the reading frame leading to prematurely truncated,
dysfunctional dystrophins. In Becker patients, in-frame mutations allow the
synthesis of internally deleted, but largely functional dystrophins. Currently,
over 4700 mutations have been reported in the Leiden DMD mutation database, of
which 91% are in agreement with this rule. In this study we provide an update of
the mutational variability in the DMD gene, particularly focusing on
genotype-phenotype correlations and mutations that appear to be exceptions to
the reading-frame rule.

DOI: 10.1002/mus.20586
PMID: 16770791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
