---
reference_id: "PMID:24913384"
title: Can we get more from our current treatments?
authors:
- Irving PM
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.bpg.2014.04.012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Can we get more from our current treatments?
**Authors:** Irving PM
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bpg.2014.04.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpg.2014.04.012)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Gastroenterol. 2014 Jun;28(3):451-63. doi: 
10.1016/j.bpg.2014.04.012. Epub 2014 May 5.

Can we get more from our current treatments?

Irving PM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Guy's and St. Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, 
Diabetes and Nutritional Sciences Division, King's College London, London, UK. 
Electronic address: peter.irving@gstt.nhs.uk.

Crohn's disease is a chronic incurable condition that normally requires lifelong 
treatment. Whilst the anti-TNF agents have revolutionised the management of 
Crohn's disease over the last fifteen years, they are not a panacea. In 
particular, in part due to their immunogenic nature, loss of response limits 
their long term effectiveness in many patients. The only other long term 
disease-modifying options are the immunomodulators, methotrexate, azathioprine 
and mercaptopurine. Therefore, given the limited number of drugs available to 
treat Crohn's disease, it is important that efforts are made to ensure that 
drugs are used in the best way possible as once a drug is deemed ineffective, it 
is rarely used again. For the growing number of patients who have active disease 
despite having been exposed to all standard therapies, failure to optimise drug 
therapy may lead to missed opportunities in the management of their disease. In 
this review, optimisation of drugs commonly used in the management of Crohn's 
disease will be discussed.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpg.2014.04.012
PMID: 24913384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]