---
reference_id: "PMID:23194659"
title: Familial Mediterranean Fever -- an increasingly important childhood disease in Sweden.
authors:
- Wekell P
- Friman V
- Balci-Peynircioglu B
- Yilmaz E
- Fasth A
- Berg S
journal: Acta Paediatr
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1111/apa.12075
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial Mediterranean Fever -- an increasingly important childhood disease in Sweden.
**Authors:** Wekell P, Friman V, Balci-Peynircioglu B, Yilmaz E, Fasth A, Berg S
**Journal:** Acta Paediatr (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/apa.12075](https://doi.org/10.1111/apa.12075)

## Content

1. Acta Paediatr. 2013 Feb;102(2):193-8. doi: 10.1111/apa.12075. Epub 2012 Dec 7.

Familial Mediterranean Fever -- an increasingly important childhood disease in 
Sweden.

Wekell P(1), Friman V, Balci-Peynircioglu B, Yilmaz E, Fasth A, Berg S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Gothenburg, Sweden.

AIM: To characterize Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) in western Sweden, 
focusing on genotype, clinical picture, prevalence and age of onset as well as 
time to diagnosis.
METHODS: Patients with autoinflammatory diseases are continuously registered at 
the five main hospitals in Western Sweden. Case records of patients with FMF 
were analysed retrospectively. Population data on immigration was retrieved from 
Statistics Sweden.
RESULTS: Until 2008, 37 patients with FMF were identified. The prevalence among 
inhabitants of Turkish, Lebanese, Syrian and Iranian origin was 173, 124, 86 and 
17/100 000, respectively. Median age at first symptoms was 4 years (range 3 
month-37 years) and at diagnosis 10 years (range 2-44 years). Median time from 
first symptoms to diagnosis was 4 years (range <1 year-34 years). Among 32 
patients screened for twelve common mutations, 75% were homozygotes or compound 
heterozygotes, 16% were heterozygotes and in 9% no mutation was found. In our 
cohort the frequencies of symptoms were fever 100%, peritonitis 92%, pleuritis 
22% and arthritis 11%.
CONCLUSIONS: The majority of patients with FMF present during childhood. The 
prevalence among immigrants in western Sweden is in the same range as in their 
country of origin. Time to diagnosis needs to be shortened by means of increased 
awareness of the disease.

©2012 The Author(s)/Acta Paediatrica ©2012 Foundation Acta Paediatrica.

DOI: 10.1111/apa.12075
PMID: 23194659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]