---
reference_id: "PMID:9425900"
title: A pore mutation in a novel KQT-like potassium channel gene in an idiopathic epilepsy family.
authors:
- Charlier C
- Singh NA
- Ryan SG
- Lewis TB
- Reus BE
- Leach RJ
- Leppert M
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1038/ng0198-53
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 8"
- "Epilepsy, Generalized/genetics"
- Female
- Genetic Variation
- Humans
- KCNQ3 Potassium Channel
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational"
- Potassium Channels/genetics
- "Potassium Channels, Voltage-Gated"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A pore mutation in a novel KQT-like potassium channel gene in an idiopathic epilepsy family.
**Authors:** Charlier C, Singh NA, Ryan SG, Lewis TB, Reus BE, Leach RJ, Leppert M
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0198-53](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0198-53)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1998 Jan;18(1):53-5. doi: 10.1038/ng0198-53.

A pore mutation in a novel KQT-like potassium channel gene in an idiopathic 
epilepsy family.

Charlier C(1), Singh NA, Ryan SG, Lewis TB, Reus BE, Leach RJ, Leppert M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City 84112, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1998 Jan;18(1):6-8. doi: 10.1038/ng0198-6.

Epileptic disorders affect about 20-40 million people worldwide, and 40% of 
these are idiopathic generalized epilepsies (IGEs; ref. 1). Most of the IGEs 
that are inherited are complex, multigenic diseases. To address basic mechanisms 
for epilepsies, we have focused on one well-defined class of IGEs with an 
autosomal-dominant mode of inheritance: the benign familial neonatal convulsions 
(BFNC; refs 2,3). Genetic heterogeneity of BFNC has been observed. Two loci, 
EBN1 and EBN2, have been mapped by linkage analysis to chromosome 20q13 (refs 
5,6) and chromosome 8q24 (refs 7,8), respectively. By positional cloning, we 
recently identified the gene for EBN1 as KCNQ2 (ref. 9). This gene, a 
voltage-gated potassium channel, based on homology, is a member of the KQT-like 
family. Here we describe an additional member, KCNQ3. We mapped this new gene to 
chromosome 8, between markers D8S256 and D8S284 on a radiation hybrid map. We 
screened KCNQ3 for mutations in the large BFNC family previously linked to 
chromosome 8q24 in the same marker interval. We found a missense mutation in the 
critical pore region in perfect co-segregation with the BFNC phenotype. The same 
conserved amino acid is also mutated in KVLQT1 (KCNQ1) in an LQT patient. KCNQ2, 
KCNQ3 and undiscovered genes of the same family of K+ channels are strong 
candidates for other IGEs.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0198-53
PMID: 9425900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]