---
reference_id: "PMID:17524020"
title: Lung disease in ataxia-telangiectasia.
authors:
- Bott L
- Lebreton J
- Thumerelle C
- Cuvellier J
- Deschildre A
- Sardet A
journal: Acta Paediatr
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1111/j.1651-2227.2007.00338.x
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Airway Obstruction
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/complications, immunology"
- Bronchiectasis
- Female
- Humans
- "Lung Diseases/etiology, immunology"
- Male
- Respiratory Tract Infections/etiology
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lung disease in ataxia-telangiectasia.
**Authors:** Bott L, Lebreton J, Thumerelle C, Cuvellier J, Deschildre A, Sardet A
**Journal:** Acta Paediatr (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1651-2227.2007.00338.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1651-2227.2007.00338.x)

## Content

1. Acta Paediatr. 2007 Jul;96(7):1021-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1651-2227.2007.00338.x.
Epub 2007 May 24.

Lung disease in ataxia-telangiectasia.

Bott L(1), Lebreton J, Thumerelle C, Cuvellier J, Deschildre A, Sardet A.

Author information:
(1)Service de pédiatrie, CHU de Poitiers, Poitiers, France.
lebreton.bott@cegetel.net

Ataxia-telangiectasia (AT) is a multi-systemic disease caused by mutational
inactivation of the ATM gene. We report a retrospective study of lung disease in
15 patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A diagnosis of AT was made if the patient met the
following criteria: neurological features and at least one the following:
oculo-cutaneous telangiectasia, elevated serum alpha-feto-protein level.
RESULTS: Recurrent sino-pulmonary infections were usually present in 11 of the
cases and occurred during the first 2 years of life. Other lung injuries noted
were bronchiectasis, obstruction and restriction of the airways, fibrosis,
pneumothorax and haemoptysis. Eleven children had immunodeficiencies.
DISCUSSION: Recurrent sino-pulmonary manifestations precede neurological
complications, but the severity of neuro-degeneration and pulmonary disease were
not correlated. Pulmonary status was a prognosis factor. Immunodeficiency was
the main, but not the only, aetiology for lung disease in AT.
CONCLUSION: There is little dispute over the role of ATM in lung and respiratory
epithelium. To reduce the morbidity associated with AT, there needs to be
greater awareness of respiratory complications. Early management and monitoring
lung function is necessary to minimize lung damage.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1651-2227.2007.00338.x
PMID: 17524020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
