---
reference_id: "PMID:31455112"
title: "Efficacy of 30% azelaic acid peel in the nonpharmacological treatment of facial acne."
authors:
- Szymańska A
- Budzisz E
- Erkiert-Polguj A
journal: J Dermatolog Treat
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/09546634.2019.1657222
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of 30% azelaic acid peel in the nonpharmacological treatment of facial acne.
**Authors:** Szymańska A, Budzisz E, Erkiert-Polguj A
**Journal:** J Dermatolog Treat (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/09546634.2019.1657222](https://doi.org/10.1080/09546634.2019.1657222)

## Content

1. J Dermatolog Treat. 2021 May;32(3):291-296. doi:
10.1080/09546634.2019.1657222.  Epub 2019 Aug 28.

Efficacy of 30% azelaic acid peel in the nonpharmacological treatment of facial 
acne.

Szymańska A(1), Budzisz E(1), Erkiert-Polguj A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cosmetic Raw Materials Chemistry, Medical University of Lodz, 
Lodz, Poland.
(2)Department of Cosmetology and Aesthetic Dermatology, Medical University of 
Lodz, Lodz, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Acne is a common, chronic, inflammatory disease of the pilosebaceous 
unit. It has a significant impact on patient quality of life, especially when 
lesions occur on cosmetically sensitive areas. Chemical peeling is a well-known 
option in the treatment of acne vulgaris, but little is known about azelaic acid 
(AZA) peels.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the efficacy of 30% AZA peel, in decreasing the amount 
of secreted sebum, and reducing acne lesions.
METHODS: The study involved 35 women, with acne lesions on face skin. All the 
subjects underwent a series of six treatments, performed every 2 weeks.
RESULTS: A series of treatments contributed to a statistically significant 
reduction in the amount of secreted sebum. Similarly, highly significant values 
determining the overall number of acne lesions and the severity of the disease 
according to the IGA scale were also changed. The procedure was well tolerated 
by all participants.
CONCLUSIONS: Peels with 30% AZA reduced acne lesions and normalized the activity 
of the sebaceous glands. The reduction of sebum allows us to believe that 
obtained good results in patients will be stable and long-lasting.

DOI: 10.1080/09546634.2019.1657222
PMID: 31455112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]