---
reference_id: "PMID:29604224"
title: Mutations in VPS13D lead to a new recessive ataxia with spasticity and mitochondrial defects.
authors:
- Seong E
- Insolera R
- Dulovic M
- Kamsteeg EJ
- Trinh J
- Brüggemann N
- Sandford E
- Li S
- Ozel AB
- Li JZ
- Jewett T
- Kievit AJA
- Münchau A
- Shakkottai V
- Klein C
- Collins CA
- Lohmann K
- van de Warrenburg BP
- Burmeister M
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/ana.25220
keywords:
- Adult
- Cerebellar Ataxia/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Linkage
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mitochondria/genetics
- Muscle Spasticity/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Optic Atrophy/genetics
- Pedigree
- Proteins/genetics
- "Spastic Paraplegia, Hereditary/genetics"
- Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in VPS13D lead to a new recessive ataxia with spasticity and mitochondrial defects.
**Authors:** Seong E, Insolera R, Dulovic M, Kamsteeg EJ, Trinh J, Brüggemann N, Sandford E, Li S, Ozel AB, Li JZ, Jewett T, Kievit AJA, Münchau A, Shakkottai V, Klein C, Collins CA, Lohmann K, van de Warrenburg BP, Burmeister M
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.25220](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.25220)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2018 Jun;83(6):1075-1088. doi: 10.1002/ana.25220. Epub 2018 Jun
30.

Mutations in VPS13D lead to a new recessive ataxia with spasticity and 
mitochondrial defects.

Seong E(1), Insolera R(2), Dulovic M(3), Kamsteeg EJ(4), Trinh J(3), Brüggemann 
N(5), Sandford E(1), Li S(1), Ozel AB(6), Li JZ(6)(7), Jewett T(8), Kievit 
AJA(9), Münchau A(3), Shakkottai V(10), Klein C(3), Collins CA(2), Lohmann K(3), 
van de Warrenburg BP(11), Burmeister M(1)(6)(7)(12).

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience Institute, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, MI.
(2)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
(3)Institute of Neurogenetics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, 
the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.
(6)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
(7)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Section on Medical Genetics, Wake Forest School of 
Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC.
(9)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(10)Departments of Neurology and Molecular and Integrative Physiology, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
(11)Department of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and 
Behavior, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(12)Department of Psychiatry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.

Comment in
    Ann Neurol. 2018 Jun;83(6):1072-1074. doi: 10.1002/ana.25262.

OBJECTIVE: To identify novel causes of recessive ataxias, including 
spinocerebellar ataxia with saccadic intrusions, spastic ataxias, and spastic 
paraplegia.
METHODS: In an international collaboration, we independently performed exome 
sequencing in 7 families with recessive ataxia and/or spastic paraplegia. To 
evaluate the role of VPS13D mutations, we evaluated a Drosophila knockout model 
and investigated mitochondrial function in patient-derived fibroblast cultures.
RESULTS: Exome sequencing identified compound heterozygous mutations in VPS13D 
on chromosome 1p36 in all 7 families. This included a large family with 5 
affected siblings with spinocerebellar ataxia with saccadic intrusions (SCASI), 
or spinocerebellar ataxia, recessive, type 4 (SCAR4). Linkage to chromosome 1p36 
was found in this family with a logarithm of odds score of 3.1. The phenotypic 
spectrum in our 12 patients was broad. Although most presented with ataxia, 
additional or predominant spasticity was present in 5 patients. Disease onset 
ranged from infancy to 39 years, and symptoms were slowly progressive and 
included loss of independent ambulation in 5. All but 2 patients carried a 
loss-of-function (nonsense or splice site) mutation on one and a missense 
mutation on the other allele. Knockdown or removal of Vps13D in Drosophila 
neurons led to changes in mitochondrial morphology and impairment in 
mitochondrial distribution along axons. Patient fibroblasts showed altered 
morphology and functionality including reduced energy production.
INTERPRETATION: Our study demonstrates that compound heterozygous mutations in 
VPS13D cause movement disorders along the ataxia-spasticity spectrum, making 
VPS13D the fourth VPS13 paralog involved in neurological disorders. Ann Neurol 
2018.

© 2018 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.25220
PMCID: PMC6105379
PMID: 29604224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential Conflicts of Interests: None of the 
authors report COI relevant to the reported work. See disclosures for other 
detailed COI