---
reference_id: "PMID:23401428"
title: "Clinical report: Two patients with atelosteogenesis type I caused by missense mutations affecting the same FLNB residue."
authors:
- Li BC
- Hogue J
- Eilers M
- Mehrotra P
- Hyland J
- Holm T
- Prosen T
- Slavotinek AM
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35792
keywords:
- Contractile Proteins/genetics
- Fatal Outcome
- Female
- Filamins
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Microfilament Proteins/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Pregnancy
- Premature Birth
- Radiography
- "Ultrasonography, Prenatal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical report: Two patients with atelosteogenesis type I caused by missense mutations affecting the same FLNB residue.
**Authors:** Li BC, Hogue J, Eilers M, Mehrotra P, Hyland J, Holm T, Prosen T, Slavotinek AM
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.35792](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.35792)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Mar;161A(3):619-25. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35792. Epub
2013  Feb 11.

Clinical report: Two patients with atelosteogenesis type I caused by missense 
mutations affecting the same FLNB residue.

Li BC(1), Hogue J, Eilers M, Mehrotra P, Hyland J, Holm T, Prosen T, Slavotinek 
AM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San 
Francisco, California 94143-0748, USA.

We present two patients with Atelosteogenesis Type I (AO type I) caused by two 
novel Filamin B (FLNB) mutations affecting the same FLNB residue: c.542G > A, 
predicting p.Gly181Asp and c.542G > C, predicting p.Gly181Arg. Both children had 
typical manifestations of AO type I, with severe rhizomelic shortening of the 
extremities, limited elbow and knee extension with mild webbing, pectus 
excavatum, broad thumbs with brachydactyly that was most marked for digits 3-5, 
dislocated hips and bilateral talipes equinovarus. Facial features included 
proptosis, hypertelorism, downslanting palpebral fissures, cleft palate, and 
retromicrognathia. The clinical course of one child was influenced by airway 
instability and bronchopulmonary dysplasia that complicated intubation and 
prevented separation from ventilator support. Respiratory insufficiency with 
tracheal hypoplasia, laryngeal stenosis, and pulmonary hypoplasia have all been 
described in patients with AO type I and we conclude that compromised pulmonary 
function is a major contributor to morbidity and mortality in this condition.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35792
PMID: 23401428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]