---
reference_id: "PMID:29952836"
title: "Myoclonus-dystonia: classification, phenomenology, pathogenesis, and treatment."
authors:
- Roze E
- Lang AE
- Vidailhet M
journal: Curr Opin Neurol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000000577
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- "Dystonic Disorders/classification, genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Humans
- Phenotype
- Sarcoglycans/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myoclonus-dystonia: classification, phenomenology, pathogenesis, and treatment.
**Authors:** Roze E, Lang AE, Vidailhet M
**Journal:** Curr Opin Neurol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1097/WCO.0000000000000577](https://doi.org/10.1097/WCO.0000000000000577)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Neurol. 2018 Aug;31(4):484-490. doi: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000000577.

Myoclonus-dystonia: classification, phenomenology, pathogenesis, and treatment.

Roze E(1)(2), Lang AE(3), Vidailhet M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Sorbonne Université, Faculté de Médecine.
(2)APHP, Hôpital Salpêtrière, Département de Neurologie, Paris, France.
(3)Edmond J. Safra Program in Parkinson's Disease and the Morton and Gloria
Shulman Movement Disorders Clinic, Toronto Western Hospital and the University
of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The present study will highlight recent advances in the field
of myoclonus-dystonia with a focus on clinical aspects, pathogenesis, and
treatment. We will also discuss genetics, classification issues, and diagnostic
criteria.
RECENT FINDINGS: Myoclonus-dystonia is a clinical syndrome corresponding to the
phenotype linked to SGCE, the main causative gene. Childhood-onset myoclonus
that predominates over dystonia with prominent upper body involvement, an
absence of truncal dystonia, associated anxiety or compulsivity, and a positive
family history are helpful diagnostic clues. Recent studies demonstrated that
zonisamide is an interesting therapeutic option in myoclonus-dystonia, and that
bilateral pallidal stimulation has major and lasting therapeutic effects.
Accumulating evidence suggests that an alteration in cerebello-thalamic pathway
function may play a prominent role and that this is possibly related to a
GABAergic deficit reflecting Purkinje cell dysfunction. Impaired striatal
plasticity and disturbed serotonin homeostasis may also be implicated. Newly
available cellular and rodent models may further assist in investigating the
pathogenesis of this disorder.
SUMMARY: Comprehensive analysis of the phenotype and precise classification are
important in patients with myoclonus and dystonia to identify homogeneous groups
of patients. This is critical to guide tailored therapeutic strategies and
promote effective research.

DOI: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000000577
PMID: 29952836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
