---
reference_id: "PMID:24940674"
title: Thirteen years experience with selective screening for disorders in purine and pyrimidine metabolism.
authors:
- Castro M
- Carrillo R
- García F
- Sanz P
- Ferrer I
- Ruiz-Sala P
- Vega AI
- Ruíz Desviat L
- Pérez B
- Pérez-Cerdá C
- Merinero B
- Ugarte M
journal: Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1080/15257770.2013.854381
keywords:
- Humans
- "Purine-Pyrimidine Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, enzymology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thirteen years experience with selective screening for disorders in purine and pyrimidine metabolism.
**Authors:** Castro M, Carrillo R, García F, Sanz P, Ferrer I, Ruiz-Sala P, Vega AI, Ruíz Desviat L, Pérez B, Pérez-Cerdá C, Merinero B, Ugarte M
**Journal:** Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15257770.2013.854381](https://doi.org/10.1080/15257770.2013.854381)

## Content

1. Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids. 2014;33(4-6):233-40. doi:
10.1080/15257770.2013.854381.

Thirteen years experience with selective screening for disorders in purine and
pyrimidine metabolism.

Castro M(1), Carrillo R, García F, Sanz P, Ferrer I, Ruiz-Sala P, Vega AI, Ruíz
Desviat L, Pérez B, Pérez-Cerdá C, Merinero B, Ugarte M.

Author information:
(1)a Centro de Diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares (CEDEM), Universidad
Autónoma de Madrid (UAM), Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de
Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER) , Madrid , Spain.

Purine and pyrimidine disorders represent a heterogeneous group with variable
clinical symptoms and low prevalence rate. In the last thirteen years, we have
studied urine/plasma specimens from about 1600 patients and we have identified
35 patients: eight patients with adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency, eight
patients with hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase deficiency, one
patient with purine nucleoside phosphorylase deficiency, ten patients with
xanthine dehydrogenase deficiency, six patients with molybdenum cofactor
deficiency and two patients with dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency.
Despite low incidence of these diseases, our findings highlight the importance
of including the purine and pyrimidine analysis in the selective screening for
inborn errors of metabolism in specialized laboratories, where amino acid and
organic acid disorders are simultaneously investigated.

DOI: 10.1080/15257770.2013.854381
PMID: 24940674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
