---
reference_id: "PMID:28578817"
title: "Childhood idiopathic spinal cord infarction: Description of 7 cases and review of the literature."
authors:
- Bar C
- Cheuret E
- Bessou P
- Pedespan JM
journal: Brain Dev
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2017.05.009
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- Diffusion Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Female
- Humans
- Infarction
- Male
- Neuroimaging
- Retrospective Studies
- Spinal Cord/pathology
- Spinal Cord Diseases/etiology
- "Spinal Cord Ischemia/etiology, physiopathology"
- Spine/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Childhood idiopathic spinal cord infarction: Description of 7 cases and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Bar C, Cheuret E, Bessou P, Pedespan JM
**Journal:** Brain Dev (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.braindev.2017.05.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.braindev.2017.05.009)

## Content

1. Brain Dev. 2017 Nov;39(10):818-827. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2017.05.009. Epub
2017 May 31.

Childhood idiopathic spinal cord infarction: Description of 7 cases and review
of the literature.

Bar C(1), Cheuret E(2), Bessou P(3), Pedespan JM(4).

Author information:
(1)Service de Neurologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital Pellegrin-Enfants, CHU de
Bordeaux, France. Electronic address: claire.bar@wanadoo.fr.
(2)Service de Neurologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital des Enfants, CHU de Toulouse,
France.
(3)Service d'imagerie anténatale, de l'enfant et de la femme, Hôpital
Pellegrin-Enfants, CHU de Bordeaux, France.
(4)Service de Neurologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital Pellegrin-Enfants, CHU de
Bordeaux, France.

OBJECTIVES: To describe the clinical course, neuroimaging findings and
functional outcome of idiopathic spinal cord infarction (SCI) in adolescents.
METHODS: Retrospective and descriptive analyses of seven patients with
idiopathic SCI and 50 additional cases from the literature were included. Data
collected concerned clinical presentation, MRI findings, initial diagnosis,
treatments and functional outcome at the last medical visit.
RESULTS: Mean age at presentation was 13.2years (range 13-15). All patients
presented a sudden and painful acute myelopathy with <24h time to maximal
symptoms manifestation. A suspected trigger related to a minor effort was
reported in 3/7 cases. Six patients presented with paraplegia, one with
paraparesis. All had bladder dysfunction needing catheterization. Three patients
had an initial misdiagnosis. Initial MRI was considered as normal in 2 cases. In
the 5 other cases, T2-weighted-MR images showed hyperintensity within the
thoracolumbar spinal cord, affecting mostly the anterior spinal artery
territory. Evidence for associated spinal growth dystrophy were present in 6/7
cases. Mean follow-up time was 27.4months (range 3-46): 2 patients recovered
autonomous ambulation, 4 patients regained walking ability with aids and one
child (the shortest follow-up) remained wheelchair-dependent. A neurogenic
bladder was still reported in 6/7 children at the last visit. Complementary
analyses with literature cases were consistent with the findings obtained in our
cohort.
CONCLUSION: Idiopathic SCI typically occurs in adolescence with a rapid onset
and painful acute myelopathy. The MRI shows a T2-hyperintense signal within the
spinal cord and provides evidence for an ischemic mechanism. Etiology remains
unclear in most cases even though some specific risk factors for this age must
play an important role in the pathogenesis, such as mechanical constraints on
the immature spine.

Copyright © 2017 The Japanese Society of Child Neurology. Published by Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.braindev.2017.05.009
PMID: 28578817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
