---
reference_id: "PMID:40517644"
title: Epidemiologic and clinical characteristics and outcomes of patients diagnosed with Southern Tick Associated Rash Illness (STARI) - 2018-2019.
authors:
- Lindell K
- Sheldon S
- Kingry L
- Mead PS
- Molins C
- Hinckley AF
journal: Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2025.116928
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- "Exanthema/epidemiology, microbiology, drug therapy, diagnosis"
- "Tick-Borne Diseases/epidemiology, diagnosis, drug therapy, microbiology"
- Aged
- Animals
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
- "RNA, Ribosomal, 16S/genetics"
- Adolescent
- Ticks/microbiology
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/therapeutic use
- "Aged, 80 and over"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiologic and clinical characteristics and outcomes of patients diagnosed with Southern Tick Associated Rash Illness (STARI) - 2018-2019.
**Authors:** Lindell K, Sheldon S, Kingry L, Mead PS, Molins C, Hinckley AF
**Journal:** Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2025.116928](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2025.116928)

## Content

1. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis. 2025 Oct;113(2):116928. doi: 
10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2025.116928. Epub 2025 Jun 4.

Epidemiologic and clinical characteristics and outcomes of patients diagnosed 
with Southern Tick Associated Rash Illness (STARI) - 2018-2019.

Lindell K(1), Sheldon S(2), Kingry L(2), Mead PS(2), Molins C(2), Hinckley 
AF(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Vector-borne Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Fort Collins, CO, USA. Electronic address: lgz7@cdc.gov.
(2)Division of Vector-borne Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Fort Collins, CO, USA.
(3)Division of Vector-borne Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Fort Collins, CO, USA. Electronic address: cue0@cdc.gov.

In this study, we describe the clinical course and outcomes for 58 patients 
presenting with Southern tick-associated rash illness (STARI). Using 16S 
sequencing, no known bacterial pathogen was detected. Although an etiologic 
agent remains unknown, these results do provide updated information on rash 
color, shape, duration, and treatment outcomes.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.diagmicrobio.2025.116928
PMID: 40517644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.