---
reference_id: "PMID:15972950"
title: The role of neutrophils in the induction of glomerulonephritis by anti-myeloperoxidase antibodies.
authors:
- Xiao H
- Heeringa P
- Liu Z
- Huugen D
- Hu P
- Maeda N
- Falk RJ
- Jennette JC
journal: Am J Pathol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)62951-3
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antibodies, Antineutrophil Cytoplasmic/immunology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Glomerulonephritis/immunology, pathology"
- Macrophages/immunology
- Mice
- Neutrophil Activation/immunology
- Neutrophils/immunology
- Peroxidase/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of neutrophils in the induction of glomerulonephritis by anti-myeloperoxidase antibodies.
**Authors:** Xiao H, Heeringa P, Liu Z, Huugen D, Hu P, Maeda N, Falk RJ, Jennette JC
**Journal:** Am J Pathol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0002-9440(10)62951-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0002-9440(10)62951-3)

## Content

1. Am J Pathol. 2005 Jul;167(1):39-45. doi: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)62951-3.

The role of neutrophils in the induction of glomerulonephritis by 
anti-myeloperoxidase antibodies.

Xiao H(1), Heeringa P, Liu Z, Huugen D, Hu P, Maeda N, Falk RJ, Jennette JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of North 
Carolina, 303 Brinkhous-Bullitt Building, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7525, USA.

In humans, circulating anti-neutrophil cytoplasm autoantibodies (ANCAs) with 
specificity for myeloperoxidase (MPO) are strongly associated with the 
development of pauci-immune necrotizing and crescentic glomerulonephritis 
(NCGN). In mice, we have demonstrated that intravenous injection of mouse 
antibodies specific for mouse MPO induces NCGN that closely mimics the human 
disease. We now report that the development of NCGN in this experimental model 
is accompanied by glomerular accumulation of neutrophils and macrophages. 
Neutrophil infiltration was most conspicuous at sites of glomerular necrosis and 
crescent formation, with macrophages also most numerous in crescents. 
Lymphocytes, however, were sparse in acute lesions. Importantly, mice that were 
depleted of circulating neutrophils with NIMP-R14 rat monoclonal antibodies were 
completely protected from anti-MPO IgG-induced NCGN. These findings provide 
direct evidence that neutrophils play a major role in the pathogenesis of 
anti-MPO-induced NCGN in this animal model and implicate neutrophils in the 
induction of human ANCA disease. This raises the possibility that therapeutic 
strategies to reduce circulating neutrophils could be beneficial to patients 
with ANCA-induced NCGN.

DOI: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)62951-3
PMCID: PMC1603451
PMID: 15972950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]