---
reference_id: "PMID:36072697"
title: "Cat Scratch Disease: 9 Years of Experience at a Pediatric Center."
authors:
- Amin O
- Rostad CA
- Gonzalez M
- Rostad BS
- Caltharp S
- Quincer E
- Betke BA
- Gottdenker NL
- Wilson JJ
- Shane AL
- Elmontser M
- Camacho-Gonzalez A
- Senior T
- Smith O
- Anderson EJ
- Yildirim I
journal: Open Forum Infect Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1093/ofid/ofac426
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cat Scratch Disease: 9 Years of Experience at a Pediatric Center.
**Authors:** Amin O, Rostad CA, Gonzalez M, Rostad BS, Caltharp S, Quincer E, Betke BA, Gottdenker NL, Wilson JJ, Shane AL, Elmontser M, Camacho-Gonzalez A, Senior T, Smith O, Anderson EJ, Yildirim I
**Journal:** Open Forum Infect Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ofid/ofac426](https://doi.org/10.1093/ofid/ofac426)

## Content

1. Open Forum Infect Dis. 2022 Aug 20;9(9):ofac426. doi: 10.1093/ofid/ofac426. 
eCollection 2022 Sep.

Cat Scratch Disease: 9 Years of Experience at a Pediatric Center.

Amin O(1), Rostad CA(1), Gonzalez M(2), Rostad BS(3), Caltharp S(4)(5), Quincer 
E(1), Betke BA(6), Gottdenker NL(6), Wilson JJ(6), Shane AL(1), Elmontser M(1), 
Camacho-Gonzalez A(1), Senior T(7), Smith O(1), Anderson EJ(1)(8), Yildirim 
I(1)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine and Children's 
Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(2)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, 
Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(3)Division of Pediatric Radiology, Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Emory 
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Healthcare of 
Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
Georgia, USA.
(6)Department of Veterinary Pathology, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA.
(7)Department of Advanced Analytics, Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, 
Georgia, USA.
(8)Department of Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
Georgia, USA.
(9)Department of Epidemiology, Rollins School of Public Health, Emory 
University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

BACKGROUND: A more complete understanding of the epidemiology, risk factors, and 
clinical features of cat scratch disease (CSD) in children could help guide 
patient care.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective analysis of children presenting to a 
tertiary pediatric hospital system in Atlanta, Georgia between January 1, 2010 
and December 31, 2018 who had serology, polymerase chain reaction, and/or 
cytopathological results consistent with a Bartonella henselae infection. We 
also retrospectively reviewed veterinary diagnostic results performed at the 
University of Georgia from 2018 to 2020 to ascertain the burden of bartonellosis 
in companion animals within the state.
RESULTS: We identified 304 children with CSD over 9 years with the largest 
proportion of diagnoses made during August (41 of 304, 13.5%) and September (47 
of 304, 15.5%). The median age of child cases was 8.1 years (interquartile range 
[IQR], 5.4-12.1); 156 (51.3%) were female; 242 of 262 (92.4%) reported feline 
exposure; and 55 of 250 (22%) reported canine exposure of those with exposure 
histories documented in the medical record. Although lymphadenopathy was present 
on physical examination in the majority of cases (78.8%), atypical presentations 
lacking lymphadenopathy were also common (63 of 304, 20.7%). Among children with 
radiographic imaging, 20 of 55 (36.4%) had splenomegaly and 21 of 55 (38.1%) had 
splenic and/or hepatic microabscesses. Among veterinary data, Bartonella 
seroprevalence was 12 of 146 (8.2%), all among canines, with a geographic 
distribution that spanned the state of Georgia.
CONCLUSIONS: Distinguishing clinical features of CSD included subacute regional 
lymphadenopathy in school-aged children in the late summer, almost all of whom 
had cat exposure. Atypical clinical manifestations of CSD were also commonly 
identified.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of 
Infectious Diseases Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/ofid/ofac426
PMCID: PMC9439574
PMID: 36072697