---
reference_id: "PMID:33736504"
title: "Mesenteric and Retroperitoneal Mucinous Cystic Neoplasms: A Case Series."
authors:
- Van Treeck BJ
- Horton RK
- Lee HE
- Rosty C
- Pai RK
- Graham RP
journal: Int J Surg Pathol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1177/1066896921993536
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mesenteric and Retroperitoneal Mucinous Cystic Neoplasms: A Case Series.
**Authors:** Van Treeck BJ, Horton RK, Lee HE, Rosty C, Pai RK, Graham RP
**Journal:** Int J Surg Pathol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1066896921993536](https://doi.org/10.1177/1066896921993536)

## Content

1. Int J Surg Pathol. 2021 Sep;29(6):606-614. doi: 10.1177/1066896921993536. Epub
 2021 Mar 18.

Mesenteric and Retroperitoneal Mucinous Cystic Neoplasms: A Case Series.

Van Treeck BJ(1), Horton RK(1), Lee HE(1), Rosty C(2)(3)(4), Pai RK(5), Graham 
RP(1).

Author information:
(1)195112Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(2)Envoi Pathology, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(3)University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(4)University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(5)23387Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ, USA.

Aims. Mucinous cystic neoplasms (MCNs) are cystic neoplasms with mucinous 
epithelium surrounded by ovarian-like stroma. Extraovarian MCN occurring in the 
liver and pancreas have been well characterized. However, only rare case reports 
of MCN arising outside of these locations have been reported. MCNs arising in 
unusual locations should enter the differential diagnosis of mucinous 
intra-abdominal tumors and must be distinguished from more common mimics. 
Therefore, we aimed to examine a series of MCNs of the retroperitoneum and 
mesentery to characterize the clinicopathologic features of this entity. Methods 
and results. Seven MCNs arising in the abdominal mesentery or retroperitoneum 
were retrospectively identified. A clinicopathologic, histologic, and 
immunohistochemical (keratin 7, keratin 19, keratin 20, calretinin, inhibin-α, 
steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1), estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor 
(PR), PAX8, CDX2, and CD10) analysis was performed. All 7 MCNs were from females 
with a median age of 41 years old and a median size of 8 cm. All cases 
demonstrated mucinous with or without concomitant non-mucinous epithelium 
overlying spindle cell ovarian-like stroma. Luteinized cells were noted. The 
epithelium was positive for keratin 7 and keratin 19 in all 7 cases, while the 
stroma expressed ER, PR, and SF-1 in all cases stained. Calretinin was focally 
positive in the stroma of 3 of 7 cases, while inhibin-α was focally expressed in 
5 of 6 cases. Conclusions. These results highlight the clinicopathologic, 
histologic, and immunophenotypic similarities between MCNs of the mesentery, 
retroperitoneum, pancreas, and liver. Overlapping features suggest a common 
histogenesis for all MCNs, which could include periductal fetal mesenchyme, 
aberrant migration of primordial germ cells, or abnormal differentiation or 
metaplasia of the embryonic coelomic epithelium.

DOI: 10.1177/1066896921993536
PMID: 33736504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]