---
reference_id: "PMID:36651583"
title: "IDH-mutant diffuse gliomas: tips and tricks in the era of genomic tumor classification."
authors:
- Ammendola S
- Broggi G
- Barresi V
journal: Histol Histopathol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.14670/HH-18-582
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IDH-mutant diffuse gliomas: tips and tricks in the era of genomic tumor classification.
**Authors:** Ammendola S, Broggi G, Barresi V
**Journal:** Histol Histopathol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.14670/HH-18-582](https://doi.org/10.14670/HH-18-582)

## Content

1. Histol Histopathol. 2023 Jul;38(7):739-753. doi: 10.14670/HH-18-582. Epub 2023
 Jan 9.

IDH-mutant diffuse gliomas: tips and tricks in the era of genomic tumor 
classification.

Ammendola S(1), Broggi G(2), Barresi V(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Diagnostics and Public Health, University of Verona, Verona, 
Italy.
(2)Department of Medical, Surgical Sciences and Advanced Technologies "G.F. 
Ingrassia", Anatomic Pathology, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.
(3)Department of Diagnostics and Public Health, University of Verona, Verona, 
Italy. valeria.barresi@univr.it.

According to the fifth edition of the World Health Organization (WHO) 
Classification, diffuse gliomas typically occurring in adults are classified as 
oligodendroglioma IDH-mutant and 1p/19q codeleted, astrocytoma IDH-mutant, and 
glioblastoma IDH-wildtype. Among these, the former has the most favorable 
clinical course, whereas the latter has the worst prognosis. In IDH-mutant 
gliomas, the IDH1 p. R132H is the most frequent IDH mutation. Other mutations in 
IDH1 are rare and predominantly found in astrocytomas, whereas IDH2 mutations 
are mostly observed in oligodendrogliomas. Astrocytomas IDH-mutant display 
frequent immunohistochemical loss of ATRX, which is mutually exclusive with 
1p/19q codeletion. They are graded based on histopathological features and the 
presence of CDKN2A/B homozygous deletion, whereas the criteria for grading 
oligodendrogliomas are less defined. DNA methylation profiling has recently 
shown three additional distinct tumor types among diffuse IDH-mutant gliomas: 
infratentorial astrocytoma IDH mutant; primary mismatch repair deficient 
IDH-mutant astrocytoma (PMRDIA); and oligosarcoma. Infratentorial astrocytoma 
IDH-mutant is enriched in IDH1 or IDH2 mutations that differ from the IDH1 
p.R132H mutation and are detectable only by gene sequencing, displays less 
frequent ATRX loss and MGMT promoter methylation than supratentorial IDH-mutant 
astrocytomas, and may additionally harbor the H3 K27M mutation, which is 
typically found in H3 K27-altered diffuse midline glioma. PMRDIA occurs in the 
context of primary mismatch repair deficiency, is characterized by frequent MSH6 
mutations, hypermutation, low frequency of MGMT promoter methylation, and poor 
clinical outcomes. Finally, oligosarcoma is a tumor featuring oligodendroglial 
and sarcomatous areas, and is characterized by worse outcome and frequent 1p/19q 
copy number loss of heterozygosity.

©The Author(s) 2023. Open Access. This article is licensed under a Creative 
Commons CC-BY International License.

DOI: 10.14670/HH-18-582
PMID: 36651583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]