---
reference_id: "PMID:35986977"
title: "Common genetic driver mutation in NSCLC and their association with thromboembolic events: A retrospective study."
authors:
- Lin M
- Lu Y
- Yu Q
- Chen Z
- Peng J
- Cai X
journal: Lung Cancer
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2022.06.011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Common genetic driver mutation in NSCLC and their association with thromboembolic events: A retrospective study.
**Authors:** Lin M, Lu Y, Yu Q, Chen Z, Peng J, Cai X
**Journal:** Lung Cancer (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lungcan.2022.06.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lungcan.2022.06.011)

## Content

1. Lung Cancer. 2022 Oct;172:29-34. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2022.06.011. Epub 2022
 Jun 22.

Common genetic driver mutation in NSCLC and their association with 
thromboembolic events: A retrospective study.

Lin M(1), Lu Y(1), Yu Q(2), Chen Z(2), Peng J(2), Cai X(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of VIP Inpatient, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State Key 
Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Guangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong 
Pharmaceutical University, Guangzhou China.
(3)Department of VIP Inpatient, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State Key 
Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: 
caixy@sysucc.org.cn.

This retrospective study aimed to estimate the incidence, risk factors of 
thromboembolism events (TEs) in non-small cell lung cancer patients harboring 
common gene mutation, and evaluate a genetic link between oncogenes and the risk 
of TEs in Asian patients with NSCLC.
METHODS: Univariate and multivariate Cox's proportional hazards regression 
models were used to identify the strongest predictors of TE development and 
evaluate the risk of TE in patients with different gene statuses of NSCLC 
patients.
RESULTS: In univariate and multivariate COX analysis, patient with squamous cell 
carcinoma (HR 3.01, 95% CI: [1.06,8.56]; p = 0.039), multi-site metastases (HR: 
2.72; 95% CI: [1.08,6.92]; p = 0.032) or high white blood cell (WBC) (HR 3.24, 
95% CI: [1.46,7.22]; p = 0.004), less hemoglobin (HGB) (HR 4.89, 95% CI: 
[1.90,12.64]; p = 0.001), are at higher risk of thrombosis. At the molecular 
level, ROS and ALK rearrangement is highly associated with TE development, with 
HR of 4.04 (95%CI: [1.54,10.58]; p = 0.005) and HR of 3.57 (95% CI: 
[1.01,12.66]; p = 0.049) in univariate analysis, and even higher in multivariate 
analysis. EGFR mutations seem to be a protective factor against TE in univariate 
analyses (HR:0.28, 95%CI [0.12,0.65], p = 0.003) but are not statistically 
significant in the multivariate model. No correlation between KRAS mutations and 
TE events in both models. Besides, a numerically higher cumulative incidence of 
thrombosis event was observed in patients who used TKI (HR 1.473; 95% CI: 
[0.682, 3.181]; p = 0.32).
CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrated that driver gene mutation may increase the 
risk of thrombosis in non-small cell lung cancer patients. The presence of 
ALK/ROS rearrangements in our study is associated with an approximately 
threefold to fourfold increase in thrombosis risk in NSCLC patients. For 
advanced-stage patients who used TKI, an increased incidence of thrombosis risk 
and shorter follow-up were observed.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2022.06.011
PMID: 35986977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.