---
reference_id: "PMID:20525256"
title: Niemann-Pick disease type C.
authors:
- Vanier MT
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-5-16
keywords:
- "1-Deoxynojirimycin/analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use"
- Age Factors
- Age of Onset
- "Biological Transport/genetics, physiology"
- Cholesterol/blood
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Testing
- Humans
- "Niemann-Pick Disease, Type C/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Niemann-Pick disease type C.
**Authors:** Vanier MT
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-5-16](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-5-16)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2010 Jun 3;5:16. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-5-16.

Niemann-Pick disease type C.

Vanier MT(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 820, Faculté 
de Médecine Lyon-Est Claude Bernard, 7 Rue G, Paradin, F-69008, Lyon, France. 
marie-t.vanier@inserm.fr

Niemann-Pick C disease (NP-C) is a neurovisceral atypical lysosomal lipid 
storage disorder with an estimated minimal incidence of 1/120,000 live births. 
The broad clinical spectrum ranges from a neonatal rapidly fatal disorder to an 
adult-onset chronic neurodegenerative disease. The neurological involvement 
defines the disease severity in most patients but is typically preceded by 
systemic signs (cholestatic jaundice in the neonatal period or isolated spleno- 
or hepatosplenomegaly in infancy or childhood). The first neurological symptoms 
vary with age of onset: delay in developmental motor milestones (early infantile 
period), gait problems, falls, clumsiness, cataplexy, school problems (late 
infantile and juvenile period), and ataxia not unfrequently following initial 
psychiatric disturbances (adult form). The most characteristic sign is vertical 
supranuclear gaze palsy. The neurological disorder consists mainly of cerebellar 
ataxia, dysarthria, dysphagia, and progressive dementia. Cataplexy, seizures and 
dystonia are other common features. NP-C is transmitted in an autosomal 
recessive manner and is caused by mutations of either the NPC1 (95% of families) 
or the NPC2 genes. The exact functions of the NPC1 and NPC2 proteins are still 
unclear. NP-C is currently described as a cellular cholesterol trafficking 
defect but in the brain, the prominently stored lipids are gangliosides. 
Clinical examination should include comprehensive neurological and 
ophthalmological evaluations. The primary laboratory diagnosis requires living 
skin fibroblasts to demonstrate accumulation of unesterified cholesterol in 
perinuclear vesicles (lysosomes) after staining with filipin. Pronounced 
abnormalities are observed in about 80% of the cases, mild to moderate 
alterations in the remainder ("variant" biochemical phenotype). Genotyping of 
patients is useful to confirm the diagnosis in the latter patients and essential 
for future prenatal diagnosis. The differential diagnosis may include other 
lipidoses; idiopathic neonatal hepatitis and other causes of cholestatic icterus 
should be considered in neonates, and conditions with cerebellar ataxia, 
dystonia, cataplexy and supranuclear gaze palsy in older children and adults. 
Symptomatic management of patients is crucial. A first product, miglustat, has 
been granted marketing authorization in Europe and several other countries for 
specific treatment of the neurological manifestations. The prognosis largely 
correlates with the age at onset of the neurological manifestations.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-5-16
PMCID: PMC2902432
PMID: 20525256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]