---
reference_id: "PMID:20522568"
title: Neuroimaging in Cockayne syndrome.
authors:
- Koob M
- Laugel V
- Durand M
- Fothergill H
- Dalloz C
- Sauvanaud F
- Dollfus H
- Namer IJ
- Dietemann JL
journal: AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A2135
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Biomarkers/analysis
- "Brain/diagnostic imaging, metabolism, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cockayne Syndrome/diagnosis
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy/methods
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Protons
- Radionuclide Imaging
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed/methods"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuroimaging in Cockayne syndrome.
**Authors:** Koob M, Laugel V, Durand M, Fothergill H, Dalloz C, Sauvanaud F, Dollfus H, Namer IJ, Dietemann JL
**Journal:** AJNR Am J Neuroradiol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.3174/ajnr.A2135](https://doi.org/10.3174/ajnr.A2135)

## Content

1. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2010 Oct;31(9):1623-30. doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A2135. Epub 
2010 Jun 3.

Neuroimaging in Cockayne syndrome.

Koob M(1), Laugel V, Durand M, Fothergill H, Dalloz C, Sauvanaud F, Dollfus H, 
Namer IJ, Dietemann JL.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Radiology II, Strasbourg Hautepierre University Hospital, 1 
Avenue Molière, Strasbourg Cedex, France. meriam.koob@chru-strasbourg.fr

CS is an autosomal recessive multisystem disorder, which is mainly characterized 
by neurologic and sensory impairment, cachectic dwarfism, and photosensitivity. 
We describe the neuroimaging features (MR imaging, ¹H-MR spectroscopy, and CT) 
in the various clinical subtypes of CS from a cohort of genetically and 
biochemically proved cases. Hypomyelination, calcifications, and brain atrophy 
were the main imaging features. Calcifications were typically found in the 
putamen and less often in the cortex and dentate nuclei. Severe progressive 
atrophy was seen in the supratentorial white matter, the cerebellum, the corpus 
callosum, and the brain stem. Patients with early-onset disease displayed more 
severe hypomyelination and prominent calcifications in the sulcal depth of the 
cerebral cortex, but atrophy was less severe in late-onset patients. On proton 
MR spectroscopy, lactate was detected and Cho and NAA values were decreased. 
These combined neuroradiologic findings can help in the differential diagnosis 
of CS, distinguishing it from other leukoencephalopathies and/or cerebral 
calcifications in childhood.

DOI: 10.3174/ajnr.A2135
PMCID: PMC7964976
PMID: 20522568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]