---
reference_id: "PMID:25129617"
title: New insights into the genetics of 5-oxoprolinase deficiency and further evidence that it is a benign biochemical condition.
authors:
- Calpena E
- Deshpande AA
- Yap S
- Kumar A
- Manning NJ
- Bachhawat AK
- Espinós C
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s00431-014-2397-0
keywords:
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics"
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Pyroglutamate Hydrolase/deficiency, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New insights into the genetics of 5-oxoprolinase deficiency and further evidence that it is a benign biochemical condition.
**Authors:** Calpena E, Deshpande AA, Yap S, Kumar A, Manning NJ, Bachhawat AK, Espinós C
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00431-014-2397-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00431-014-2397-0)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 2015 Mar;174(3):407-11. doi: 10.1007/s00431-014-2397-0. Epub
2014  Aug 17.

New insights into the genetics of 5-oxoprolinase deficiency and further evidence
that it is a benign biochemical condition.

Calpena E(1), Deshpande AA, Yap S, Kumar A, Manning NJ, Bachhawat AK, Espinós C.

Author information:
(1)Program in Rare and Genetic Diseases, Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe
(CIPF), Valencia, Spain, ecalpena@cipf.es.

Inherited 5-oxoprolinase (OPLAH) deficiency is a rare inborn condition
characterised by 5-oxoprolinuria. To date, three OPLAH mutations have been
described: p.H870Pfs in a homozygous state, which results in a truncated
protein, was reported in two siblings, and two heterozygous missense changes,
p.S323R and p.V1089I, were independently identified in two unrelated patients.
We describe the clinical context of a young girl who manifested 5-oxoprolinuria
together with dusky episodes and who is compound heterozygote for two novel
OPLAH variations: p.G860R and p.D1241V. To gain insight into the aetiology of
the 5-oxoprolinase deficiency, we investigated the pathogenicity of all the
reported missense mutations in the OPLAH gene. A yeast in vivo growth assay
revealed that only p.S323R, p.G860R and p.D1241V affected the activity of the
enzyme.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, this report further suggests that hereditary
5-oxoprolinase deficiency is a benign biochemical condition caused by mutations
in the OPLAH gene, which are transmitted in an autosomal recessive manner, but
5-oxoprolinuria may be a chance association in other disorders.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-014-2397-0
PMID: 25129617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
