---
reference_id: "PMID:33972588"
title: Dermal bacterial LPS-stimulation reduces susceptibility to intradermal Trypanosoma brucei infection.
authors:
- Alfituri OA
- Mararo EM
- Steketee PC
- Morrison LJ
- Mabbott NA
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-89053-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dermal bacterial LPS-stimulation reduces susceptibility to intradermal Trypanosoma brucei infection.
**Authors:** Alfituri OA, Mararo EM, Steketee PC, Morrison LJ, Mabbott NA
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-021-89053-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-89053-2)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2021 May 10;11(1):9856. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-89053-2.

Dermal bacterial LPS-stimulation reduces susceptibility to intradermal 
Trypanosoma brucei infection.

Alfituri OA(1), Mararo EM(1), Steketee PC(1), Morrison LJ(1), Mabbott NA(2).

Author information:
(1)The Roslin Institute and Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Sciences, 
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(2)The Roslin Institute and Royal (Dick) School of Veterinary Sciences, 
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK. neil.mabbott@roslin.ed.ac.uk.

Infections with Trypanosoma brucei sp. are established after the injection of 
metacyclic trypomastigotes into the skin dermis by the tsetse fly vector. The 
parasites then gain access to the local lymphatic vessels to infect the local 
draining lymph nodes and disseminate systemically via the bloodstream. 
Macrophages are considered to play an important role in host protection during 
the early stage of systemic trypanosome infections. Macrophages are abundant in 
the skin dermis, but relatively little is known of their impact on 
susceptibility to intradermal (ID) trypanosome infections. We show that although 
dermal injection of colony stimulating factor 1 (CSF1) increased the local 
abundance of macrophages in the skin, this did not affect susceptibility to ID 
T. brucei infection. However, bacterial LPS-stimulation in the dermis prior to 
ID trypanosome infection significantly reduced disease susceptibility. In vitro 
assays showed that LPS-stimulated macrophage-like RAW264.7 cells had enhanced 
cytotoxicity towards T. brucei, implying that dermal LPS-treatment may similarly 
enhance the ability of dermal macrophages to eliminate ID injected T. brucei 
parasites in the skin. A thorough understanding of the factors that reduce 
susceptibility to ID injected T. brucei infections may lead to the development 
of novel strategies to help reduce the transmission of African trypanosomes.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-89053-2
PMCID: PMC8110744
PMID: 33972588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.