---
reference_id: "PMID:22265014"
title: "Mutations in KAT6B, encoding a histone acetyltransferase, cause Genitopatellar syndrome."
authors:
- Campeau PM
- Kim JC
- Lu JT
- Schwartzentruber JA
- Abdul-Rahman OA
- Schlaubitz S
- Murdock DM
- Jiang MM
- Lammer EJ
- Enns GM
- Rhead WJ
- Rowland J
- Robertson SP
- Cormier-Daire V
- Bainbridge MN
- Yang XJ
- Gingras MC
- Gibbs RA
- Rosenblatt DS
- Majewski J
- Lee BH
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.023
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/enzymology, genetics"
- Animals
- "Blepharophimosis/enzymology, genetics"
- "Blepharoptosis/enzymology, genetics"
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/enzymology, genetics"
- Cerebellum/abnormalities
- Epigenomics/methods
- Exome
- Female
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/enzymology, genetics"
- Heterozygote
- Histone Acetyltransferases/genetics
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/enzymology, genetics"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Musculoskeletal Abnormalities/enzymology, genetics"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome/enzymology, genetics"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA/methods"
- "Urogenital Abnormalities/enzymology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in KAT6B, encoding a histone acetyltransferase, cause Genitopatellar syndrome.
**Authors:** Campeau PM, Kim JC, Lu JT, Schwartzentruber JA, Abdul-Rahman OA, Schlaubitz S, Murdock DM, Jiang MM, Lammer EJ, Enns GM, Rhead WJ, Rowland J, Robertson SP, Cormier-Daire V, Bainbridge MN, Yang XJ, Gingras MC, Gibbs RA, Rosenblatt DS, Majewski J, Lee BH
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.023)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Feb 10;90(2):282-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.023. Epub
 2012 Jan 19.

Mutations in KAT6B, encoding a histone acetyltransferase, cause Genitopatellar 
syndrome.

Campeau PM(1), Kim JC, Lu JT, Schwartzentruber JA, Abdul-Rahman OA, Schlaubitz 
S, Murdock DM, Jiang MM, Lammer EJ, Enns GM, Rhead WJ, Rowland J, Robertson SP, 
Cormier-Daire V, Bainbridge MN, Yang XJ, Gingras MC, Gibbs RA, Rosenblatt DS, 
Majewski J, Lee BH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Genitopatellar syndrome (GPS) is a skeletal dysplasia with cerebral and genital 
anomalies for which the molecular basis has not yet been determined. By exome 
sequencing, we found de novo heterozygous truncating mutations in KAT6B (lysine 
acetyltransferase 6B, formerly known as MYST4 and MORF) in three subjects; then 
by Sanger sequencing of KAT6B, we found similar mutations in three additional 
subjects. The mutant transcripts do not undergo nonsense-mediated decay in cells 
from subjects with GPS. In addition, human pathological analyses and mouse 
expression studies point to systemic roles of KAT6B in controlling organismal 
growth and development. Myst4 (the mouse orthologous gene) is expressed in mouse 
tissues corresponding to those affected by GPS. Phenotypic differences and 
similarities between GPS, the Say-Barber-Biesecker variant of Ohdo syndrome 
(caused by different mutations of KAT6B), and Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (caused 
by mutations in other histone acetyltransferases) are discussed. Together, the 
data support an epigenetic dysregulation of the limb, brain, and genital 
developmental programs.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.11.023
PMCID: PMC3276659
PMID: 22265014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]