---
reference_id: "PMID:29729495"
title: "BRAF in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC): Pickaxing another brick in the wall."
authors:
- Leonetti A
- Facchinetti F
- Rossi G
- Minari R
- Conti A
- Friboulet L
- Tiseo M
- Planchard D
journal: Cancer Treat Rev
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2018.04.006
keywords:
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/genetics, mortality, pathology"
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/genetics, mortality, pathology"
- Prognosis
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BRAF in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC): Pickaxing another brick in the wall.
**Authors:** Leonetti A, Facchinetti F, Rossi G, Minari R, Conti A, Friboulet L, Tiseo M, Planchard D
**Journal:** Cancer Treat Rev (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ctrv.2018.04.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ctrv.2018.04.006)

## Content

1. Cancer Treat Rev. 2018 May;66:82-94. doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2018.04.006. Epub
2018  Apr 24.

BRAF in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC): Pickaxing another brick in the wall.

Leonetti A(1), Facchinetti F(1), Rossi G(2), Minari R(1), Conti A(3), Friboulet
L(4), Tiseo M(5), Planchard D(6).

Author information:
(1)Medical Oncology Unit, University Hospital of Parma, Parma, Italy.
(2)Pathology Unit, Santa Maria delle Croci Hospital, Ravenna, Italy.
(3)Medical Illustrator, Riccione, Italy.
(4)INSERM, U981, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif, France.
(5)Medical Oncology Unit, University Hospital of Parma, Parma, Italy. Electronic
address: mtiseo@ao.pr.it.
(6)Department of Medical Oncology, Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif,
France.

Molecular characterization of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) marked an
historical turning point for the treatment of lung tumors harboring kinase
alterations suitable for specific targeted drugs inhibition, translating into
major clinical improvements. Besides EGFR, ALK and ROS1, BRAF represents a novel
therapeutic target for the treatment of advanced NSCLC. BRAF mutations, found in
1.5-3.5% of NSCLC, are responsible of the constitutive activation of mitogen
activated protein kinase (MAPK)/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)
pathway. Clinical trials evaluating the efficacy of the BRAF inhibitor
dabrafenib in combination with the downstream MEK inhibitor trametinib in
metastatic BRAFV600E-mutated NSCLC guaranteed FDA and EMA rapid approval of the
combination regimen in this clinical setting. In line with the striking results
observed in metastatic melanoma harboring the same molecular alteration, BRAF
and MEK inhibition should be considered a new standard of care in this molecular
subtype of NSCLC. In the present review, we propose an overview of the available
evidence about BRAF in NSCLC mutations (V600E and non-V600E), from biological
significance to emerging clinical implications of BRAF mutations detection.
Focusing on the current strategies to act against the mutated kinase, we
moreover approach additional strategies to overcome treatment resistance.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2018.04.006
PMID: 29729495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
