---
reference_id: "PMID:20301587"
title: SGCE Myoclonus-Dystonia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Raymond D
- Saunders-Pullman R
- Ozelius L
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SGCE Myoclonus-Dystonia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Raymond D, Saunders-Pullman R, Ozelius L

## Content

1. SGCE Myoclonus-Dystonia.

Raymond D(1), Saunders-Pullman R(1), Ozelius L(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2003 May 21 [updated 2020 Jun 4].

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology Mount Sinai Beth Israel New York, New York
(2)Department of Neurology Massachusetts General Hospital Charlestown,
Massachusetts

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: SGCE myoclonus-dystonia (SGCE-M-D) is a movement
disorder characterized by a combination of rapid, brief muscle contractions
(myoclonus) and/or sustained twisting and repetitive movements that result in
abnormal postures (dystonia). The myoclonic jerks typical of SGCE-M-D most often
affect the neck, trunk, and upper limbs with less common involvement of the
legs. Approximately 50% of affected individuals have additional focal or
segmental dystonia, presenting as cervical dystonia and/or writer's cramp.
Non-motor features may include alcohol abuse, obsessive-compulsive disorder
(OCD), and anxiety disorders. Symptom onset is usually in the first decade of
life and almost always by age 20 years, but ranges from age six months to 80
years. Most affected adults report a dramatic reduction in myoclonus in response
to alcohol ingestion. SGCE-M-D is compatible with an active life of normal span.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SGCE-M-D is established in a proband with
characteristic clinical features by identification of a heterozygous pathogenic
variant in SGCE.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Class 1 evidence supports the
improvement of myoclonus and dystonia with zonisamide. Benzodiazepines
(particularly clonazepam) and anti-seizure drugs used to treat myoclonus
(especially valproate and levitiracetam) also improve myoclonus in individuals
with myoclonus-dystonia. The response to other anti-seizure drugs (e.g.,
topiramate) is more variable. Anticholinergic medication may improve dystonia.
Botulinum toxin injection may be especially helpful for cervical dystonia.
Improvement with L-5-hydroxytryptophan, L-dopa, and the salt of sodium oxybate
has been reported. Deep brain stimulation has improved both myoclonus and
dystonia, with most targeting the globus pallidus interna (GPi); however,
success with ventral intermediate nucleus of the thalamus (VIM) target has also
been reported. Other: Symptoms of SGCE-M-D often improve short term with
ingestion of alcohol, but the risk of addiction recommends against its long-term
use.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SGCE-M-D is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner with
penetrance determined by the parental origin of the altered SGCE allele: an SGCE
pathogenic variant on the paternally derived (expressed) SGCE allele generally
results in disease; a pathogenic variant on the maternally derived (silenced)
SGCE allele typically does not result in disease. Most individuals with SGCE-M-D
inherited the disorder from a heterozygous parent who may or may not have
clinical signs of M-D (as phenotypic expression in the parent would depend on
the sex of the transmitting grandparent). Each child of an individual with
SGCE-M-D has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant. Almost all
children who inherit an SGCE pathogenic variant from their father develop
symptoms, whereas only ~5% of children who inherit an SGCE pathogenic variant
from their mother develop symptoms. Once the SGCE pathogenic variant has been
identified in an affected family member, prenatal testing and preimplantation
genetic diagnosis are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301587
