---
reference_id: "PMID:33417207"
title: "Fatty Acid Oxidation in Peroxisomes: Enzymology, Metabolic Crosstalk with Other Organelles and Peroxisomal Disorders."
authors:
- Wanders RJA
- Vaz FM
- Waterham HR
- Ferdinandusse S
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-60204-8_5
keywords:
- Fatty Acids/metabolism
- Humans
- Lipid Metabolism
- Oxidation-Reduction
- "Peroxisomal Disorders/enzymology, metabolism"
- "Peroxisomes/enzymology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fatty Acid Oxidation in Peroxisomes: Enzymology, Metabolic Crosstalk with Other Organelles and Peroxisomal Disorders.
**Authors:** Wanders RJA, Vaz FM, Waterham HR, Ferdinandusse S
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-030-60204-8_5](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-60204-8_5)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2020;1299:55-70. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-60204-8_5.

Fatty Acid Oxidation in Peroxisomes: Enzymology, Metabolic Crosstalk with Other 
Organelles and Peroxisomal Disorders.

Wanders RJA(1), Vaz FM(2), Waterham HR(2), Ferdinandusse S(3).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Clinical Chemistry and Pediatrics, Amsterdam Gastroenterology 
Endocrinology Metabolism, Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases and Emma 
Children's hospital, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. r.j.wanders@amsterdamumc.nl.
(2)Departments of Clinical Chemistry and Pediatrics, Amsterdam Gastroenterology 
Endocrinology Metabolism, Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases and Emma 
Children's hospital, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Departments of Clinical Chemistry and Pediatrics, Amsterdam Gastroenterology 
Endocrinology Metabolism, Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases and Emma 
Children's hospital, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. s.ferdinandusse@amsterdamumc.nl.

Peroxisomes play a central role in metabolism as exemplified by the fact that 
many genetic disorders in humans have been identified through the years in which 
there is an impairment in one or more of these peroxisomal functions, in most 
cases associated with severe clinical signs and symptoms. One of the key 
functions of peroxisomes is the β-oxidation of fatty acids which differs from 
the oxidation of fatty acids in mitochondria in many respects which includes the 
different substrate specificities of the two organelles. Whereas mitochondria 
are the main site of oxidation of medium-and long-chain fatty acids, peroxisomes 
catalyse the β-oxidation of a distinct set of fatty acids, including 
very-long-chain fatty acids, pristanic acid and the bile acid intermediates di- 
and trihydroxycholestanoic acid. Peroxisomes require the functional alliance 
with multiple subcellular organelles to fulfil their role in metabolism. Indeed, 
peroxisomes require the functional interaction with lysosomes, lipid droplets 
and the endoplasmic reticulum, since these organelles provide the substrates 
oxidized in peroxisomes. On the other hand, since peroxisomes lack a citric acid 
cycle as well as respiratory chain, oxidation of the end-products of peroxisomal 
fatty acid oxidation notably acetyl-CoA, and different medium-chain acyl-CoAs, 
to CO2 and H2O can only occur in mitochondria. The same is true for the 
reoxidation of NADH back to NAD+. There is increasing evidence that these 
interactions between organelles are mediated by tethering proteins which bring 
organelles together in order to allow effective exchange of metabolites. It is 
the purpose of this review to describe the current state of knowledge about the 
role of peroxisomes in fatty acid oxidation, the transport of metabolites across 
the peroxisomal membrane, its functional interaction with other subcellular 
organelles and the disorders of peroxisomal fatty acid β-oxidation identified so 
far in humans.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-60204-8_5
PMID: 33417207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]