---
reference_id: "PMID:33238275"
title: "Acromesomelic Dysplasia, Type Maroteaux: Impact of Long-Term (8 Years) High-Dose Growth Hormone Treatment on Growth Velocity and Final Height in 2 Siblings."
authors:
- Arya VB
- Raj M
- Younes M
- Chapman S
- Irving M
- Kapoor RR
- Buchanan CR
journal: Horm Res Paediatr
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1159/000511874
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Body Height/drug effects
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Growth Charts
- "Growth Hormone/administration & dosage"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Radiography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acromesomelic Dysplasia, Type Maroteaux: Impact of Long-Term (8 Years) High-Dose Growth Hormone Treatment on Growth Velocity and Final Height in 2 Siblings.
**Authors:** Arya VB, Raj M, Younes M, Chapman S, Irving M, Kapoor RR, Buchanan CR
**Journal:** Horm Res Paediatr (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000511874](https://doi.org/10.1159/000511874)

## Content

1. Horm Res Paediatr. 2020;93(5):335-342. doi: 10.1159/000511874. Epub 2020 Nov
25.

Acromesomelic Dysplasia, Type Maroteaux: Impact of Long-Term (8 Years) High-Dose 
Growth Hormone Treatment on Growth Velocity and Final Height in 2 Siblings.

Arya VB(1), Raj M(2), Younes M(3), Chapman S(4), Irving M(5), Kapoor RR(4)(6), 
Buchanan CR(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Child Health, King's College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, 
London, United Kingdom, vedarya@nhs.net.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
(3)Viapath Laboratories, Guy's Hospital, Guy's and St Thomas' Hospital NHS 
Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Child Health, King's College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, 
London, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Clinical Genetics, Guy's Hospital, Guy's and St Thomas' 
Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Faculty of Life Science and Medicine, King's College London, London, United 
Kingdom.

INTRODUCTION: Acromesomelic dysplasia, type Maroteaux (AMDM) is a rare autosomal 
recessive skeletal dysplasia, characterized by severe dwarfism and 
disproportionate limb shortening. It results from loss-of-function NPR2 
mutations affecting the C-type natriuretic peptide receptor. Resistance to 
growth hormone (GH) action has previously been suggested. We describe outcomes 
of 2 siblings with AMDM after prolonged high-dose GH treatment.
PATIENTS/METHODS: Two siblings (Pt-A and Pt-B; consanguineous parents) presented 
in early childhood with severe disproportionate short stature and radiological 
features of AMDM. Subsequent genetic testing identified a novel homozygous NPR2 
mutation. GH provocation testing showed relatively high GH levels. Serum 
insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) was ∼2 SD below age/sex-specific mean. 
High-dose GH (0.075 mg/kg/day) was started. Pre-GH height velocities were 3.7 
(Pt-A) and 4.5 (Pt-B) cm/year. GH dose was adjusted to sustain serum IGF-1 
towards +3 SDS for age/sex. Annualized height velocities for first 3 years on GH 
were 7.0, 5.4, and 4.7 cm/year for patient A and 9.4, 8.0, and 5.9 cm/year for 
patient B. Height gain during puberty was 10.6 (Pt-A) and 5.9 (Pt-B) cm. Final 
heights after 8.5 years of GH treatment were 130.5 cm (-6.57 SDS, Pt-A) and 134 
cm (-4.58 SDS, Pt-B).
CONCLUSIONS: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of final 
height in patients with AMDM after long-term GH treatment. Our results confirm 
the finding of relative GH resistance in AMDM, which when overcome with 
high-dose GH treatment resulted in improved height SDS during childhood and 
adolescence and associated quality of life. The final height of our patients was 
significantly higher than average reported final height (120 cm) of AMDM 
patients.

© 2020 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000511874
PMID: 33238275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]