---
reference_id: "PMID:19945904"
title: "Worldwide frequency of G2019S LRRK2 mutation in Parkinson's disease: a systematic review."
authors:
- Correia Guedes L
- Ferreira JJ
- Rosa MM
- Coelho M
- Bonifati V
- Sampaio C
journal: Parkinsonism Relat Disord
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2009.11.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Worldwide frequency of G2019S LRRK2 mutation in Parkinson's disease: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Correia Guedes L, Ferreira JJ, Rosa MM, Coelho M, Bonifati V, Sampaio C
**Journal:** Parkinsonism Relat Disord (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.parkreldis.2009.11.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parkreldis.2009.11.004)

## Content

1. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2010 May;16(4):237-42. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2009.11.004. Epub 2009 Nov 30.

Worldwide frequency of G2019S LRRK2 mutation in Parkinson's disease: a 
systematic review.

Correia Guedes L(1), Ferreira JJ, Rosa MM, Coelho M, Bonifati V, Sampaio C.

Author information:
(1)Neurological Clinical Research Unit, Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Lisbon 
School of Medicine, Lisbon, Portugal. lcorreiaguedes@sapo.pt

BACKGROUND: The LRRK2 G2019S mutation is the most frequent known cause of 
familial and sporadic Parkinson's disease. Knowledge of its worldwide frequency 
distribution is essential for clinical and molecular research as well as genetic 
counseling.
OBJECTIVES: To conduct a systematic review of the reported frequency of G2019S 
in different populations and to assess critically the quality of the clinical 
studies.
METHODS: We conducted a systematic review of all published papers on G2019S 
frequency in homogeneous ethnic groups or sub-groups of patients. Selected 
papers were analyzed for methodological quality.
RESULTS: 68 studies from 32 countries were included in the analysis. A 
heterogeneous distribution was observed with high frequencies in North African 
Arab countries, the Middle East, southern Europe, North American Ashkenazi 
Jewish populations and in South American countries with known European ethnic 
influence. Frequencies ranged from the no cases to 35.7% in sporadic and 42% in 
familial North-African Arab patients. Only one paper from one sub-Saharan 
country was found. Methodological pitfalls were identified.
CONCLUSIONS: Estimated frequencies were found to be variable, which may reflect 
ethnic differences and methodological discrepancies. We make recommendations on 
the methods of selection of participants and on the definition of familial 
Parkinson's disease to improve the quality of frequency studies on LRRK2 
mutations.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2009.11.004
PMID: 19945904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]