---
reference_id: "PMID:39634188"
title: Practical application of precision oncology in adult onset craniopharyngiomas.
authors:
- Biswas C
- Mansur G
- Wu KC
- Prevedello DM
- Ghalib L
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2024.1488958
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Age of Onset
- "Craniopharyngioma/diagnosis, genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Medical Oncology/methods
- Molecular Targeted Therapy/methods
- Mutation
- "Pituitary Neoplasms/therapy, genetics, pathology, diagnosis"
- Precision Medicine/methods
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Practical application of precision oncology in adult onset craniopharyngiomas.
**Authors:** Biswas C, Mansur G, Wu KC, Prevedello DM, Ghalib L
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2024.1488958](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2024.1488958)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2024 Nov 20;15:1488958. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2024.1488958. eCollection 2024.

Practical application of precision oncology in adult onset craniopharyngiomas.

Biswas C(1), Mansur G(1), Wu KC(1), Prevedello DM(1), Ghalib L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurologic Surgery, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical 
Centre, Columbus, OH, United States.
(2)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Department of Internal 
Medicine, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Centre, Columbus, OH, United 
States.

INTRODUCTION: Craniopharyngiomas (CPs) are benign and rare tumors found in 
adults. Their location close to vital neurovascular structures makes traditional 
treatment modalities (surgery and radiation) challenging and potentially fraught 
with morbidity. The 2021 WHO classification has divided what was previously 
considered two subtypes of craniopharyngioma into separate entities. 
Identification of specific molecular driver mutations in each type- BRAF V600E 
in papillary craniopharyngiomas (PCP) and CTNNB1 in adamantinomatous 
craniopharyngiomas (ACP) has resulted in a paradigm shift in the management of 
adult CPs.
METHODS: In this study, we describe our experience in treating PCPs with 
targeted therapy and highlight nuances in management accounting for current 
evidence. This review also explores the current scope and application of 
precision oncology in adult CPs including the experience with ongoing trials and 
prospects for future research.
RESULTS: The high prevalence of targetable mutation in cases of PCP and the 
efficacy of BRAF inhibitors alone or in combination with MEK inhibitors has 
improved the disease control in these patients. In the current scenario, while 
surgery is warranted to obtain histopathological diagnosis, radical resection 
and its associated risks can be avoided. In case of ACPs, dysregulation of 
multiple pathways has been implicated. This has prompted the use of a variety of 
targeted therapies with inconsistent outcomes. The results of ongoing and future 
trials may define its role in management.
CONCLUSION: Precision oncology is a promising addition to the treatment 
armamentarium of adult CPs.

Copyright © 2024 Biswas, Mansur, Wu, Prevedello and Ghalib.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2024.1488958
PMCID: PMC11615394
PMID: 39634188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DP reports being a consultant for BK Medical, 
Stryker, Medtronic, and Integra Life Sciences and receiving royalties from ACE 
Medical, Mizuho, KLS—Martin. The remaining authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.