---
reference_id: "PMID:23830180"
title: "Characteristics of neurological manifestations of Behçet's disease: a retrospective monocentric study in Tunisia."
authors:
- Houman MH
- Bellakhal S
- Ben Salem T
- Hamzaoui A
- Braham A
- Lamloum M
- Monia SK
- Ben Ghorbel I
journal: Clin Neurol Neurosurg
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.clineuro.2013.06.009
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Age of Onset
- "Behcet Syndrome/complications, physiopathology"
- Central Nervous System Diseases/etiology
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Glucocorticoids/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Nervous System Diseases/etiology, physiopathology, psychology"
- Prevalence
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- Sex Factors
- Tunisia/epidemiology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characteristics of neurological manifestations of Behçet's disease: a retrospective monocentric study in Tunisia.
**Authors:** Houman MH, Bellakhal S, Ben Salem T, Hamzaoui A, Braham A, Lamloum M, Monia SK, Ben Ghorbel I
**Journal:** Clin Neurol Neurosurg (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clineuro.2013.06.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clineuro.2013.06.009)

## Content

1. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2013 Oct;115(10):2015-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.clineuro.2013.06.009. Epub 2013 Jul 3.

Characteristics of neurological manifestations of Behçet's disease: a 
retrospective monocentric study in Tunisia.

Houman MH(1), Bellakhal S, Ben Salem T, Hamzaoui A, Braham A, Lamloum M, Monia 
SK, Ben Ghorbel I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, La Rabta University Hospital, Faculty of 
Medicine of Tunis, university el Manar, 1007 Tunis, Tunisia. Electronic address: 
houman_habib@yahoo.fr.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study was to analyze demographic, clinical and 
genetic features of Behçet's disease patients with neurological involvement 
through a monocentric study of a homogenous group of hospitalized patients 
observed in the same department and to compare them with those of other ethnic 
and geographic groups.
METHODS: Four hundred and thirty Behçet's disease (BD) patients were 
retrospectively studied. Diagnosis of BD was made according to the international 
study group for Behçet's disease criteria. Patients with neurological findings 
suggestive of involvement of the nervous system by BD were further studied 
according to clinical examination, laboratory tests and neuroradiological 
investigations.
RESULTS: Neurological involvement was observed in 121 patients (28.1%). The mean 
age at neuro-Behçet's disease (NBD) onset was 29.7 years. Average disease 
duration of BD before neurological manifestations onset was 6.4 years. Male to 
female ratio was 1.8. Of the 121 NBD patients, parenchymal involvement occurred 
in 74 patients (61%). Among them 26 (21.4%) presented with brainstem 
involvement, 24 (19.8%) with hemispheric involvement and 2 (1.6%) with spinal 
cord involvement. Non-parenchymal NBD occurred in 47 patients (39%). Involvement 
of the main vascular structures (Vasculo-NBD) was the most common 
non-parenchymal NBD lesion found in 35 patients (28.9%) consisting of cerebral 
vein thrombosis (CVT) in 24 cases and cerebral arterial thrombosis in 11 cases. 
Forty-nine (40.5%) patients with NBD have been followed-up for a median of 3 
years (range 1-19 years). Forty-one of them recovered well without significant 
residual disability, 5 patients made no improvement and are left with severe 
neurological impairments and 3 died. Male gender and CNS parenchymal lesions 
occurrence were significantly associated with a poorer prognosis.
CONCLUSION: Clinical and epidemiological features of NBD are various. In our 
Tunisian cohort of NBD patients the main characteristic features were male 
predominance, a relatively high prevalence of CVT, a low prevalence of 
intra-cranial hypertension and a significant lower frequency of HLA-B51 
haplotype.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clineuro.2013.06.009
PMID: 23830180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]