---
reference_id: "PMID:26904695"
title: "Hib Vaccines: Past, Present, and Future Perspectives."
authors:
- Zarei AE
- Almehdar HA
- Redwan EM
journal: J Immunol Res
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1155/2016/7203587
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hib Vaccines: Past, Present, and Future Perspectives.
**Authors:** Zarei AE, Almehdar HA, Redwan EM
**Journal:** J Immunol Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2016/7203587](https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/7203587)

## Content

1. J Immunol Res. 2016;2016:7203587. doi: 10.1155/2016/7203587. Epub 2016 Jan 20.

Hib Vaccines: Past, Present, and Future Perspectives.

Zarei AE(1), Almehdar HA(2), Redwan EM(3).

Author information:
(1)Biological Sciences Department, Faculty of Science, King Abdulaziz 
University, P.O. Box 80203, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia; Main Medical Laboratory, 
Medical Services, Saudi Airlines, P.O. Box 167, Cost Center 507, Jeddah 21231, 
Saudi Arabia.
(2)Biological Sciences Department, Faculty of Science, King Abdulaziz 
University, P.O. Box 80203, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Biological Sciences Department, Faculty of Science, King Abdulaziz 
University, P.O. Box 80203, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia; Therapeutic and 
Protective Proteins Laboratory, Protein Research Department, Genetic Engineering 
and Biotechnology Research Institute, City for Scientific Research and 
Technology Applications, New Borg EL-Arab, Alexandria 21934, Egypt.

Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) causes many severe diseases, including 
epiglottitis, pneumonia, sepsis, and meningitis. In developed countries, the 
annual incidence of meningitis caused by bacteria is approximately 5-10 cases 
per population of 100,000. The Hib conjugate vaccine is considered protective 
and safe. Adjuvants, molecules that can enhance and/or regulate the fundamental 
immunogenicity of an antigen, comprise a wide range of diverse compounds. While 
earlier developments of adjuvants created effective products, there is still a 
need to create new generations, rationally designed based on recent discoveries 
in immunology, mainly in innate immunity. Many factors may play a role in the 
immunogenicity of Hib conjugate vaccines, such as the polysaccharides and 
proteins carrier used in vaccine construction, as well as the method of 
conjugation. A Hib conjugate vaccine has been constructed via chemical synthesis 
of a Hib saccharide antigen. Two models of carbohydrate-protein conjugate have 
been established, the single ended model (terminal amination-single method) and 
cross-linked lattice matrix (dual amination method). Increased knowledge in the 
fields of immunology, molecular biology, glycobiology, glycoimmunology, and the 
biology of infectious microorganisms has led to a dramatic increase in vaccine 
efficacy.

DOI: 10.1155/2016/7203587
PMCID: PMC4745871
PMID: 26904695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]