---
reference_id: "PMID:28060431"
title: The Social Value of Knowledge and the Responsiveness Requirement for International Research.
authors:
- Wenner DM
journal: Bioethics
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/bioe.12316
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Social Value of Knowledge and the Responsiveness Requirement for International Research.
**Authors:** Wenner DM
**Journal:** Bioethics (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bioe.12316](https://doi.org/10.1111/bioe.12316)

## Content

1. Bioethics. 2017 Feb;31(2):97-104. doi: 10.1111/bioe.12316.

The Social Value of Knowledge and the Responsiveness Requirement for 
International Research.

Wenner DM.

Ethicists have long recognized that two necessary features of ethical research 
are scientific validity and social value. Yet despite a significant literature 
surrounding the validity component of this dictate, until recently there has 
been little attention paid to unpacking what the social value component might 
require. This article introduces a framework for assessing the social value of 
research, and in particular, for determining whether a given research program is 
likely to have significant social value of the kind necessary to fulfill the 
social value requirement. The article goes on to illustrate how this framework 
can provide a clearer account of the responsiveness requirement, an ethical 
dictum that is oft-repeated but whose content and value as a guideline in 
international research remains contested. Although I introduce this conception 
of social value in the context of the responsiveness requirement, the account 
offered can, and is intended to, stand alone as a tool for the assessment of the 
social value of research. As such it can be usefully applied to discussions 
about the value of comparative effectiveness trials, the assessment of the 
continued proliferation of me-too drugs and the research done to develop them, 
the demand for public access to study-generated data, and persistent deficits in 
the publication of negative results.

© 2017 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/bioe.12316
PMID: 28060431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]