---
reference_id: "PMID:3872065"
title: The natural history of homocystinuria due to cystathionine beta-synthase deficiency.
authors:
- Mudd SH
- Skovby F
- Levy HL
- Pettigrew KD
- Wilcken B
- Pyeritz RE
- Andria G
- Boers GH
- Bromberg IL
- Cerone R
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1985'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Clinical Enzyme Tests
- Cystathionine beta-Synthase/deficiency
- Female
- Fertility
- Follow-Up Studies
- Genetic Testing
- "Homocystinuria/complications, diagnosis, diet therapy, genetics"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Intellectual Disability/etiology
- Lens Subluxation/etiology
- Male
- "Methionine/administration & dosage"
- Osteoporosis/etiology
- Pregnancy
- Pregnancy Complications
- Pyridoxine
- Seizures/etiology
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- Thromboembolism/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The natural history of homocystinuria due to cystathionine beta-synthase deficiency.
**Authors:** Mudd SH, Skovby F, Levy HL, Pettigrew KD, Wilcken B, Pyeritz RE, Andria G, Boers GH, Bromberg IL, Cerone R
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1985)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1985 Jan;37(1):1-31.

The natural history of homocystinuria due to cystathionine beta-synthase 
deficiency.

Mudd SH, Skovby F, Levy HL, Pettigrew KD, Wilcken B, Pyeritz RE, Andria G, Boers 
GH, Bromberg IL, Cerone R, et al.

An international questionnaire survey has been conducted to define better the 
natural history of homocystinuria due to cystathionine beta-synthase deficiency 
and permit evaluation of treatment. Data were compiled for 629 patients. Among 
patients not discovered by newborn screening, B6-responsive individuals on the 
average have significantly better mental capabilities (mean IQ, 79) than do 
B6-nonresponsive individuals (mean IQ, 57). Time-to-event curves are presented 
for the other major clinical abnormalities produced by this disease. Each 
occurred at significantly lower rates in untreated B6-responsive than in 
untreated B6-nonresponsive patients, as shown by the following examples: (1) 
dislocation of optic lenses (at age 10, chances of dislocation: 55% and 82%, 
respectively); (2) initial clinically detected thromboembolic events (at age 15, 
chances of having had such an event: 12% and 27%, respectively); (3) radiologic 
detection of spinal osteoporosis (at age 15, chances of such osteoporosis having 
been detected: 36% and 64%, respectively); and (4) mortality (at age 30, chances 
of not surviving: 4% and 23%, respectively). Methionine restriction initiated 
neonatally prevented mental retardation, retarded the rate of lens dislocation, 
and may have reduced the incidence of seizures. Pyridoxine treatment of 
late-detected B6-responsive patients retarded the rate of occurrence of initial 
thromboembolic events. Following 586 surgical procedures, 25 postoperative 
thromboembolic complications occurred, six of which were fatal. Reproductive 
histories were reported predominantly for B6-responsive patients. Living 
offspring of either men or women patients had few abnormalities. The evidence is 
inconclusive whether untreated maternal cystathionine beta-synthase deficiency 
leads to excessive fetal loss. Only 13% of patients detected in screening 
programs of newborns and classified as to B6-responsiveness were B6-responsive, 
compared to 47% among late-detected patients. Current screening programs that 
identify neonatal hypermethioninemia may be preferentially failing to detect 
B6-responsive patients.

PMCID: PMC1684548
PMID: 3872065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]