---
reference_id: "PMID:19157891"
title: The 18q deletion syndrome and analysis of the critical region for orofacial cleft at 18q22.3.
authors:
- Dostal A
- Nemeckova J
- Gaillyova R
journal: J Craniomaxillofac Surg
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.jcms.2008.12.002
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/classification, genetics"
- Animals
- Chromosome Deletion
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 18/genetics"
- "Cleft Lip/classification, genetics"
- "Cleft Palate/classification, genetics"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Phenotype
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The 18q deletion syndrome and analysis of the critical region for orofacial cleft at 18q22.3.
**Authors:** Dostal A, Nemeckova J, Gaillyova R
**Journal:** J Craniomaxillofac Surg (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jcms.2008.12.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcms.2008.12.002)

## Content

1. J Craniomaxillofac Surg. 2009 Jul;37(5):272-5. doi:
10.1016/j.jcms.2008.12.002.  Epub 2009 Jan 20.

The 18q deletion syndrome and analysis of the critical region for orofacial 
cleft at 18q22.3.

Dostal A(1), Nemeckova J, Gaillyova R.

Author information:
(1)Hematology-Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston, MA, USA. 
ales.dostal@eudoramail.com

INTRODUCTION: The 18q deletion syndrome (18q-) is a multiple-anomaly disorder 
associated with mental retardation, white matter anomalies in the brain, growth 
hormone deficiency, congenital aural atresia, orofacial cleft (OFC), and palate 
abnormalities. The aims of this study were to determine the frequency of 
different forms of OFC in 18q- individuals: cleft palate with or without cleft 
lip (CP/L), cleft lip (CL), and palate abnormalities. We also sought to map a 
potential critical region for OFC within chromosome 18q22.3 region.
PATIENTS: The study presents an overview of selected 18q- individuals from 11 
published reports and one presented poster.
RESULTS: The frequency of CP/L and CL among 18q- individuals is about 25%; when 
high/arched palate cases are included, the frequency rises to about 43%.
CONCLUSION: Orofacial abnormalities are characteristic features of 18q- syndrome 
patients and potential CP/L critical region could be assumed at 18q22.3 between 
markers D18S879 and D18S1141. In addition, gene deficient mouse models for Sall3 
or Tshz1 genes, which are located at the 18q22.3 critical region, displayed 
palate abnormality phenotype.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcms.2008.12.002
PMID: 19157891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]