---
reference_id: "PMID:25605368"
title: "Phase 1/2 study of mogamulizumab, a defucosylated anti-CCR4 antibody, in previously treated patients with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma."
authors:
- Duvic M
- Pinter-Brown LC
- Foss FM
- Sokol L
- Jorgensen JL
- Challagundla P
- Dwyer KM
- Zhang X
- Kurman MR
- Ballerini R
- Liu L
- Kim YH
journal: Blood
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-09-600924
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Drug Administration Schedule
- Female
- Humans
- "Lymphoma, T-Cell, Cutaneous/immunology, therapy"
- Male
- Maximum Tolerated Dose
- Middle Aged
- "Mycosis Fungoides/immunology, therapy"
- Prognosis
- "Receptors, CCR4/immunology"
- "Sezary Syndrome/immunology, therapy"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phase 1/2 study of mogamulizumab, a defucosylated anti-CCR4 antibody, in previously treated patients with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.
**Authors:** Duvic M, Pinter-Brown LC, Foss FM, Sokol L, Jorgensen JL, Challagundla P, Dwyer KM, Zhang X, Kurman MR, Ballerini R, Liu L, Kim YH
**Journal:** Blood (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2014-09-600924](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2014-09-600924)

## Content

1. Blood. 2015 Mar 19;125(12):1883-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-09-600924. Epub
2015  Jan 20.

Phase 1/2 study of mogamulizumab, a defucosylated anti-CCR4 antibody, in
previously treated patients with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma.

Duvic M(1), Pinter-Brown LC(2), Foss FM(3), Sokol L(4), Jorgensen JL(1),
Challagundla P(1), Dwyer KM(5), Zhang X(5), Kurman MR(5), Ballerini R(5), Liu
L(6), Kim YH(7).

Author information:
(1)MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX;
(2)University of California, Los Angeles, CA;
(3)Smilow Cancer Center at Yale New Haven Hospital, New Haven, CT;
(4)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, Tampa, FL;
(5)Kyowa Hakko Kirin Pharma Inc, Princeton, NJ;
(6)ReSearch Pharmaceutical Services, Inc, Fort Washington, PA; and.
(7)Stanford Cancer Center, Stanford, CA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2015 Mar 19;125(12):1847-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-02-625251.

This phase 1/2 study evaluated the efficacy of mogamulizumab, a defucosylated,
humanized, anti-CC chemokine receptor 4 monoclonal antibody, in 41 pretreated
patients with cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. No dose-limiting toxicity was observed
and the maximum tolerated dose was not reached in phase 1 after IV infusion of
mogamulizumab (0.1, 0.3, and 1.0 mg/kg) once weekly for 4 weeks followed by a
2-week observation. In phase 2, patients were dosed with 1.0 mg/kg mogamulizumab
according to the same schedule for the first course followed by infusion every 2
weeks during subsequent courses until disease progression. The most frequent
treatment-emergent adverse events were nausea (31.0%), chills (23.8%), headache
(21.4%), and infusion-related reaction (21.4%); the majority of events were
grade 1/2. There were no significant hematologic effects. Among 38 evaluable
patients, the overall response rate was 36.8%: 47.1% in Sézary syndrome (n = 17)
and 28.6% in mycosis fungoides (n = 21). Eighteen of 19 (94.7%) patients with
≥B1 blood involvement had a response in blood, including 11 complete responses.
Given the safety and efficacy of mogamulizumab, phase 3 investigation of
mogamulizumab is warranted in cutaneous T-cell lymphoma patients. This trial was
registered at www.clinicaltrials.gov as #NCT00888927.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2014-09-600924
PMCID: PMC4375715
PMID: 25605368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
