---
reference_id: "PMID:35836715"
title: "Apixaban-Induced Pseudo-Ludwig's Angina."
authors:
- Figaro N
- Figaro K
- Seecheran RV
- Seecheran VK
- Giddings S
- Seecheran NA
journal: Cureus
year: '2022'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.26740
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Apixaban-Induced Pseudo-Ludwig's Angina.
**Authors:** Figaro N, Figaro K, Seecheran RV, Seecheran VK, Giddings S, Seecheran NA
**Journal:** Cureus (2022)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.26740](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.26740)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2022 Jul 11;14(7):e26740. doi: 10.7759/cureus.26740. eCollection 2022 
Jul.

Apixaban-Induced Pseudo-Ludwig's Angina.

Figaro N(1), Figaro K(2), Seecheran RV(3), Seecheran VK(4), Giddings S(5), 
Seecheran NA(6).

Author information:
(1)Otolaryngology, Eric Williams Medical Sciences Complex, Mt. Hope, TTO.
(2)Internal Medicine, Eric Williams Medical Sciences Complex, Mt. Hope, TTO.
(3)Internal Medicine, University of Kansas Medical Center, Wichita, USA.
(4)Internal Medicine, Eric Williams Medical Sciences Complex, Champs Fleurs, 
TTO.
(5)Infectious Diseases, The University of the West Indies, St. Augustine, TTO.
(6)Cardiology, The University of the West Indies, St. Augustine, TTO.

Ludwig's angina describes fulminant cellulitis involving the oro- and 
hypopharynx, which typically stems from bacterial pathogens, whereas 
"pseudo-Ludwig's angina" is ascribed to sublingual swelling due to noninfectious 
causes. There is a paucity of case reports implicating warfarin as the culprit 
for sublingual hematoma mimicking Ludwig's angina; however, we describe a novel 
case of apixaban-induced pseudo-Ludwig's angina, which was successfully managed 
with urgent surgical intervention and supportive care with antibiotic and 
glucocorticoid therapy.

Copyright © 2022, Figaro et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.26740
PMCID: PMC9275551
PMID: 35836715

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.