---
reference_id: "PMID:11278244"
title: Domain-specific mutations of a transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta 1 latency-associated peptide cause Camurati-Engelmann disease because of the formation of a constitutively active form of TGF-beta 1.
authors:
- Saito T
- Kinoshita A
- Yoshiura Ki
- Makita Y
- Wakui K
- Honke K
- Niikawa N
- Taniguchi N
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.C000859200
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Domain-specific mutations of a transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta 1 latency-associated peptide cause Camurati-Engelmann disease because of the formation of a constitutively active form of TGF-beta 1.
**Authors:** Saito T, Kinoshita A, Yoshiura Ki, Makita Y, Wakui K, Honke K, Niikawa N, Taniguchi N
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.C000859200](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.C000859200)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 13;276(15):11469-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C000859200. Epub 
2001 Feb 13.

Domain-specific mutations of a transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta 1 
latency-associated peptide cause Camurati-Engelmann disease because of the 
formation of a constitutively active form of TGF-beta 1.

Saito T(1), Kinoshita A, Yoshiura Ki, Makita Y, Wakui K, Honke K, Niikawa N, 
Taniguchi N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Osaka University Medical School, 2-2 Yamadaoka, 
Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta1 is secreted as a latent form, which 
consists of its mature form and a latency-associated peptide (beta1-LAP) in 
either the presence or the absence of additional latent TGF-beta1-binding 
protein. We recently reported that three different missense mutations (R218H, 
R218C, and C225R) of beta1-LAP cause the Camurati-Engelmann disease (CED), an 
autosomal dominant disorder characterized by hyperosteosis and sclerosis of the 
diaphysis of the long bones. Pulse-chase experiments using fibroblasts from CED 
patients and expression experiments of the mutant genes in an insect cell system 
suggest that these mutations disrupt the association of beta1-LAP and TGF-beta1 
and the subsequent release of the mature TGF-beta1. Furthermore, the cell growth 
of fibroblasts from a CED patient and mutant gene-transfected fibroblasts was 
suppressed via TGF-beta1. The growth suppression observed was attenuated by 
neutralizing antibody to TGF-beta1 or by treatment of dexamethasone. On the 
other hand, the proliferation of human osteoblastic MG-63 cells was accelerated 
by coculture with CED fibroblasts. These data suggest that the domain-specific 
mutations of beta1-LAP result in a more facile activation of TGF-beta1, thus 
causing CED.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.C000859200
PMID: 11278244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]