---
reference_id: "PMID:25524711"
title: Pivotal role of choline metabolites in remyelination.
authors:
- Skripuletz T
- Manzel A
- Gropengießer K
- Schäfer N
- Gudi V
- Singh V
- Salinas Tejedor L
- Jörg S
- Hammer A
- Voss E
- Vulinovic F
- Degen D
- Wolf R
- Lee DH
- Pul R
- Moharregh-Khiabani D
- Baumgärtner W
- Gold R
- Linker RA
- Stangel M
journal: Brain
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awu358
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pivotal role of choline metabolites in remyelination.
**Authors:** Skripuletz T, Manzel A, Gropengießer K, Schäfer N, Gudi V, Singh V, Salinas Tejedor L, Jörg S, Hammer A, Voss E, Vulinovic F, Degen D, Wolf R, Lee DH, Pul R, Moharregh-Khiabani D, Baumgärtner W, Gold R, Linker RA, Stangel M
**Journal:** Brain (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awu358](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awu358)

## Content

1. Brain. 2015 Feb;138(Pt 2):398-413. doi: 10.1093/brain/awu358. Epub 2014 Dec
17.

Pivotal role of choline metabolites in remyelination.

Skripuletz T(1), Manzel A(2), Gropengießer K(1), Schäfer N(1), Gudi V(1), Singh 
V(3), Salinas Tejedor L(3), Jörg S(4), Hammer A(4), Voss E(1), Vulinovic F(1), 
Degen D(1), Wolf R(4), Lee DH(4), Pul R(1), Moharregh-Khiabani D(1), Baumgärtner 
W(5), Gold R(6), Linker RA(4), Stangel M(7).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Neurology, Hannover Medical School, 30625 Hannover, Germany.
(2)2 Ruhr-University Bochum, International Graduate School of Neuroscience, 
44801 Bochum, Germany 3 Department of Neurology, University Hospital Erlangen, 
91054 Erlangen, Germany.
(3)1 Department of Neurology, Hannover Medical School, 30625 Hannover, Germany 4 
Centre for Systems Neuroscience, 30559 Hannover, Germany.
(4)3 Department of Neurology, University Hospital Erlangen, 91054 Erlangen, 
Germany.
(5)4 Centre for Systems Neuroscience, 30559 Hannover, Germany 5 Department of 
Pathology, University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover, 30559 Hannover, Germany.
(6)6 Department of Neurology, St Josef Hospital, Ruhr-University Bochum, 44791 
Bochum, Germany.
(7)1 Department of Neurology, Hannover Medical School, 30625 Hannover, Germany 4 
Centre for Systems Neuroscience, 30559 Hannover, Germany 
Stangel.Martin@MH-Hannover.de.

Comment in
    Brain. 2015 Nov;138(Pt 11):e388. doi: 10.1093/brain/awv140.
    Brain. 2015 Nov;138(Pt 11):e389. doi: 10.1093/brain/awv141.

Neuroprotective approaches for central nervous system regeneration have not been 
successful in clinical practice so far and compounds that enhance remyelination 
are still not available for patients with multiple sclerosis. The objective of 
this study was to determine potential regenerative effects of the substance 
cytidine-5'-diphospho (CDP)-choline in two different murine animal models of 
multiple sclerosis. The effects of exogenously applied CDP-choline were tested 
in murine myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein-induced experimental autoimmune 
encephalomyelitis. In addition, the cuprizone-induced mouse model of de- and 
remyelination was used to specifically test the hypothesis that CDP-choline 
directly increases remyelination. We found that CDP-choline ameliorated the 
disease course of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis and exerted 
beneficial effects on myelin, oligodendrocytes and axons. After 
cuprizone-induced demyelination, CDP-choline effectively enhanced myelin 
regeneration and reversed motor coordination deficits. The increased 
remyelination arose from an increase in the numbers of proliferating 
oligodendrocyte precursor cells and oligodendrocytes. Further in vitro studies 
suggest that this process is regulated by protein kinase C. We thus identified a 
new mechanism to enhance central nervous system remyelination via the choline 
pathway. Due to its regenerative action combined with an excellent safety 
profile, CDP-choline could become a promising substance for patients with 
multiple sclerosis as an add-on therapy.

© The Author (2014). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awu358
PMID: 25524711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]