---
reference_id: "PMID:33383265"
title: "Diagnosis and management of Ludwig's angina: An evidence-based review."
authors:
- Bridwell R
- Gottlieb M
- Koyfman A
- Long B
journal: Am J Emerg Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajem.2020.12.030
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and management of Ludwig's angina: An evidence-based review.
**Authors:** Bridwell R, Gottlieb M, Koyfman A, Long B
**Journal:** Am J Emerg Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajem.2020.12.030](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajem.2020.12.030)

## Content

1. Am J Emerg Med. 2021 Mar;41:1-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ajem.2020.12.030. Epub 2020
Dec  23.

Diagnosis and management of Ludwig's angina: An evidence-based review.

Bridwell R(1), Gottlieb M(2), Koyfman A(3), Long B(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Brooke Army Medical Center, San Antonio, 
TX, United States of America.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, 
IL, United States of America.
(3)Department of Emergency Medicine, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, 
United States of America.
(4)Department of Emergency Medicine, Brooke Army Medical Center, San Antonio, 
TX, United States of America. Electronic address: Brit.long@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Ludwig's angina is a potentially deadly condition that must not be 
missed in the emergency department (ED).
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this narrative review article is to provide a summary 
of the epidemiology, pathophysiology, diagnosis, and management of Ludwig's 
angina with a focus on emergency clinicians.
DISCUSSION: Ludwig's angina is a rapidly spreading infection that involves the 
floor of the mouth. It occurs more commonly in those with poor dentition or 
immunosuppression. Patients may have a woody or indurated floor of the mouth 
with submandibular swelling. Trismus is a late finding. Computed tomography of 
the neck soft tissue with contrast is preferred if the patient is able to safely 
leave the ED and can tolerate lying supine. Point-of-care ultrasound can be a 
useful adjunct, particularly in those who cannot tolerate lying supine. Due to 
the threat of rapid airway compromise, emergent consultation to anesthesia and 
otolaryngology, if available, may be helpful if a definitive airway is required. 
The first line approach for airway intervention in the ED is flexible intubating 
endoscopy with preparation for a surgical airway. Broad spectrum antibiotics and 
surgical source control are keys in treating the infection. These patients 
should then be admitted to the intensive care unit for close airway observation.
CONCLUSION: Ludwig's angina is a life-threatening condition that all emergency 
clinicians need to consider. It is important for clinicians to be aware of the 
current evidence regarding the diagnosis, management, and disposition of these 
patients.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajem.2020.12.030
PMID: 33383265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest None.