---
reference_id: "PMID:18940465"
title: Hereditary spherocytosis.
authors:
- Perrotta S
- Gallagher PG
- Mohandas N
journal: Lancet
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61588-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hereditary spherocytosis.
**Authors:** Perrotta S, Gallagher PG, Mohandas N
**Journal:** Lancet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61588-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61588-3)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2008 Oct 18;372(9647):1411-26. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61588-3.

Hereditary spherocytosis.

Perrotta S(1), Gallagher PG, Mohandas N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy.

Hereditary spherocytosis is a common inherited disorder that is characterised by 
anaemia, jaundice, and splenomegaly. It is reported worldwide and is the most 
common inherited anaemia in individuals of northern European ancestry. Clinical 
severity is variable with most patients having a well-compensated haemolytic 
anaemia. Some individuals are asymptomatic, whereas others have severe 
haemolytic anaemia requiring erythrocyte transfusion. The primary lesion in 
hereditary spherocytosis is loss of membrane surface area, leading to reduced 
deformability due to defects in the membrane proteins ankyrin, band 3, beta 
spectrin, alpha spectrin, or protein 4.2. Many isolated mutations have been 
identified in the genes encoding these membrane proteins; common hereditary 
spherocytosis-associated mutations have not been identified. Abnormal 
spherocytes are trapped and destroyed in the spleen and this is the main cause 
of haemolysis in this disorder. Common complications are cholelithiasis, 
haemolytic episodes, and aplastic crises. Splenectomy is curative but should be 
undertaken only after careful assessment of the risks and benefits.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(08)61588-3
PMID: 18940465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]