---
reference_id: "PMID:34636719"
title: Visual Phenomena Associated With Migraine and Their Differential Diagnosis.
authors:
- Eren OE
- Wilhelm H
- Schankin CJ
- Straube A
journal: Dtsch Arztebl Int
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3238/arztebl.m2021.0287
keywords:
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- Migraine Disorders/diagnosis
- Migraine with Aura/diagnosis
- Posterior Leukoencephalopathy Syndrome
- "Vision Disorders/diagnosis, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Visual Phenomena Associated With Migraine and Their Differential Diagnosis.
**Authors:** Eren OE, Wilhelm H, Schankin CJ, Straube A
**Journal:** Dtsch Arztebl Int (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3238/arztebl.m2021.0287](https://doi.org/10.3238/arztebl.m2021.0287)

## Content

1. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2021 Oct 1;118(39):647-653. doi:
10.3238/arztebl.m2021.0287.

Visual Phenomena Associated With Migraine and Their Differential Diagnosis.

Eren OE(1), Wilhelm H, Schankin CJ, Straube A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospital, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany; 
Department of Neurology, Inselspital, University Hospital Bern, Switzerland; 
Department of Ophthalmology, University of Tübingen.

Comment in
    Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2022 Apr 1;119(13):230. doi: 10.3238/arztebl.m2022.0059.
    Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2022 Apr 1;119(13):230-231. doi: 
10.3238/arztebl.m2022.0060.

BACKGROUND: Visual phenomena are of many different kinds; their differential 
diagnosis is usually possible with directed history-taking. In this review, we 
describe common visual phenomena that must be distinguished from a migraine 
aura.
METHODS: This review is based on publications retrieved by a selective search in 
PubMed and the Web of Knowledge/Science, with special attention to the current 
classification of the International Headache Society and the recommendations of 
the German Migraine and Headache Society. The following search terms were used: 
"visual phenomena/phenomenon," "migraine aura," and "persistent/complication/ 
long-lasting/ongoing."
RESULTS: The most helpful questions for differential diagnosis are whether the 
symptoms are present in one eye only or in both, whether their onset was sudden 
or over minutes or days, and whether the phenomenon has occurred only once or 
repeatedly, or is persistently present. A visual aura associated with migraine 
must be distinguished, in rare cases, from an isolated epileptic aura, from 
cerebral/retinal ischemia, or from visual snow. Further differential diagnoses 
include a persisting perceptual disturbance after hallucinogen use (HPPD, 
"hallucinogen persisting perception disorder") and the Charles Bonnet syndrome 
(CBS); the latter arises as a consequence of severely impaired vision. Posterior 
reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) is rare and generally reveals itself 
over its further course through the appearance of additional clinical 
manifestations. Primary ophthalmological causes can usually be readily 
identified and classified by ophthalmological examination.
CONCLUSION: Patients with visual phenomena typically consult physicians from 
various medical specialties. A correct differential diagnosis can be made based 
on the history if the physician views the symptoms in their overall context to 
determine the particular disease entity that is responsible.

DOI: 10.3238/arztebl.m2021.0287
PMCID: PMC8762590
PMID: 34636719 [Indexed for MEDLINE]