---
reference_id: "PMID:20172912"
title: "Diagnosis of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy/dysplasia: proposed modification of the Task Force Criteria."
authors:
- Marcus FI
- McKenna WJ
- Sherrill D
- Basso C
- Bauce B
- Bluemke DA
- Calkins H
- Corrado D
- Cox MG
- Daubert JP
- Fontaine G
- Gear K
- Hauer R
- Nava A
- Picard MH
- Protonotarios N
- Saffitz JE
- Sanborn DM
- Steinberg JS
- Tandri H
- Thiene G
- Towbin JA
- Tsatsopoulou A
- Wichter T
- Zareba W
journal: Eur Heart J
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehq025
keywords:
- "Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Dysplasia/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Biopsy
- Electrocardiography
- Genotype
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Angiography/standards
- Myocardium/pathology
- Phenotype
- Sensitivity and Specificity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy/dysplasia: proposed modification of the Task Force Criteria.
**Authors:** Marcus FI, McKenna WJ, Sherrill D, Basso C, Bauce B, Bluemke DA, Calkins H, Corrado D, Cox MG, Daubert JP, Fontaine G, Gear K, Hauer R, Nava A, Picard MH, Protonotarios N, Saffitz JE, Sanborn DM, Steinberg JS, Tandri H, Thiene G, Towbin JA, Tsatsopoulou A, Wichter T, Zareba W
**Journal:** Eur Heart J (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/eurheartj/ehq025](https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehq025)

## Content

1. Eur Heart J. 2010 Apr;31(7):806-14. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehq025. Epub 2010
Feb  19.

Diagnosis of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy/dysplasia: proposed 
modification of the Task Force Criteria.

Marcus FI(1), McKenna WJ, Sherrill D, Basso C, Bauce B, Bluemke DA, Calkins H, 
Corrado D, Cox MG, Daubert JP, Fontaine G, Gear K, Hauer R, Nava A, Picard MH, 
Protonotarios N, Saffitz JE, Sanborn DM, Steinberg JS, Tandri H, Thiene G, 
Towbin JA, Tsatsopoulou A, Wichter T, Zareba W.

Author information:
(1)University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA. fmarcus@u.arizona.edu

BACKGROUND: In 1994, an International Task Force proposed criteria for the 
clinical diagnosis of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy/dysplasia 
(ARVC/D) that facilitated recognition and interpretation of the frequently 
nonspecific clinical features of ARVC/D. This enabled confirmatory clinical 
diagnosis in index cases through exclusion of phenocopies and provided a 
standard on which clinical research and genetic studies could be based. 
Structural, histological, electrocardiographic, arrhythmic, and familial 
features of the disease were incorporated into the criteria, subdivided into 
major and minor categories according to the specificity of their association 
with ARVC/D. At that time, clinical experience with ARVC/D was dominated by 
symptomatic index cases and sudden cardiac death victims-the overt or severe end 
of the disease spectrum. Consequently, the 1994 criteria were highly specific 
but lacked sensitivity for early and familial disease.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Revision of the diagnostic criteria provides guidance on 
the role of emerging diagnostic modalities and advances in the genetics of 
ARVC/D. The criteria have been modified to incorporate new knowledge and 
technology to improve diagnostic sensitivity, but with the important requisite 
of maintaining diagnostic specificity. The approach of classifying structural, 
histological, electrocardiographic, arrhythmic, and genetic features of the 
disease as major and minor criteria has been maintained. In this modification of 
the Task Force criteria, quantitative criteria are proposed and abnormalities 
are defined on the basis of comparison with normal subject data.
CONCLUSIONS: The present modifications of the Task Force Criteria represent a 
working framework to improve the diagnosis and management of this condition. 
Clinical Trial Registration clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT00024505.

DOI: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehq025
PMCID: PMC2848326
PMID: 20172912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]