---
reference_id: "PMID:38077958"
title: "Cholic acid increases plasma cholesterol in Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome: A pilot study."
authors:
- Elias ER
- Orth LE
- Li A
- Xu L
- Jones SM
- Rizzo WB
journal: Mol Genet Metab Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2023.101030
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cholic acid increases plasma cholesterol in Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome: A pilot study.
**Authors:** Elias ER, Orth LE, Li A, Xu L, Jones SM, Rizzo WB
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgmr.2023.101030](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgmr.2023.101030)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2023 Nov 28;38:101030. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2023.101030.
eCollection 2024 Mar.

Cholic acid increases plasma cholesterol in Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome: A pilot
study.

Elias ER(1), Orth LE(2), Li A(3), Xu L(3), Jones SM(4), Rizzo WB(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA.
(3)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA,
USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics and Child Health Research Institute, University of
Nebraska Medical Center and Children's Hospital and Medical Center, Omaha, NE,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is an inherited disorder of
cholesterol biosynthesis associated with congenital malformations, growth delay,
intellectual disability and behavior problems. SLOS is caused by bi-allelic
mutations in DHCR7, which lead to reduced activity of 7-dehydrocholesterol
reductase that catalyzes the last step in cholesterol biosynthesis. Symptoms of
SLOS are thought to be due to cholesterol deficiency and accumulation of its
precursor 7-dehydrocholesterol (7-DHC) and 8-dehydrocholesterol (8-DHC), and
toxic oxysterols. Therapy for SLOS often includes dietary cholesterol
supplementation, but lipids are poorly absorbed from the diet, possibly due to
impaired bile acid synthesis. We hypothesized that bile acid supplementation
with cholic acid would improve dietary cholesterol absorption and raise plasma
cholesterol levels.
METHODS: Twelve SLOS subjects (10 M, 2F, ages 2-27 years) who had plasma
cholesterol ≤125 mg/dL were treated with cholic acid (10 mg/kg/day) divided
twice daily for 2 months. Plasma cholesterol, 7-DHC and 8-DHC were measured by
GC-MS. Oxysterols were measured by ultra-high-performance LC-MS/MS. Data were
analyzed using paired t-tests.
RESULTS: At baseline, plasma cholesterol was 75 ± 24 mg/dL (mean ± SD; range
43-125, n = 12). After 2 months on cholic acid, mean plasma cholesterol
increased to 97 ± 29 mg/dL (p = 0.011). Eleven of 12 subjects showed an increase
in plasma cholesterol that varied from 3.8% to 85.7% (mean 38.7 ± 23.3%).
7-Hydroxycholesterol decreased by 20.6% on average (p = 0.013) but no
significant changes were seen in 7-DHC or 8-DHC. Mean body weight tended to
increase (3.6% p = 0.069). Subjects tolerated cholic acid well and experienced
no drug-related adverse events.
CONCLUSIONS: In this pilot study, cholic acid supplementation was well tolerated
and safe and resulted in an increase in plasma cholesterol in most SLOS
subjects. Further controlled longitudinal studies are needed to look for the
sustainability of the biochemical effect and possible clinical benefits.

© 2023 Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2023.101030
PMCID: PMC10698565
PMID: 38077958

Conflict of interest statement: None.
