---
reference_id: PMID:37446301
title: "IL-18 in Autoinflammatory Diseases: Focus on Adult Onset Still Disease and Macrophages Activation Syndrome."
authors:
- Baggio C
- Bindoli S
- Guidea I
- Doria A
- Oliviero F
- Sfriso P
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms241311125
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Interleukin-18/metabolism
- "Still's Disease, Adult-Onset/diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Macrophage Activation Syndrome/diagnosis
- Hereditary Autoinflammatory Diseases
- Macrophages/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IL-18 in Autoinflammatory Diseases: Focus on Adult Onset Still Disease and Macrophages Activation Syndrome.
**Authors:** Baggio C, Bindoli S, Guidea I, Doria A, Oliviero F, Sfriso P
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms241311125](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms241311125)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Jul 5;24(13):11125. doi: 10.3390/ijms241311125.

IL-18 in Autoinflammatory Diseases: Focus on Adult Onset Still Disease and 
Macrophages Activation Syndrome.

Baggio C(1), Bindoli S(1), Guidea I(1), Doria A(1), Oliviero F(1), Sfriso P(1).

Author information:
(1)Rheumatology Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Padova, 35128 
Padova, Italy.

Interleukin-18 (IL-18) is a potent pro-inflammatory cytokine that is involved in 
various innate and adaptive immune processes related to infection, inflammation, 
and autoimmunity. Therefore, it is described as a key mediator of 
autoinflammatory diseases associated with the development of macrophage 
activation syndrome (MAS), including systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis and 
adult-onset Still's disease. This review focuses on the role of IL-18 in 
inflammatory responses, placing emphasis on autoinflammatory diseases associated 
with chronic excess of serum IL-18, which correlate with clinical and biological 
signs of the disease. Therefore, it is useful for the diagnosis and monitoring 
of disease activity. Researchers are currently investigating IL-18's role as a 
therapeutic target for the treatment of inflammatory diseases. The inhibition of 
IL-18 signaling through recombinant human IL-18BP (IL-18 binding protein) seems 
to be an effective therapeutic strategy, though further studies are necessary to 
clarify its importance as a therapeutic target.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241311125
PMCID: PMC10342495
PMID: 37446301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: A.D. received consultancy fees from GSK, Eli 
Lilly, AstraZeneca, and Otsuka. P.S. received grants from Novartis and Sobi. The 
other authors declare no conflict of interest.