---
reference_id: "PMID:17329572"
title: "Transcriptional and functional analyses of SLC12A3 mutations: new clues for the pathogenesis of Gitelman syndrome."
authors:
- Riveira-Munoz E
- Chang Q
- Godefroid N
- Hoenderop JG
- Bindels RJ
- Dahan K
- Devuyst O
- Belgian Network for Study of Gitelman Syndrome
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2006101095
keywords:
- Animals
- "DNA, Complementary/chemistry"
- Female
- Genotype
- "Gitelman Syndrome/etiology, genetics"
- Humans
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "RNA, Messenger/analysis"
- "Receptors, Drug/genetics, physiology"
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Solute Carrier Family 12, Member 3"
- "Symporters/genetics, physiology"
- "Transcription, Genetic"
- Xenopus
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcriptional and functional analyses of SLC12A3 mutations: new clues for the pathogenesis of Gitelman syndrome.
**Authors:** Riveira-Munoz E, Chang Q, Godefroid N, Hoenderop JG, Bindels RJ, Dahan K, Devuyst O, Belgian Network for Study of Gitelman Syndrome
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2006101095](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2006101095)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2007 Apr;18(4):1271-83. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2006101095. Epub
2007  Feb 28.

Transcriptional and functional analyses of SLC12A3 mutations: new clues for the
pathogenesis of Gitelman syndrome.

Riveira-Munoz E(1), Chang Q, Godefroid N, Hoenderop JG, Bindels RJ, Dahan K,
Devuyst O; Belgian Network for Study of Gitelman Syndrome.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Université Catholique de Louvain Medical School,
Brussels, Belgium.

Gitelman syndrome (GS) is a recessive salt-losing tubulopathy that is caused by
mutations in the SLC12A3 gene that encodes the sodium-chloride co-transporter
(NCC). GS is characterized by significant inter- and intrafamilial phenotype
variability, with early onset and/or severe clinical manifestations in some
patients. No correlations between the disease variability and the
position/nature of SLC12A3 mutations have been investigated thus far. In this
study, extensive mutational analyses of SLC12A3 were performed in 27 patients
with GS, including genomic DNA sequencing, multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification, cDNA analysis, and quantification of allele-specific transcripts,
in parallel with functional analyses in Xenopus laevis oocytes and detailed
phenotyping. Twenty-six SLC12A3 mutations were identified in 25 patients with
GS, including eight novel (detection rate 80%). Transcript analysis demonstrated
that splicing mutations of SLC12A3 lead to frameshifted mRNA subject to
degradation by nonsense-mediated decay. Heterologous expression documented a
novel class of NCC mutants with defective intrinsic transport activity. A
subgroup of patients presented with early onset, growth retardation, and/or
detrimental manifestations, confirming the potential severity of GS. The
mutations that were associated with a severe presentation were the combination
at least for one allele of a missplicing resulting in a truncated transcript
that was downregulated by nonsense-mediated decay or a nonfunctional, cell
surface-absent mutant. The most recurrent mutation on the second allele was a
newly described NCC mutant that affected the functional properties of the
co-transporter. These data suggest that the nature/position of SLC12A3 mutation,
combined with male gender, is a determinant factor in the severity of GS and
provide new insights in the underlying pathogenic mechanisms of the disease.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2006101095
PMID: 17329572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
