---
reference_id: "PMID:29754569"
title: Toward personalized medicine in Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
authors:
- Kenny J
- Forsythe E
- Beales P
- Bacchelli C
journal: Per Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.2217/pme-2017-0019
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Toward personalized medicine in Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
**Authors:** Kenny J, Forsythe E, Beales P, Bacchelli C
**Journal:** Per Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.2217/pme-2017-0019](https://doi.org/10.2217/pme-2017-0019)

## Content

1. Per Med. 2017 Sep;14(5):447-456. doi: 10.2217/pme-2017-0019. Epub 2017 Sep 4.

Toward personalized medicine in Bardet-Biedl syndrome.

Kenny J(1), Forsythe E(1), Beales P(1), Bacchelli C(1).

Author information:
(1)NIHR Great Ormond Street Hospital Biomedical Research Centre, UCL Great 
Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, 30 Guildford St, London WC1N 1EH, UK.

Personalized medicine is becoming routine in the treatment of common diseases 
such as cancer, but has lagged behind in the field of rare diseases. It is 
currently in the early stages for the treatment of Bardet-Biedl syndrome. 
Advances in the understanding of ciliary biology and diagnostic techniques have 
opened up the prospect of treating BBS in a patient-specific manner. Owing to 
their structure and function, cilia provide an attractive therapeutic target and 
genetic therapies are being explored in ciliopathy treatment. Promising avenues 
include gene therapy, gene editing techniques and splice-correcting and 
read-through therapies. Targeted drug design has been successful in the 
treatment of genetic disease and research is underway in the discovery of known 
and novel drugs to treat Bardet-Biedl syndrome.

DOI: 10.2217/pme-2017-0019
PMID: 29754569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]