---
reference_id: "PMID:26921200"
title: "Preoperative prediction of histopathological outcome in basal cell carcinoma: flat surface and multiple small erosions predict superficial basal cell carcinoma in lighter skin types."
authors:
- Ahnlide I
- Zalaudek I
- Nilsson F
- Bjellerup M
- Nielsen K
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1111/bjd.14499
keywords:
- Algorithms
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/pathology, surgery"
- Dermoscopy/standards
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Preoperative Care/standards
- Prospective Studies
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- "Skin Neoplasms/pathology, surgery"
- Skin Pigmentation
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Preoperative prediction of histopathological outcome in basal cell carcinoma: flat surface and multiple small erosions predict superficial basal cell carcinoma in lighter skin types.
**Authors:** Ahnlide I, Zalaudek I, Nilsson F, Bjellerup M, Nielsen K
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bjd.14499](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjd.14499)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2016 Oct;175(4):751-61. doi: 10.1111/bjd.14499. Epub 2016 Jun
23.

Preoperative prediction of histopathological outcome in basal cell carcinoma:
flat surface and multiple small erosions predict superficial basal cell
carcinoma in lighter skin types.

Ahnlide I(1), Zalaudek I(2), Nilsson F(3), Bjellerup M(4), Nielsen K(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Helsingborg Hospital, Department of Clinical
Sciences Lund, Faculty of Medicine, Lund University, S Vallgatan 5, Helsingborg,
S-251 87, Sweden. ingela.ahnlide@skane.se.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Medical University of Graz, Graz,
Austria.
(3)Research and Development Centre, Skåne, Unit for Medical Statistics and
Epidemiology, Skåne University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Helsingborg Hospital, Department of Clinical
Sciences Lund, Faculty of Medicine, Lund University, S Vallgatan 5, Helsingborg,
S-251 87, Sweden.

Comment in
    Br J Dermatol. 2016 Oct;175(4):674-5. doi: 10.1111/bjd.14657.

BACKGROUND: Prediction of the histopathological subtype of basal cell carcinoma
(BCC) is important for tailoring optimal treatment, especially in patients with
suspected superficial BCC (sBCC).
OBJECTIVES: To assess the accuracy of the preoperative prediction of subtypes of
BCC in clinical practice, to evaluate whether dermoscopic examination enhances
accuracy and to find dermoscopic criteria for discriminating sBCC from other
subtypes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The main presurgical diagnosis was compared with the
histopathological, postoperative diagnosis of routinely excised skin tumours in
a predominantly fair-skinned patient cohort of northern Europe during a study
period of 3 years (2011-13). The study period was split in two: during period 1,
dermoscopy was optional (850 cases with a pre- or postoperative diagnosis of
BCC), while during period 2 (after an educational dermoscopic update) dermoscopy
was mandatory (651 cases). A classification tree based on clinical and
dermoscopic features for prediction of sBCC was applied.
RESULTS: For a total of 3544 excised skin tumours, the sensitivity for the
diagnosis of BCC (any subtype) was 93·3%, specificity 91·8%, and the positive
predictive value (PPV) 89·0%. The diagnostic accuracy as well as the PPV and the
positive likelihood ratio for sBCC were significantly higher when dermoscopy was
mandatory. A flat surface and multiple small erosions predicted sBCC.
CONCLUSIONS: The study shows a high accuracy for an overall diagnosis of BCC and
increased accuracy in prediction of sBCC for the period when dermoscopy was
applied in all cases. The most discriminating findings for sBCC, based on
clinical and dermoscopic features in this fair-skinned population, were a flat
surface and multiple small erosions.

© 2016 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/bjd.14499
PMID: 26921200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
