---
reference_id: "PMID:38025143"
title: "Alpelisib: A Novel Agent for PIK3CA-Related Overgrowth Spectrum."
authors:
- Nadjkovic K
- Lonabaugh K
journal: J Pediatr Pharmacol Ther
year: '2023'
doi: 10.5863/1551-6776-28.7.590
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alpelisib: A Novel Agent for PIK3CA-Related Overgrowth Spectrum.
**Authors:** Nadjkovic K, Lonabaugh K
**Journal:** J Pediatr Pharmacol Ther (2023)
**DOI:** [10.5863/1551-6776-28.7.590](https://doi.org/10.5863/1551-6776-28.7.590)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Pharmacol Ther. 2023;28(7):590-594. doi: 10.5863/1551-6776-28.7.590.
 Epub 2023 Nov 23.

Alpelisib: A Novel Agent for PIK3CA-Related Overgrowth Spectrum.

Nadjkovic K(1)(2), Lonabaugh K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy (KRN), Sentara Martha Jefferson Hospital, 
Charlottesville, VA.
(2)School of Pharmacy (KRN), Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA.
(3)Department of Pharmacy (KPL), University of Virginia Health System, 
Charlottesville, VA.

The aim of this review is to present the information a clinician will need when 
considering alpelisib therapy for a patient diagnosed with PIK3CA-related 
overgrowth spectrum (PROS). PROS is a condition caused by a somatic recessive 
gain-of-function mutation in the gene encoding phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase 
(PI3K). PROS is rare, affecting approximately 14 births per 1 million. PROS 
affects many different tissues including skin, bone, vascular, adipose, and 
connective tissues, thus its presentations vary widely. The presentation of PROS 
is often described as mosaic, as the disease typically does not affect all cells 
in the body. For patients two years of age and older requiring systemic therapy, 
alpelisib is an option which was recently granted accelerated approval by the US 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) on April 5, 2022. Alpelisib is an inhibitor 
of PI3K, slowing the progression of existing lesions and preventing new lesions 
in patients with PROS. Important drug interactions exist with both CYP3A4 
inducers and CYP2C9 substrates. Additionally, providers of patients receiving 
alpelisib should be aware of potential side effects including hypersensitivity, 
severe cutaneous adverse reactions, hyperglycemia, pneumonitis, diarrhea, and 
embryo-fetal toxicity. Despite the potential for adverse events, alpelisib has 
provided clinical benefit to many patients with PROS as evidenced by the current 
literature. This review collects and summarizes the currently available 
evidence, including a recently published case series and multiple case reports. 
Alpelisib is a promising new option for patients with PROS.

Copyright. Pediatric Pharmacy Association. All rights reserved. For permissions, 
email: membership@pediatricpharmacy.org.

DOI: 10.5863/1551-6776-28.7.590
PMCID: PMC10681085
PMID: 38025143