---
reference_id: "PMID:20538792"
title: "Revised diagnostic criteria and classification for the autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS): report from the 2009 NIH International Workshop."
authors:
- Oliveira JB
- Bleesing JJ
- Dianzani U
- Fleisher TA
- Jaffe ES
- Lenardo MJ
- Rieux-Laucat F
- Siegel RM
- Su HC
- Teachey DT
- Rao VK
journal: Blood
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-04-280347
keywords:
- "Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative Syndrome/classification, diagnosis"
- Child
- Humans
- United States
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Revised diagnostic criteria and classification for the autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS): report from the 2009 NIH International Workshop.
**Authors:** Oliveira JB, Bleesing JJ, Dianzani U, Fleisher TA, Jaffe ES, Lenardo MJ, Rieux-Laucat F, Siegel RM, Su HC, Teachey DT, Rao VK
**Journal:** Blood (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2010-04-280347](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2010-04-280347)

## Content

1. Blood. 2010 Oct 7;116(14):e35-40. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-04-280347. Epub 2010
 Jun 10.

Revised diagnostic criteria and classification for the autoimmune
lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS): report from the 2009 NIH International
Workshop.

Oliveira JB(1), Bleesing JJ, Dianzani U, Fleisher TA, Jaffe ES, Lenardo MJ,
Rieux-Laucat F, Siegel RM, Su HC, Teachey DT, Rao VK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Clinical Center, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. oliveirajb@cc.nih.gov

Lymphadenopathy in children for which no infectious or malignant cause can be
ascertained constitutes a challenging diagnostic dilemma. Autoimmune
lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS) is a human genetic disorder of lymphocyte
apoptosis resulting in an accumulation of lymphocytes and childhood onset
chronic lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, multilineage cytopenias, and an increased
risk of B-cell lymphoma. In 1999, investigators at the National Institutes of
Health (NIH) suggested criteria to establish the diagnosis of ALPS. Since then,
with approximately 500 patients with ALPS studied worldwide, significant
advances in our understanding of the disease have prompted the need for
revisions to the existing diagnostic criteria and classification scheme. The
rationale and recommendations outlined here stem from an international workshop
held at NIH on September 21 and 22, 2009, attended by investigators from the
United States, Europe, and Australia engaged in clinical and basic science
research on ALPS and related disorders. It is hoped that harmonizing the
diagnosis and classification of ALPS will foster collaborative research and
better understanding of the pathogenesis of autoimmune cytopenias and B-cell
lymphomas.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2010-04-280347
PMCID: PMC2953894
PMID: 20538792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
