---
reference_id: "PMID:31454984"
title: "FOXG1-Related Syndrome: From Clinical to Molecular Genetics and Pathogenic Mechanisms."
authors:
- Wong LC
- Singh S
- Wang HP
- Hsu CJ
- Hu SC
- Lee WT
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3390/ijms20174176
keywords:
- Biomarkers
- "Brain Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- Forkhead Transcription Factors/genetics
- Gene Duplication
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genetic Variation
- Humans
- Mutation
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Neuroimaging/methods
- Phenotype
- "Rett Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FOXG1-Related Syndrome: From Clinical to Molecular Genetics and Pathogenic Mechanisms.
**Authors:** Wong LC, Singh S, Wang HP, Hsu CJ, Hu SC, Lee WT
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms20174176](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms20174176)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2019 Aug 26;20(17):4176. doi: 10.3390/ijms20174176.

FOXG1-Related Syndrome: From Clinical to Molecular Genetics and Pathogenic
Mechanisms.

Wong LC(1)(2), Singh S(1), Wang HP(3), Hsu CJ(4), Hu SC(1), Lee WT(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Cathay General Hospital, Taipei 106, Taiwan.
(2)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Taiwan University College
of Medicine, Taipei 100, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital YunLin Branch,
YunLin 640, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Taipei City Hospital YangMing Branch, Taipei 111,
Taiwan.
(5)Department of Pediatric Neurology, National Taiwan University Children's
Hospital, Taipei 100, Taiwan. wangtsolee@ntu.edu.tw.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University College of Medicine,
Taipei 100, Taiwan. wangtsolee@ntu.edu.tw.
(7)Graduate Institute of Brain and Mind Sciences, National Taiwan University
College of Medicine, Taipei 100, Taiwan. wangtsolee@ntu.edu.tw.

Individuals with mutations in forkhead box G1 (FOXG1) belong to a distinct
clinical entity, termed "FOXG1-related encephalopathy". There are two clinical
phenotypes/syndromes identified in FOXG1-related encephalopathy, duplications
and deletions/intragenic mutations. In children with deletions or intragenic
mutations of FOXG1, the recognized clinical features include microcephaly,
developmental delay, severe cognitive disabilities, early-onset dyskinesia and
hyperkinetic movements, stereotypies, epilepsy, and cerebral malformation. In
contrast, children with duplications of FOXG1 are typically normocephalic and
have normal brain magnetic resonance imaging. They also have different clinical
characteristics in terms of epilepsy, movement disorders, and neurodevelopment
compared with children with deletions or intragenic mutations. FOXG1 is a
transcriptional factor. It is expressed mainly in the telencephalon and plays a
pleiotropic role in the development of the brain. It is a key player in
development and territorial specification of the anterior brain. In addition, it
maintains the expansion of the neural proliferating pool, and also regulates the
pace of neocortical neuronogenic progression. It also facilitates cortical layer
and corpus callosum formation. Furthermore, it promotes dendrite elongation and
maintains neural plasticity, including dendritic arborization and spine
densities in mature neurons. In this review, we summarize the clinical features,
molecular genetics, and possible pathogenesis of FOXG1-related syndrome.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms20174176
PMCID: PMC6747066
PMID: 31454984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
