---
reference_id: "PMID:39611850"
title: Supplementation with nicotinamide limits accelerated aging in affected individuals with cockayne syndrome and restores antioxidant defenses.
authors:
- Chikhaoui A
- Zayoud K
- Kraoua I
- Bouchoucha S
- Tebourbi A
- Turki I
- Yacoub-Youssef H
journal: Aging (Albany NY)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.18632/aging.206160
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cockayne Syndrome/genetics, metabolism"
- "Niacinamide/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Oxidative Stress/drug effects
- Dietary Supplements
- "Antioxidants/pharmacology, metabolism"
- Autophagy/drug effects
- Male
- Female
- "Aging, Premature/metabolism"
- Aged
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- "Aging/metabolism, drug effects"
- "Fibroblasts/metabolism, drug effects"
- "NF-E2-Related Factor 2/metabolism, genetics"
- "Poly-ADP-Ribose Binding Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Supplementation with nicotinamide limits accelerated aging in affected individuals with cockayne syndrome and restores antioxidant defenses.
**Authors:** Chikhaoui A, Zayoud K, Kraoua I, Bouchoucha S, Tebourbi A, Turki I, Yacoub-Youssef H
**Journal:** Aging (Albany NY) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.18632/aging.206160](https://doi.org/10.18632/aging.206160)

## Content

1. Aging (Albany NY). 2024 Nov 26;16(21):13271-13287. doi: 10.18632/aging.206160.
 Epub 2024 Nov 26.

Supplementation with nicotinamide limits accelerated aging in affected 
individuals with cockayne syndrome and restores antioxidant defenses.

Chikhaoui A(1), Zayoud K(1), Kraoua I(2), Bouchoucha S(3), Tebourbi A(4), Turki 
I(2), Yacoub-Youssef H(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biomedical Genomics and Oncogenetics, LR16IPT05, Institut 
Pasteur de Tunis, Universit&#xe9; Tunis El Manar, El Manar I, Tunis 1002, 
Tunisia.
(2)Department of Neuropediatrics, National Institute of Neurology Mongi Ben 
Hamida, Tunis 2092, Tunisia.
(3)Orthopedics Department, B&#xe9;chir Hamza Children&#x2019;s Hospital, Tunis 
2092, Tunisia.
(4)Orthopedic and Trauma Surgery Department, Mongi Slim Hospital, La Marsa 2046, 
Tunisia.

Cockayne syndrome (CS) is a segmental progeroid syndrome characterized by 
defects in the DNA excision repair pathway, predisposing to neurodegenerative 
manifestations. It is a rare genetic disorder and an interesting model for 
studying premature aging. Oxidative stress and autophagy play an important role 
in the aging process. The study of these two processes in a model of accelerated 
aging and the means to counteract them would lead to the identification of 
relevant biomarkers with therapeutic value for healthy aging. Here we 
investigated the gene expression profiles of several oxidative stress-related 
transcripts derived from CS-affected individuals and healthy elderly donors. We 
also explored the effect of nicotinamide supplementation on several genes 
related to inflammation and autophagy. Gene expression analysis revealed 
alterations in two main pathways. This involves the activation of arachidonic 
acid metabolism and the repression of the NRF2 pathway in affected individuals 
with CS. The supplementation with nicotinamide adjusted these abnormalities by 
enhancing autophagy and decreasing inflammation. Furthermore, CSA/CSB-dependent 
depletion of the mitochondrial DNA polymerase-γ catalytic subunit (POLG1) was 
restored following nicotinamide supplementation in CS-affected individuals' 
fibroblasts. This study reveals the link between oxidative stress and 
accelerated aging in affected individuals with CS and highlights new biomarkers 
of cellular senescence. However, further analyses are needed to confirm these 
results, which could not be carried out, mainly due to the unavailability of 
crucial samples of this rare disease.

DOI: 10.18632/aging.206160
PMCID: PMC11719109
PMID: 39611850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST: The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest.