---
reference_id: "PMID:3016110"
title: Early immune response in healthy and immunocompromised subjects with primary varicella-zoster virus infection.
authors:
- Arvin AM
- Koropchak CM
- Williams BR
- Grumet FC
- Foung SK
journal: J Infect Dis
year: '1986'
doi: 10.1093/infdis/154.3.422
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early immune response in healthy and immunocompromised subjects with primary varicella-zoster virus infection.
**Authors:** Arvin AM, Koropchak CM, Williams BR, Grumet FC, Foung SK
**Journal:** J Infect Dis (1986)
**DOI:** [10.1093/infdis/154.3.422](https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/154.3.422)

## Content

1. J Infect Dis. 1986 Sep;154(3):422-9. doi: 10.1093/infdis/154.3.422.

Early immune response in healthy and immunocompromised subjects with primary 
varicella-zoster virus infection.

Arvin AM, Koropchak CM, Williams BR, Grumet FC, Foung SK.

Events in pathogenesis and immunity during primary varicella-zoster virus (VZV) 
infection were examined in 64 healthy subjects and 21 immunocompromised 
patients. Activation of the interferon system and activation of circulating T 
lymphocytes were early immune responses that occurred during the incubation 
period in some healthy subjects. Elevated levels of 2-5A synthetase in 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells and detection of serum alpha interferon 
(IFN-alpha) and gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) were present in the majority of 
healthy subjects who had acute primary VZV infection. Expression of HLA-DR 
antigen occurred on circulating T lymphocytes from subjects with acute VZV 
infection. The early production of VZV-specific IgG or IgM antibodies did not 
correlate with the severity of the clinical infection, but the detection of T 
lymphocyte proliferation to VZV antigen within three days after the appearance 
of the varicella exanthem was associated with milder illness. The mean 
VZV-specific lymphocyte transformation for subjects with less than 100 
lesions/m2 was 7.5 +/- 10.43 SD compared with 1.4 +/- 1.85 SD for those with 
greater than 400 lesions/m2 (P less than .05). Only one (7.7%) of 13 
immunocompromised patients had early VZV-specific lymphocyte transformation 
compared with 19 (42%) of 45 healthy subjects (P less than .05). The rapid host 
response to primary VZV infection was associated with rapid termination of 
viremia in healthy subjects; VZV was isolated from only 11% of peripheral blood 
mononuclear cell samples cultured within 48 hr after the appearance of the 
exanthem.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/154.3.422
PMID: 3016110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]