---
reference_id: "PMID:21540075"
title: Mathematical analysis of a cholera model with public health interventions.
authors:
- Mwasa A
- Tchuenche JM
journal: Biosystems
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.biosystems.2011.04.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mathematical analysis of a cholera model with public health interventions.
**Authors:** Mwasa A, Tchuenche JM
**Journal:** Biosystems (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biosystems.2011.04.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystems.2011.04.001)

## Content

1. Biosystems. 2011 Sep;105(3):190-200. doi: 10.1016/j.biosystems.2011.04.001.
Epub  2011 Apr 20.

Mathematical analysis of a cholera model with public health interventions.

Mwasa A(1), Tchuenche JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Mathematics, Islamic University in Uganda, Mbale, Uganda. 
a.mwasa@yahoo.com

Erratum in
    Biosystems. 2018 Jan;163:83-84. doi: 10.1016/j.biosystems.2017.11.006.

Cholera, an acute gastro-intestinal infection and a waterborne disease continues 
to emerge in developing countries and remains an important global health 
challenge. We formulate a mathematical model that captures some essential 
dynamics of cholera transmission to study the impact of public health 
educational campaigns, vaccination and treatment as control strategies in 
curtailing the disease. The education-induced, vaccination-induced and 
treatment-induced reproductive numbers R(E), R(V), R(T) respectively and the 
combined reproductive number R(C) are compared with the basic reproduction 
number R(0) to assess the possible community benefits of these control measures. 
A Lyapunov functional approach is also used to analyse the stability of the 
equilibrium points. We perform sensitivity analysis on the key parameters that 
drive the disease dynamics in order to determine their relative importance to 
disease transmission and prevalence. Graphical representations are provided to 
qualitatively support the analytical results.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biosystems.2011.04.001
PMID: 21540075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]