---
reference_id: "PMID:32956154"
title: Frequency of Polyautoimmunity in Patients With Rheumatoid Arthritis and Systemic Lupus Erythematosus.
authors:
- Ordoñez-Cañizares MC
- Mena-Vázquez N
- Redondo-Rodriguez R
- Manrique-Arija S
- Jimenez-Núñez FG
- Ureña-Garnica I
- Fernández-Nebro A
journal: J Clin Rheumatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000001574
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frequency of Polyautoimmunity in Patients With Rheumatoid Arthritis and Systemic Lupus Erythematosus.
**Authors:** Ordoñez-Cañizares MC, Mena-Vázquez N, Redondo-Rodriguez R, Manrique-Arija S, Jimenez-Núñez FG, Ureña-Garnica I, Fernández-Nebro A
**Journal:** J Clin Rheumatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1097/RHU.0000000000001574](https://doi.org/10.1097/RHU.0000000000001574)

## Content

1. J Clin Rheumatol. 2022 Jan 1;28(1):e38-e43. doi: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000001574.

Frequency of Polyautoimmunity in Patients With Rheumatoid Arthritis and Systemic 
Lupus Erythematosus.

Ordoñez-Cañizares MC, Mena-Vázquez N, Redondo-Rodriguez R, Manrique-Arija S, 
Jimenez-Núñez FG, Ureña-Garnica I, Fernández-Nebro A.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the frequency of polyautoimmunity and multiple autoimmune 
syndrome in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and patients with systemic 
lupus erythematosus (SLE).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This was a cross-sectional observational study of patients 
with RA, SLE, and controls without autoimmune rheumatic disease. Cases were 
those with RA according to the 2010 American College of Rheumatology/European 
League Against Rheumatism criteria and SLE according to the 2019 American 
College of Rheumatology/European League Against Rheumatism criteria, 
consecutively recruited in a rheumatology clinic. Controls were subjects with no 
rheumatic autoimmune disease (AIDs) recruited in the same area. Patients filled 
out a questionnaire on polyautoimmunity. Variables of interest were 
polyautoimmunity (RA or SLE with other AIDs), whereas secondary variables were 
rheumatic, skin, endocrine, digestive, and neurological AIDs. Multiple 
autoimmune syndrome is defined as the presence of 3 or more AIDs and a family 
history of AIDs. Statistical analyses performed were descriptive, bivariate, and 
multivariate (dependent variable: polyautoimmunity).
RESULTS: The study population comprised 109 patients with RA, 105 patients with 
SLE, and 88 controls. Polyautoimmunity was recorded in 15 patients with RA 
(13.8%), 43 with SLE (41%), and 2 controls (2.2%). The most frequent AID in RA 
was Sjögren syndrome (53.3%), followed by Hashimoto thyroiditis and psoriasis; 
the most frequent AIDs in SLE were Sjögren syndrome (55.8%) and antiphospholipid 
syndrome (30.2%), followed by Hashimoto thyroiditis. Obesity was associated with 
polyautoimmunity in RA (odds ratio [OR], 3.362; p = 0.034). In SLE, joint damage 
(OR, 2.282; p = 0.038) and anti-RNP antibodies (OR, 5.095; p = 0.028) were risk 
factors for polyautoimmunity, and hydroxychloroquine was a protective factor 
(OR, 0.190; p = 0.004).
CONCLUSIONS: Polyautoimmunity is frequent in RA and even more frequent in SLE. 
It was associated with obesity in RA and with joint damage and anti-RNP in SLE. 
Hydroxychloroquine was a protector.

Copyright © 2020 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000001574
PMID: 32956154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.