---
reference_id: "PMID:40425952"
title: "A decade of active surveillance for low-risk papillary thyroid carcinoma in Argentina: persistent challenges in acceptance and discontinuation rates."
authors:
- Smulever A
- Pitoia F
journal: Endocrine
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s12020-025-04296-7
keywords:
- Humans
- Argentina/epidemiology
- Female
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/pathology, therapy, epidemiology, diagnostic imaging"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Thyroid Cancer, Papillary/pathology, epidemiology, therapy, diagnostic imaging"
- "Watchful Waiting/statistics & numerical data"
- Adult
- Prospective Studies
- Aged
- Young Adult
- "Patient Acceptance of Health Care/statistics & numerical data"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A decade of active surveillance for low-risk papillary thyroid carcinoma in Argentina: persistent challenges in acceptance and discontinuation rates.
**Authors:** Smulever A, Pitoia F
**Journal:** Endocrine (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12020-025-04296-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12020-025-04296-7)

## Content

1. Endocrine. 2025 Aug;89(2):497-507. doi: 10.1007/s12020-025-04296-7. Epub 2025
May 27.

A decade of active surveillance for low-risk papillary thyroid carcinoma in
Argentina: persistent challenges in acceptance and discontinuation rates.

Smulever A(1), Pitoia F(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Instituto de Investigaciones Médicas A. Lanari,
University of Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Division of Endocrinology, Hospital de Clínicas, University of Buenos Aires,
Buenos Aires, Argentina. fpitoia@intramed.net.

BACKGROUND: Active surveillance (AS) for low-risk papillary thyroid carcinoma
(PTC) has been practiced for over 30 years with encouraging results globally.
However, its adoption remains limited in certain contexts. This study aimed to
evaluate the long-term oncological outcomes of patients undergoing AS and
compare changes in the acceptance and discontinuation rates in Argentina over
the past decade.
METHODS: This prospective, observational cohort study (2014-2024) included 358
patients diagnosed with low-risk PTC measuring ≤1.5 cm across two university
hospitals. Of these, 104 patients (29%) opted for AS and were followed up with
thyroid ultrasounds and function tests annually for at least 24 months. Surgery
was recommended for tumors showing a ≥3 mm increase in size, newly detected
foci, or metastatic involvement. Outcomes were analyzed in two distinct phases:
2014-2019 (A) and 2020-2024 (B).
RESULTS: Of the 104 patients under AS, 10.6% developed tumor growth of ≥3 mm,
and 7.6% developed new PTC foci. The 5- and 10-year cumulative incidence of
tumor growth was 7 and 8%, respectively. Lymph node metastases occurred in 0.9%.
AS acceptance rates remained stable between Phase A (25%) and Phase B (30%)
(p = 0.82). AS discontinuation rates were also similar: 19.5% in A and 12.6% in
B (p = 0.63). Among patients discontinuing AS due to tumor progression, 31%
underwent surgery. Anxiety was the main reason for surgery in 66% of cases in
Phase A and 40% in Phase B. Lobectomies increased from 1.5% (A) to 9% (B,
p = 0.8). No evidence of disease was achieved in 84% of cases at the end of
follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite persistently low acceptance and adherence to AS, the
long-term outcomes observed in this prospective study reinforce this approach as
a feasible initial management option for low-risk PTC. These findings underscore
the need for further efforts to improve the acceptance of AS among eligible
patients.

© 2025. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12020-025-04296-7
PMID: 40425952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Compliance with ethical standards. Ethics
approval: This study was performed in line with the principles of the
Declaration of Helsinki. Approval was granted by the Ethics Committee of
University of Buenos Aires. Consent of participate: Informed consent was
obtained from all individual participants included in the study. Conflict of
interest: The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
