---
reference_id: "PMID:37781373"
title: The involvement of NETs in ANCA-associated vasculitis.
authors:
- Shiratori-Aso S
- Nakazawa D
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1261151
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The involvement of NETs in ANCA-associated vasculitis.
**Authors:** Shiratori-Aso S, Nakazawa D
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2023.1261151](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1261151)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2023 Sep 14;14:1261151. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1261151. 
eCollection 2023.

The involvement of NETs in ANCA-associated vasculitis.

Shiratori-Aso S(1), Nakazawa D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Endocrinology, and Nephrology, Faculty of 
Medicine and Graduate School of Medicine, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.

Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic autoantibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitis (AAV) is a 
serious autoimmune disease that is characterized by vascular necrosis. The 
pathogenesis of AAV includes ANCA-mediated neutrophil activation, subsequent 
release of inflammatory cytokines and reactive oxygen species (ROS), and 
formation of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs). Excessive NETs could 
participate not only in ANCA-mediated vascular injury but also in the production 
of ANCAs per se as autoantigens. Thus, a vicious cycle of NET formation and ANCA 
production is critical for AAV pathogenesis. Elucidating the molecular signaling 
pathways in aberrant neutrophil activation and NETs clearance systems will allow 
specific therapeutics to regulate these pathways. Currently, standard therapy 
with high doses of glucocorticoids and immunosuppressants has improved outcomes 
in patients with AAV. However, AAV frequently develops in elderly people, and 
adverse effects such as severe infections in the standard regimens might 
contribute to the mortality. Mechanistically, cytokines or complement factors 
activate and prime neutrophils for ANCA-binding; thus, C5a receptor blocker has 
garnered attention as potential replacement for glucocorticoids in clinical 
settings. Recent studies have demonstrated that receptor-interacting protein 
kinases (RIPK3) and cyclophilin D (CypD), which regulate cell necrosis, may be 
involved in ANCA-induced NETs formation. Meanwhile, targeting NETs clearance, 
including the addition of deoxyribonuclease I (DNase I) and macrophage 
engulfment, may improve vasculitis. In this review, we focus on the pathogenesis 
of NETs and discuss potential targeted therapies for AAV based on recent 
experimental evidence.

Copyright © 2023 Shiratori-Aso and Nakazawa.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1261151
PMCID: PMC10539550
PMID: 37781373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.