---
reference_id: "PMID:28085124"
title: "Remnant preservation in anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction versus standard techniques: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials."
authors:
- Ma T
- Zeng C
- Pan J
- Zhao C
- Fang H
- Cai D
journal: J Sports Med Phys Fitness
year: '2017'
doi: 10.23736/S0022-4707.16.06832-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Remnant preservation in anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction versus standard techniques: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
**Authors:** Ma T, Zeng C, Pan J, Zhao C, Fang H, Cai D
**Journal:** J Sports Med Phys Fitness (2017)
**DOI:** [10.23736/S0022-4707.16.06832-8](https://doi.org/10.23736/S0022-4707.16.06832-8)

## Content

1. J Sports Med Phys Fitness. 2017 Jul-Aug;57(7-8):1014-1022. doi: 
10.23736/S0022-4707.16.06832-8. Epub 2017 Jan 13.

Remnant preservation in anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction versus 
standard techniques: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.

Ma T(1), Zeng C(1), Pan J(1), Zhao C(1), Fang H(1), Cai D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedics, The Third Affiliated Hospital, Southern Medical 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(2)Department of Orthopedics, The Third Affiliated Hospital, Southern Medical 
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China - daozhang@medmail.com.

INTRODUCTION: Preserving the remnant during anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) 
reconstruction is considered beneficial for graft healing, but it might increase 
the technical difficulties and complications. This study was to compare outcomes 
of using the technique of remnant preservation during the ACL reconstruction 
versus the standard procedure with the debridement of remnant.
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION: We searched PubMed and EMBASE and the Cochrane Library for 
randomized controlled trials comparing the outcomes of ACL reconstruction both 
with and without remnant preservation. The risk of bias was assessed in 
accordance with the Cochrane Collaboration's risk of bias tool. Meta-analysis 
was performed to compare results.
EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS: Six randomized controlled trials with 346 patients were 
included. Statistically signiﬁcant differences in favor of using technique of 
remnant preservation were observed for Lysholm Score, arthrometer measurements, 
and tibial tunnel enlargement. There was no signiﬁcant difference between 
remnant technique of preservation and the standard procedure with respect to the 
IKDC (International Knee Documentation Committee) grade, IKDC score, Lachman 
Test, Pivot-shift Test, range of motion (ROM), and the incidence of the cyclops 
lesion.
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials showed that ACL 
reconstruction with technique of remnant preservation cannot provide superior 
clinical outcomes compared with the standard procedure.

DOI: 10.23736/S0022-4707.16.06832-8
PMID: 28085124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]