---
reference_id: "PMID:37355912"
title: Clinical and Genetic Spectrum of Myotonia Congenita in Turkish Children.
authors:
- Öz Tunçer G
- Sanri A
- Aydin S
- Hergüner ÖM
- Özgün N
- Kömür M
- İçağasioğlu DF
- Toker RT
- Yilmaz S
- Arslan EA
- Güngör M
- Kutluk G
- Erol İ
- Mert GG
- Polat BG
- Aksoy A
journal: J Neuromuscul Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3233/JND-230046
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- Child
- Adolescent
- Aged
- Infant
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Myotonia Congenita/genetics
- Retrospective Studies
- Chloride Channels/genetics
- Mutation
- "Muscle, Skeletal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and Genetic Spectrum of Myotonia Congenita in Turkish Children.
**Authors:** Öz Tunçer G, Sanri A, Aydin S, Hergüner ÖM, Özgün N, Kömür M, İçağasioğlu DF, Toker RT, Yilmaz S, Arslan EA, Güngör M, Kutluk G, Erol İ, Mert GG, Polat BG, Aksoy A
**Journal:** J Neuromuscul Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JND-230046](https://doi.org/10.3233/JND-230046)

## Content

1. J Neuromuscul Dis. 2023;10(5):915-924. doi: 10.3233/JND-230046.

Clinical and Genetic Spectrum of Myotonia Congenita in Turkish Children.

Öz Tunçer G(1), Sanri A(2), Aydin S(1), Hergüner ÖM(3), Özgün N(4), Kömür M(5), 
İçağasioğlu DF(6), Toker RT(7), Yilmaz S(8), Arslan EA(9), Güngör M(10), Kutluk 
G(11), Erol İ(12), Mert GG(3), Polat BG(5), Aksoy A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of 
Medicine, Ondokuz Mayıs University, Samsun, Türkiye.
(2)Department of Pediatric Genetics, University of Health Sciences, Samsun 
Training and Research Hospital, Samsun, Türkiye.
(3)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of 
Medicine, Çukurova University, Adana, Türkiye.
(4)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of 
Medicine, Artuklu University, Mardin, Türkiye.
(5)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of 
Medicine, Mersin University, Mersin, Türkiye.
(6)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of 
Medicine, Bezmialem Vakıf University, İstanbul, Türkiye.
(7)Department of Pediatric Neurology, University of Health Sciences, Bursa City 
Hospital, Bursa, Türkiye.
(8)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of 
Medicine, Ege University, İzmir, Türkiye.
(9)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of 
Medicine, Karadeniz Technical University, Trabzon, Türkiye.
(10)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of 
Medicine, Kocaeli University, Kocaeli, Türkiye.
(11)Department of Pediatric Neurolgy, University of Health Sciences, Antalya 
Training and Research Hospital, Antalya, Türkiye.
(12)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of 
Medicine, Başkent University, Adana, Türkiye.

BACKGROUND: Myotonia congenita is the most common form of nondystrophic myotonia 
and is caused by Mendelian inherited mutations in the CLCN1 gene encoding the 
voltage-gated chloride channel of skeletal muscle.
OBJECTIVE: The study aimed to describe the clinical and genetic spectrum of 
Myotonia congenita in a large pediatric cohort.
METHODS: Demographic, genetic, and clinical data of the patients aged under 18 
years at time of first clinical attendance from 11 centers in different 
geographical regions of Türkiye were retrospectively investigated.
RESULTS: Fifty-four patients (mean age:15.2 years (±5.5), 76% males, with 85% 
Becker, 15% Thomsen form) from 40 families were included. Consanguineous 
marriage rate was 67%. 70.5% of patients had a family member with Myotonia 
congenita. The mean age of disease onset was 5.7 (±4.9) years. Overall 23 
different mutations (2/23 were novel) were detected in 52 patients, and large 
exon deletions were identified in two siblings. Thomsen and Becker forms were 
observed concomitantly in one family. Carbamazepine (46.3%), mexiletine (27.8%), 
phenytoin (9.3%) were preferred for treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: The clinical and genetic heterogeneity, as well as the limited 
response to current treatment options, constitutes an ongoing challenge. In our 
cohort, recessive Myotonia congenita was more frequent and novel mutations will 
contribute to the literature.

DOI: 10.3233/JND-230046
PMCID: PMC10578252
PMID: 37355912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors has any conflict of interest 
to disclose.