---
reference_id: "PMID:36269457"
title: Management and Treatment of Non-small Cell Lung Cancer with MET Alteration and Mechanisms of Resistance.
authors:
- Moiseenko F
- Bogdanov A
- Egorenkov V
- Volkov N
- Moiseyenko V
journal: Curr Treat Options Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s11864-022-01019-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management and Treatment of Non-small Cell Lung Cancer with MET Alteration and Mechanisms of Resistance.
**Authors:** Moiseenko F, Bogdanov A, Egorenkov V, Volkov N, Moiseyenko V
**Journal:** Curr Treat Options Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11864-022-01019-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11864-022-01019-2)

## Content

1. Curr Treat Options Oncol. 2022 Dec;23(12):1664-1698. doi: 
10.1007/s11864-022-01019-2. Epub 2022 Oct 21.

Management and Treatment of Non-small Cell Lung Cancer with MET Alteration and 
Mechanisms of Resistance.

Moiseenko F(1)(2)(3), Bogdanov A(4), Egorenkov V(4), Volkov N(4), Moiseyenko 
V(4).

Author information:
(1)Saint-Petersburg City Cancer Center, Leningradskay 68a, Lit.A, Pesochny, St. 
Petersburg, 197758, Russia. moiseenkofv@gmail.com.
(2)N.N. Petrov National Medical Research Center of Oncology, Ministry of Public 
Health of the Russian Federation, 68, Leningradskaya st., Pesochny, St. 
Petersburg, 197758, Russia. moiseenkofv@gmail.com.
(3)State Budget Institution of Higher Education "North-Western State Medical 
University named after I.I Mechnikov" under the Ministry of Public Health of the 
Russian Federation, 41, Kirochnaya str, Saint Petersburg, 191015, Russia. 
moiseenkofv@gmail.com.
(4)Saint-Petersburg City Cancer Center, Leningradskay 68a, Lit.A, Pesochny, St. 
Petersburg, 197758, Russia.

MET-driven tumors are a heterogenous group of non-small cell lung cancers 
(NSCLC) with activating mutations. Pathologic activation of MET can be achieved 
with increased number of gene copies overexpression, or decreased protein 
degradation through several mechanisms, including mutations, amplifications, or 
fusions. Besides its role as primary driver, MET activation might also mediate 
resistance to kinase inhibitors in NSCLC with various other actionable 
alterations. While checkpoint inhibitors have modest efficacy in MET-driven 
tumors, several approaches of targeted blockade are available. Among them the 
most promising are small tyrosine kinase inhibitors, antibody-drug conjugates, 
and bispecific antibodies. Unfortunately, resistance is virtually inevitable. 
Resistance to small kinase inhibitors might be mediated by kinase domain 
mutations or activation of shunting cascades. Various resistance mechanisms 
might be present in one patient, making it overcoming an unresolved problem.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11864-022-01019-2
PMID: 36269457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]