---
reference_id: "PMID:31529350"
title: "ALG12-CDG: novel glycophenotype insights endorse the molecular defect."
authors:
- Sturiale L
- Bianca S
- Garozzo D
- Terracciano A
- Agolini E
- Messina A
- Palmigiano A
- Esposito F
- Barone C
- Novelli A
- Fiumara A
- Jaeken J
- Barone R
journal: Glycoconj J
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s10719-019-09890-2
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/blood, genetics, pathology"
- "Endoplasmic Reticulum/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Glycoproteins/blood
- Glycosylation
- Humans
- "IgG Deficiency/blood, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Immunoglobulins/blood, deficiency, genetics"
- Infant
- Male
- "Mannosyltransferases/blood, genetics"
- "Oligosaccharides/genetics, metabolism"
- Polysaccharides/genetics
- "Spectrometry, Mass, Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption-Ionization"
- "Transferrin/genetics, metabolism"
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ALG12-CDG: novel glycophenotype insights endorse the molecular defect.
**Authors:** Sturiale L, Bianca S, Garozzo D, Terracciano A, Agolini E, Messina A, Palmigiano A, Esposito F, Barone C, Novelli A, Fiumara A, Jaeken J, Barone R
**Journal:** Glycoconj J (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10719-019-09890-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10719-019-09890-2)

## Content

1. Glycoconj J. 2019 Dec;36(6):461-472. doi: 10.1007/s10719-019-09890-2. Epub
2019  Sep 16.

ALG12-CDG: novel glycophenotype insights endorse the molecular defect.

Sturiale L(1), Bianca S(2), Garozzo D(1), Terracciano A(3), Agolini E(3), 
Messina A(1), Palmigiano A(1), Esposito F(1), Barone C(2), Novelli A(3), Fiumara 
A(4), Jaeken J(5), Barone R(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)CNR, Institute for Polymers, Composites and Biomaterials, IPCB, Catania, 
Italy.
(2)Medical Genetics, Referral Centre for Rare Genetic Diseases, ARNAS Garibaldi, 
Catania, Italy.
(3)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, 
Rome, Italy.
(4)Referral Centre for Inherited Metabolic Diseases Policlinico, University of 
Catania, Catania, Italy.
(5)Center for Metabolic Diseases, UZ and KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(6)CNR, Institute for Polymers, Composites and Biomaterials, IPCB, Catania, 
Italy. rbarone@unict.it.
(7)Child Neurology and Psychiatry, Department of Clinical and Experimental 
Medicine, University of Catania, Catania, Italy. rbarone@unict.it.

Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) are genetic diseases characterized 
by deficient synthesis (CDG type I) and/or abnormal processing (CDG type II) of 
glycan moieties linked to protein and lipids. The impact of the molecular 
defects on protein glycosylation and in turn on the clinical phenotypes of 
patients with CDG is not yet understood. ALG12-CDG is due to deficiency of ALG12 
α1,6-mannosyltransferase that adds the eighth mannose residue on the 
dolichol-PP-oligosaccharide precursor in the endoplasmic reticulum. ALG12-CDG is 
a severe multisystem disease associated with low to deficient serum 
immunoglobulins and recurrent infections. We thoroughly investigated the 
glycophenotype in a patient with novel ALG12 variants and immunodeficiency. We 
analyzed serum native transferrin, as first line test for CDG and we profiled 
serum IgG and total serum N-glycans by a combination of consolidated (N-glycan 
analysis by MALDI MS) and innovative mass spectrometry-based protocols, such as 
GlycoWorks RapiFluor N-glycan analysis coupled with LC-ESI MS. Intact serum 
transferrin showed, as expected for a CDG type I defect, underoccupancy of 
N-glycosylation sites. Surprisingly, total serum proteins and IgG N-glycans 
showed some specific changes, consisting in accumulating amounts of definite 
high-mannose and hybrid structures. As a whole, ALG12-CDG behaves as a dual CDG 
(CDG-I and II defects) and it is associated with distinct, abnormal 
glycosylation of total serum and IgG N-glycans. Glycan profiling of target 
glycoproteins may endorse the molecular defect unraveling the complex clinical 
phenotype of CDG patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s10719-019-09890-2
PMID: 31529350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]