---
reference_id: "PMID:30462537"
title: "Modulating GLUT1 expression in retinal pigment epithelium decreases glucose levels in the retina: impact on photoreceptors and Müller glial cells."
authors:
- Swarup A
- Samuels IS
- Bell BA
- Han JYS
- Du J
- Massenzio E
- Abel ED
- Boesze-Battaglia K
- Peachey NS
- Philp NJ
journal: Am J Physiol Cell Physiol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1152/ajpcell.00410.2018
keywords:
- Animals
- "Ependymoglial Cells/chemistry, metabolism"
- Gene Expression
- Glucose/metabolism
- "Glucose Transporter Type 1/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Photoreceptor Cells/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Retinal Pigment Epithelium/chemistry, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modulating GLUT1 expression in retinal pigment epithelium decreases glucose levels in the retina: impact on photoreceptors and Müller glial cells.
**Authors:** Swarup A, Samuels IS, Bell BA, Han JYS, Du J, Massenzio E, Abel ED, Boesze-Battaglia K, Peachey NS, Philp NJ
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Cell Physiol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpcell.00410.2018](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpcell.00410.2018)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2019 Jan 1;316(1):C121-C133. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00410.2018. Epub 2018 Nov 21.

Modulating GLUT1 expression in retinal pigment epithelium decreases glucose
levels in the retina: impact on photoreceptors and Müller glial cells.

Swarup A(1), Samuels IS(2)(3), Bell BA(4), Han JYS(1), Du J(5), Massenzio E(1),
Abel ED(6)(7), Boesze-Battaglia K(8), Peachey NS(2)(3)(9), Philp NJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology, Thomas Jefferson
University , Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(2)Louis Stokes Cleveland VA Medical Center , Cleveland, Ohio.
(3)Cole Eye Institute, Cleveland Clinic , Cleveland, Ohio.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Department of Biochemistry, West Virginia
University Eye Institute , Morgantown, West Virginia.
(6)Fraternal Order of Eagles Diabetes Research Center, University of Iowa , Iowa
City, Iowa.
(7)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Carver College of Medicine,
University of Iowa , Iowa City, Iowa.
(8)Department of Biochemistry, Penn Dental Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(9)Department of Ophthalmology, Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine of
Case Western Reserve University , Cleveland, Ohio.

The retina is one of the most metabolically active tissues in the body and
utilizes glucose to produce energy and intermediates required for daily renewal
of photoreceptor cell outer segments. Glucose transporter 1 (GLUT1) facilitates
glucose transport across outer blood retinal barrier (BRB) formed by the retinal
pigment epithelium (RPE) and the inner BRB formed by the endothelium. We used
conditional knockout mice to study the impact of reducing glucose transport
across the RPE on photoreceptor and Müller glial cells. Transgenic mice
expressing Cre recombinase under control of the Bestrophin1 ( Best1) promoter
were bred with Glut1flox/flox mice to generate Tg-Best1-Cre:Glut1flox/flox mice
( RPEΔGlut1). The RPEΔGlut1 mice displayed a mosaic pattern of Cre expression
within the RPE that allowed us to analyze mice with ~50% ( RPEΔGlut1m)
recombination and mice with >70% ( RPEΔGlut1h) recombination separately.
Deletion of GLUT1 from the RPE did not affect its carrier or barrier functions,
indicating that the RPE utilizes other substrates to support its metabolic needs
thereby sparing glucose for the outer retina. RPEΔGlut1m mice had normal retinal
morphology, function, and no cell death; however, where GLUT1 was absent from a
span of RPE greater than 100 µm, there was shortening of the photoreceptor cell
outer segments. RPEΔGlut1h mice showed outer segment shortening, cell death of
photoreceptors, and activation of Müller glial cells. The severe phenotype seen
in RPEΔGlut1h mice indicates that glucose transport via the GLUT1 transporter in
the RPE is required to meet the anabolic and catabolic requirements of
photoreceptors and maintain Müller glial cells in a quiescent state.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpcell.00410.2018
PMCID: PMC6383144
PMID: 30462537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
