---
reference_id: "PMID:32720730"
title: The association between asthma and anxiety in elementary school students in Japan.
authors:
- Kimura M
- Ikeda A
- Suzuki Y
- Maruyama K
- Wada H
- Tanigawa T
journal: Pediatr Pulmonol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/ppul.24986
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The association between asthma and anxiety in elementary school students in Japan.
**Authors:** Kimura M, Ikeda A, Suzuki Y, Maruyama K, Wada H, Tanigawa T
**Journal:** Pediatr Pulmonol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ppul.24986](https://doi.org/10.1002/ppul.24986)

## Content

1. Pediatr Pulmonol. 2020 Oct;55(10):2603-2609. doi: 10.1002/ppul.24986. Epub
2020  Aug 17.

The association between asthma and anxiety in elementary school students in 
Japan.

Kimura M(1), Ikeda A(1), Suzuki Y(1), Maruyama K(2), Wada H(1), Tanigawa T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health, Graduate School of Medicine, Juntendo 
University, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Bioscience, Graduate School of Agriculture, Ehime University, 
Matsuyama, Ehime, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Studies on the association between asthma and anxiety in Asian 
children are limited. Therefore, we aimed to evaluate the association between 
asthma and anxiety among Japanese elementary school students.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study of the association between asthma and anxiety 
in primary school children in Matsuyama City was conducted in 2014. The 
questionnaires included inquiries on asthma, anxiety, and other demographic 
variables. After excluding missing values, 17 752 (51.5% male) children were 
included in the analysis. The presence of asthma (yes/no) was answered by 
guardians. A score of four or more on the emotional symptom subscale of the 
strengths and difficulties questionnaire was considered as having anxiety. A 
Rohrer index score of 145 or more was considered as overweight. We estimated the 
prevalence ratio (PR) of having anxiety in relation to the presence of asthma 
based on the Poisson regression model.
RESULTS: The multivariate PR (95% confidence interval) of having anxiety in 
asthmatic boys compared with non-asthmatic boys was 1.56 (1.21-1.99). The 
association was more evident in older than younger boys, where PR = 1.32 
(0.93-1.88) for younger versus 1.87(1.32-2.64) for older boys (P for 
interaction = .08); and in non-overweight boys than overweight, where PR = 1.64 
(1.27-2.13) and 0.94 (0.41-2.19) (P for interaction = .22), respectively. 
Similar associations were not found for girls.
CONCLUSION: Asthma was significantly associated with anxiety in boys, 
particularly in older boys.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ppul.24986
PMID: 32720730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]