---
reference_id: "PMID:32234870"
title: "New Frontiers in Therapy of Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumors in Patients With Neurofibromatosis Type 1: Latest Evidence and Clinical Implications."
authors:
- Marjanska A
- Galazka P
- Wysocki M
- Styczynski J
journal: Anticancer Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.21873/anticanres.14136
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New Frontiers in Therapy of Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumors in Patients With Neurofibromatosis Type 1: Latest Evidence and Clinical Implications.
**Authors:** Marjanska A, Galazka P, Wysocki M, Styczynski J
**Journal:** Anticancer Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.21873/anticanres.14136](https://doi.org/10.21873/anticanres.14136)

## Content

1. Anticancer Res. 2020 Apr;40(4):1817-1831. doi: 10.21873/anticanres.14136.

New Frontiers in Therapy of Peripheral Nerve Sheath Tumors in Patients With 
Neurofibromatosis Type 1: Latest Evidence and Clinical Implications.

Marjanska A(1), Galazka P(2), Wysocki M(3), Styczynski J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Nicolaus Copernicus 
University Torun, Jurasz University Hospital, Collegium Medicum, Bydgoszcz, 
Poland agata.marjanska@wp.pl.
(2)Department of General and Oncological Pediatric Surgery, Nicolaus Copernicus 
University Torun, Jurasz University Hospital, Collegium Medicum, Bydgoszcz, 
Poland.
(3)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Nicolaus Copernicus 
University Torun, Jurasz University Hospital, Collegium Medicum, Bydgoszcz, 
Poland.

Almost all individuals with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) develop peripheral 
nerve sheath tumors (PNSTs), mainly benign neurofibromas, however about 10% of 
PNSTs will undergo transformation to malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors 
(MPNSTs). Surgical treatment of PNSTs has traditionally been regarded as a 
standard approach. The availability of new agents that target specific molecular 
pathways involved in the pathogenesis of PNST has led to a number of clinical 
trials, which resulted in increased chances for better survival and quality of 
life. This review presents the latest evidence and clinical implications for new 
therapies of PNSTs in patients with NF1 emphasizing the potential benefit from 
the use of Ras/MAPK pathway inhibitors, immunotherapy, chemotherapy or radiation 
therapy. We present evaluation of current knowledge on available treatment 
modalities.

Copyright© 2020, International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. George J. 
Delinasios), All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.21873/anticanres.14136
PMID: 32234870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]