---
reference_id: "PMID:38286873"
title: Mitochondrial damage and impaired mitophagy contribute to disease progression in SCA6.
authors:
- Leung TCS
- Fields E
- Rana N
- Shen RYL
- Bernstein AE
- Cook AA
- Phillips DE
- Watt AJ
journal: Acta Neuropathol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00401-023-02680-z
keywords:
- Mice
- Animals
- Humans
- Mitophagy
- Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics
- Cerebellum
- Disease Progression
- Mitochondrial Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial damage and impaired mitophagy contribute to disease progression in SCA6.
**Authors:** Leung TCS, Fields E, Rana N, Shen RYL, Bernstein AE, Cook AA, Phillips DE, Watt AJ
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00401-023-02680-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00401-023-02680-z)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol. 2024 Jan 29;147(1):26. doi: 10.1007/s00401-023-02680-z.

Mitochondrial damage and impaired mitophagy contribute to disease progression in 
SCA6.

Leung TCS(1), Fields E(1)(2), Rana N(1), Shen RYL(1), Bernstein AE(1), Cook 
AA(1), Phillips DE(1), Watt AJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(2)Integrated Program in Neuroscience, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
(3)Department of Biology, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada. 
alanna.watt@mcgill.ca.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 (SCA6) is a neurodegenerative disease that 
manifests in midlife and progressively worsens with age. SCA6 is rare, and many 
patients are not diagnosed until long after disease onset. Whether 
disease-causing cellular alterations differ at different disease stages is 
currently unknown, but it is important to answer this question in order to 
identify appropriate therapeutic targets across disease duration. We used 
transcriptomics to identify changes in gene expression at disease onset in a 
well-established mouse model of SCA6 that recapitulates key disease features. We 
observed both up- and down-regulated genes with the major down-regulated gene 
ontology terms suggesting mitochondrial dysfunction. We explored mitochondrial 
function and structure and observed that changes in mitochondrial structure 
preceded changes in function, and that mitochondrial function was not 
significantly altered at disease onset but was impaired later during disease 
progression. We also detected elevated oxidative stress in cells at the same 
disease stage. In addition, we observed impairment in mitophagy that exacerbates 
mitochondrial dysfunction at late disease stages. In post-mortem SCA6 patient 
cerebellar tissue, we observed metabolic changes that are consistent with 
mitochondrial impairments, supporting our results from animal models being 
translatable to human disease. Our study reveals that mitochondrial dysfunction 
and impaired mitochondrial degradation likely contribute to disease progression 
in SCA6 and suggests that these could be promising targets for therapeutic 
interventions in particular for patients diagnosed after disease onset.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-023-02680-z
PMCID: PMC10824820
PMID: 38286873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interests.