---
reference_id: "PMID:36900678"
title: A Summary of Current Guidelines and Future Directions for Medical Management and Monitoring of Patients with Cystinuria.
authors:
- Azer SM
- Goldfarb DS
journal: Healthcare (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/healthcare11050674
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Summary of Current Guidelines and Future Directions for Medical Management and Monitoring of Patients with Cystinuria.
**Authors:** Azer SM, Goldfarb DS
**Journal:** Healthcare (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/healthcare11050674](https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare11050674)

## Content

1. Healthcare (Basel). 2023 Feb 24;11(5):674. doi: 10.3390/healthcare11050674.

A Summary of Current Guidelines and Future Directions for Medical Management and
Monitoring of Patients with Cystinuria.

Azer SM(1), Goldfarb DS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, NYU Grossman School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016,
USA.
(2)NYU Langone Medical Center, Nephrology Section, New York Harbor VA Healthcare
System, New York, NY 10010, USA.

Cystinuria is the most common genetic cause of recurrent kidney stones. As the
result of a genetic defect in proximal tubular reabsorption of filtered cystine,
increased urine levels of the poorly soluble amino acid result in recurrent
cystine nephrolithiasis. Recurrent cystine stones not only adversely affect the
quality of patients suffering from cystinuria but also may result in chronic
kidney disease (CKD) from recurrent renal injury. Thus, the mainstay of medical
management revolves around prevention of stones. Recently published consensus
statements on guidelines for managing cystinuria were released from both the
United States and Europe. The purpose of this review is to summarize guidelines
for medical management of patients with cystinuria, to provide new insight into
the utility and clinical significance of cystine capacity-an assay for
monitoring cystinuria, and to discuss future directions for research on
treatment of cystinuria. We discuss future directions, including the potential
use of cystine mimetics, gene therapy, V2-receptor blockers, and SGLT2
inhibitors, topics which have not appeared in more recent reviews. It is notable
that in the absence of randomized, controlled trials, the recommendations cited
here and in the guidelines are based on our best understanding of the disorder's
pathophysiology, observational studies, and clinical experience.

DOI: 10.3390/healthcare11050674
PMCID: PMC10000469
PMID: 36900678

Conflict of interest statement: No conflict of interest exists regarding this
review, but Goldfarb has the following disclosures: Consultant, Allena, Alnylam,
Cymabay, Dicerna, Sumitovant, Synlogic; Research: Dicerna, Travere; Owner,
Moonstone Nutrition.
