---
reference_id: "PMID:16722536"
title: "Mevalonate kinase deficiencies: from mevalonic aciduria to hyperimmunoglobulinemia D syndrome."
authors:
- Haas D
- Hoffmann GF
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-1-13
keywords:
- Humans
- Hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA Reductase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Hypergammaglobulinemia/drug therapy, metabolism, pathology"
- Immunoglobulin D/metabolism
- "Mevalonic Acid/metabolism, urine"
- "Phosphotransferases (Alcohol Group Acceptor)/deficiency, genetics"
- Simvastatin/therapeutic use
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mevalonate kinase deficiencies: from mevalonic aciduria to hyperimmunoglobulinemia D syndrome.
**Authors:** Haas D, Hoffmann GF
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-1-13](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-1-13)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2006 Apr 26;1:13. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-1-13.

Mevalonate kinase deficiencies: from mevalonic aciduria to 
hyperimmunoglobulinemia D syndrome.

Haas D(1), Hoffmann GF.

Author information:
(1)Department of General Pediatrics, University Children's Hospital Heidelberg, 
Im Neuenheimer Feld 150, D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany. 
dorothea.haas@med.uni-heidelberg.de

Mevalonic aciduria (MVA) and hyperimmunoglobulinemia D syndrome (HIDS) represent 
the two ends of a clinical spectrum of disease caused by deficiency of 
mevalonate kinase (MVK), the first committed enzyme of cholesterol biosynthesis. 
At least 30 patients with MVA and 180 patients with HIDS have been reported 
worldwide. MVA is characterized by psychomotor retardation, failure to thrive, 
progressive cerebellar ataxia, dysmorphic features, progressive visual 
impairment and recurrent febrile crises. The febrile episodes are commonly 
accompanied by hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, abdominal symptoms, 
arthralgia and skin rashes. Life expectancy is often compromised. In HIDS, only 
febrile attacks are present, but a subgroup of patients may also develop 
neurological abnormalities of varying degree such as mental retardation, ataxia, 
ocular symptoms and epilepsy. A reduced activity of MVK and pathogenic mutations 
in the MVK gene have been demonstrated as the common genetic basis in both 
disorders. In MVA, the diagnosis is established by detection of highly elevated 
levels of mevalonic acid excreted in urine. Increased levels of immunoglobulin D 
(IgD) and, in most patients of immunoglobulin A (IgA), in combination with 
enhanced excretion of mevalonic acid provide strong evidence for HIDS. The 
diagnosis is confirmed by low activity of mevalonate kinase or by demonstration 
of disease-causing mutations. Genetic counseling should be offered to families 
at risk. There is no established successful treatment for MVA. Simvastatin, an 
inhibitor of HMG-CoA reductase, and anakinra have been shown to have beneficial 
effect in HIDS.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-1-13
PMCID: PMC1475558
PMID: 16722536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]