---
reference_id: "PMID:35115294"
title: Parenteral Methotrexate Is Efficient in the Treatment of Azathioprine Refractory Crohn's Disease.
authors:
- Gökbulut V
- Özin Y
- Kalkan İH
- Arı D
- Yüksel M
- Kılıç ZMY
- Kayaçetin E
journal: Turk J Gastroenterol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.5152/tjg.2022.21459
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Parenteral Methotrexate Is Efficient in the Treatment of Azathioprine Refractory Crohn's Disease.
**Authors:** Gökbulut V, Özin Y, Kalkan İH, Arı D, Yüksel M, Kılıç ZMY, Kayaçetin E
**Journal:** Turk J Gastroenterol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.5152/tjg.2022.21459](https://doi.org/10.5152/tjg.2022.21459)

## Content

1. Turk J Gastroenterol. 2022 Feb;33(2):111-118. doi: 10.5152/tjg.2022.21459.

Parenteral Methotrexate Is Efficient in the Treatment of Azathioprine Refractory 
Crohn's Disease.

Gökbulut V(1), Özin Y(1), Kalkan İH(2), Arı D(1), Yüksel M(1), Kılıç ZMY(1), 
Kayaçetin E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Ankara City Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, TOBB University of Economics and Technology 
Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: There is limited data in the literature analyzing the efficacy of 
methotrexate in Crohn's disease used after thiopurine analogs. We aimed in our 
study to show the efficacy of methotrexate in Crohn's disease patients who 
failed to respond to thiopurine treatment.
METHODS: The study included 29 azathioprine refractory patients with Crohn's 
disease. Intramuscular methotrexate (25 mg/week) in the induction of remission 
and intramuscular methotrexate (15 mg/week) in 29 CD patients with a median 
follow-up time of 13 months was performed. In 15 (51.7%) patients, methotrexate 
was used in combination with anti-Tumour necrosis factor (TNF) (combination 
group), while it was used in 14 (48.3%) patients in monotherapy (monotherapy 
group).
RESULTS: The mean Harvey-Bradshaw index score significantly decreased in the 
follow-up period (Wk0 = 7.6, last visit = 4.5, P < .001). Remission and response 
rates at week 12 were 75.9% and 79.3%, respectively. Maintenance of remission 
(77.8% vs 37.5%, respectively, P = .1) and response rates (77.8% vs 50%, 
respectively, P = .3) due to last visit examination were numerically higher in 
combination group but they were not statistically significant. The cumulative 
probability of remission maintenance in patients with methotrexate therapy was 
72.7%, 33.1%, and 22.0% at 1, 2 ,and 4 years after starting methotrexate, 
respectively.
CONCLUSION: Our results show that parenteral use of methotrexate is efficacious 
in inducing and maintaining remission as a step-up agent in azathioprine 
refractory Crohn's disease patients.

DOI: 10.5152/tjg.2022.21459
PMCID: PMC9128578
PMID: 35115294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors have no 
conflict of interest to declare.