---
reference_id: "PMID:38683245"
title: "Two case reports of a novel missense mutation in the PNPLA6 gene in two siblings with chorioretinal dystrophy, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, and cerebellar ataxia."
authors:
- Liampas A
- Nicolaou P
- Votsi C
- Georghiou A
- Christodoulou K
- Tanteles GA
- Pantzaris M
journal: Mol Biol Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s11033-024-09515-4
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Acyltransferases/genetics
- Cerebellar Ataxia/genetics
- Hypogonadism/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Pedigree
- Phospholipases/genetics
- Retinal Dystrophies/genetics
- Siblings
- Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two case reports of a novel missense mutation in the PNPLA6 gene in two siblings with chorioretinal dystrophy, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, and cerebellar ataxia.
**Authors:** Liampas A, Nicolaou P, Votsi C, Georghiou A, Christodoulou K, Tanteles GA, Pantzaris M
**Journal:** Mol Biol Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11033-024-09515-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11033-024-09515-4)

## Content

1. Mol Biol Rep. 2024 Apr 29;51(1):590. doi: 10.1007/s11033-024-09515-4.

Two case reports of a novel missense mutation in the PNPLA6 gene in two siblings 
with chorioretinal dystrophy, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, and cerebellar 
ataxia.

Liampas A(1), Nicolaou P(2), Votsi C(2), Georghiou A(2), Christodoulou K(2), 
Tanteles GA(3), Pantzaris M(4).

Author information:
(1)Neuroimmunology Department, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, 
Nicosia, Cyprus. liampasand@gmail.com.
(2)Neurogenetics Department, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, 
Nicosia, Cyprus.
(3)Medical Genetics Department, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, 
Nicosia, Cyprus.
(4)Neuroimmunology Department, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, 
Nicosia, Cyprus.

BACKGROUND: Boucher Neuhäuser Syndrome (BNS) is a rare disease with autosomal 
recessive inheritance defined by the classical triad; early-onset ataxia, 
hypogonadism and chorioretinal dystrophy.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present two siblings diagnosed with BNS at midlife, 
identified with homozygous state of a novel PNPLA6 missense mutation. One 
healthy sibling and the mother were heterozygous carriers of the mutation. The 
proband presented with the classical triad and the other sibling presented with 
visual problems at first. The proband was referred to our department by a 
private Neurologist, in early adulthood, because of hypogonadism, cerebellar 
ataxia, axonal neuropathy, and chorioretinal dystrophy for further evaluation. 
The sibling was referred to our department for evaluation, at childhood, due to 
visual problems. Later, the patient displayed the triad of ataxia, 
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, and chorioretinal dystrophy. The unusual medical 
history of the two siblings led to further examinations and eventually the 
diagnosis of the first BNS cases in Cyprus. WES-based ataxia in silico gene 
panel analysis revealed 15 genetic variants and further filtering analysis 
revealed the PNPLA6 c.3323G > A variant. Segregation analysis in the family with 
Sanger sequencing confirmed the PNPLA6 homozygous variant c.3323G > A, 
p.Arg1108Gln in exon 29.
CONCLUSIONS: This highlights the importance of considering rare inherited causes 
of visual loss, spinocerebellar ataxia, or/and HH in a neurology clinic and the 
significant role of genetic sequencing in the diagnostic process.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature B.V.

DOI: 10.1007/s11033-024-09515-4
PMID: 38683245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]