---
reference_id: "PMID:9516674"
title: Acute intermittent porphyria.
authors:
- Grandchamp B
journal: Semin Liver Dis
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1055/s-2007-1007136
keywords:
- Humans
- "Porphyria, Acute Intermittent/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute intermittent porphyria.
**Authors:** Grandchamp B
**Journal:** Semin Liver Dis (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-2007-1007136](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-2007-1007136)

## Content

1. Semin Liver Dis. 1998;18(1):17-24. doi: 10.1055/s-2007-1007136.

Acute intermittent porphyria.

Grandchamp B(1).

Author information:
(1)INSERM U409, Faculté de Médecine Xavier Bichat, Paris, France.

Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) is transmitted as an autosomal dominant
disorder with incomplete penetrance. Recent population studies suggest that the
prevalence of asymptomatic heterozygotes for a mutant AIP gene may be in the
range of 1 in 2,000. Clinical manifestations include abdominal pain and
neurological dysfunctions. These symptoms occur during acute attacks, which are
often precipitated by drugs, alcohol, low caloric intake, or infections.
Biochemical abnormalities are thought to result from primary defects of
porphobilinogen deaminase (PBGD; also called hydroxymethyl bilane synthase), the
third enzyme of the heme synthesis pathway, and consecutive hepatic
overexpression of the first enzyme of the pathway, 5-aminolevulinate synthase.
As a result of these enzymatic disturbances, heme precursors are synthesized in
excess in the liver, and massive amounts of compounds upstream of the enzymatic
block are excreted in urine. Although the pathophysiology of the disease has not
yet been fully elucidated, a specific treatment of acute attacks with heme has
improved the prognosis. The cDNAs and the gene encoding PBGD have been isolated,
permitting identification of mutations that account for the corresponding
enzymatic deficiencies. Consequently, DNA analysis improves the accuracy of
detection of presymptomatic heterozygotes in AIP families, permitting better
counseling.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-1007136
PMID: 9516674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
