---
reference_id: "PMID:20301491"
title: X-Linked Adrenoleukodystrophy.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Raymond GV
- Moser AB
- Fatemi A
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# X-Linked Adrenoleukodystrophy.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Raymond GV, Moser AB, Fatemi A

## Content

1. X-Linked Adrenoleukodystrophy.

Raymond GV(1), Moser AB(2), Fatemi A(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
1999 Mar 26 [updated 2023 Apr 6].

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland
(2)Department of Neurogenetics, Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, Maryland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD) involves the
central or peripheral nervous system and the adrenal cortex. The nervous system
and adrenal glands are involved independently; thus, an affected male may be
diagnosed with cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy (CALD), adrenomyeloneuropathy
(AMN), and/or primary adrenocortical insufficiency. CALD is characterized by
progressive behavioral, cognitive, and neurologic deficits; onset of symptoms
ranges from childhood (typically ages 4 to 8 years) to adolescence (ages 11 to
21 years) and adulthood. AMN is characterized by leg weakness, spasticity,
clumsy gait, pain, and bladder and bowel dysfunction; onset is typically in the
20s and 30s. Onset of primary adrenocortical insufficiency ranges from age two
years to adulthood (most commonly by age 7.5 years). Heterozygous females are
not at increased risk to develop CALD, but are at increased risk to develop AMN
and primary adrenocortical insufficiency with increasing age.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: Three scenarios for suspecting the diagnosis are: (1)
positive newborn screening result, which to date is performed in more than half
of the United States; (2) a male or female proband with suggestive clinical and
laboratory findings; (3) a male not known to have X-ALD ascertained and
diagnosed via family screening. The diagnosis is established by identification
of a hemizygous ABCD1 pathogenic variant in a male or a heterozygous ABCD1
pathogenic variant in a female on molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapy: Newborns and asymptomatic infant boys (most
commonly diagnosed following a positive newborn screening result or family
screening) require immediate referral to a neurologist or biochemical geneticist
who will develop a plan for scheduled neurologic examinations and brain MRIs to
identify promptly those boys at risk to develop childhood CALD (cCALD) who will
benefit from targeted therapy (either hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
or, in some, an ex vivo gene therapy recently approved in the US). Supportive
care: Older males with CALD and males and females with AMN require supportive
treatment by multidisciplinary specialists in relevant fields to improve quality
of life, maximize function, and reduce complications. For primary adrenocortical
insufficiency, newborn males and asymptomatic infant boys with confirmed X-ALD
require immediate referral to a pediatric endocrinologist to screen for
adrenocortical insufficiency in order to either promptly treat those with
confirmed adrenal insufficiency according to published steroid replacement
guidelines or institute a plan for scheduled screening throughout childhood for
boys who do not yet have adrenal insufficiency. Older males require scheduled
screening to detect later-onset adrenal insufficiency. Surveillance: For boys
receiving targeted therapy for neurologic disease, the treating neurologist /
biochemical geneticist monitors existing manifestations, the individual's
response to targeted therapy, and need for supportive care. Older males with
CALD and males and females with AMN receiving supportive care require scheduled
examinations by their multidisciplinary care providers to identify and address
emerging issues. Boys at risk for cCALD who are possible candidates for targeted
therapy require frequent assessments starting at age 12 months. For primary
adrenocortical insufficiency, boys who do not yet have adrenal involvement
require scheduled assessments by their treating pediatric endocrinologist
throughout childhood. Males with AMN require scheduled assessment (at least
yearly) by their treating endocrinologist. Agents/circumstances to avoid:
Triggers known or suspected to be associated with activation of cerebral
disease, including significant head injury, coma associated with adrenal crisis,
and neurosurgical procedures. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is appropriate
to evaluate at-risk male relatives of an affected individual through measurement
of plasma concentration of very long-chain fatty acids – or molecular genetic
testing if the familial ABCD1 pathogenic variant is known – in order to identify
as early as possible those who would benefit from screening for primary
adrenocortical insufficiency and to facilitate timely identification of young
males who might benefit from targeted treatment for cCALD.
GENETIC COUNSELING: X-ALD is inherited in an X-linked manner. Approximately 95%
of probands inherit an ABCD1 pathogenic variant from one parent; at least 4% of
individuals with X-ALD have a de novo pathogenic variant. If the mother of the
proband has an ABCD1 pathogenic variant, the chance of the mother transmitting
it in each pregnancy is 50%; if the father of the proband is affected (i.e.,
hemizygous for an ABCD1 pathogenic variant), he will transmit the pathogenic
variant to all of his daughters and none of his sons. Males who inherit the
pathogenic variant will be affected; females who inherit the pathogenic variant
will typically be symptom-free in childhood but may manifest findings in
adulthood. A positive newborn screening result in a female infant should prompt
identification and evaluation of at-risk male relatives, as identification of
males with X-ALD before symptoms occur or early in the course of the disease can
allow for diagnosis and management of adrenal insufficiency before
life-threatening complications occur; such testing can also allow for correct
diagnosis of early (and often nonspecific) neurologic, behavioral, and/or
cognitive signs and symptoms. Once the ABCD1 pathogenic variant has been
identified in an affected family member, heterozygote testing for at-risk female
relatives and prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301491
