---
reference_id: "PMID:38758423"
title: "Evaluation of the Factors Influencing Mortality in Patients with Stevens-Johnson Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis: A Multicenter Study of 166 Patients."
authors:
- Erduran F
- Adışen E
- Emre S
- Hayran Y
- Başkan EB
- Yazıcı S
- Bilgiç A
- Alpsoy E
- Günaydın SD
- Elmas L
- Akyol M
- Güner R
- Arıca DA
- Aypek Y
- Ergun T
- Karavelioğlu D
- Yazıcı AC
- Aydoğan K
- Bayramgürler D
- Kıran R
- Erdoğan HK
- Acer E
- Aktaş A
journal: Dermatol Ther (Heidelb)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s13555-024-01180-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of the Factors Influencing Mortality in Patients with Stevens-Johnson Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis: A Multicenter Study of 166 Patients.
**Authors:** Erduran F, Adışen E, Emre S, Hayran Y, Başkan EB, Yazıcı S, Bilgiç A, Alpsoy E, Günaydın SD, Elmas L, Akyol M, Güner R, Arıca DA, Aypek Y, Ergun T, Karavelioğlu D, Yazıcı AC, Aydoğan K, Bayramgürler D, Kıran R, Erdoğan HK, Acer E, Aktaş A
**Journal:** Dermatol Ther (Heidelb) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13555-024-01180-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13555-024-01180-6)

## Content

1. Dermatol Ther (Heidelb). 2024 Jun;14(6):1547-1560. doi: 
10.1007/s13555-024-01180-6. Epub 2024 May 17.

Evaluation of the Factors Influencing Mortality in Patients with Stevens-Johnson 
Syndrome and Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis: A Multicenter Study of 166 Patients.

Erduran F(1), Adışen E(2), Emre S(3), Hayran Y(4), Başkan EB(5), Yazıcı S(5), 
Bilgiç A(6), Alpsoy E(6), Günaydın SD(7), Elmas L(7), Akyol M(8), Güner R(8), 
Arıca DA(9), Aypek Y(2), Ergun T(10), Karavelioğlu D(10), Yazıcı AC(11), Aydoğan 
K(11), Bayramgürler D(12), Kıran R(12), Erdoğan HK(13), Acer E(13), Aktaş A(3).

Author information:
(1)Ankara Bilkent City Hospital, Department of Dermatology, Ankara, Turkey. 
fnderdrn@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Gazi University, Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Ankara Yıldırım Beyazıt University, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(4)Ankara Bilkent City Hospital, Department of Dermatology, Ankara, Turkey.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Bursa Uludağ University, Bursa, Turkey.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Akdeniz University, Antalya, Turkey.
(7)Department of Dermatology, Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey.
(8)Department of Dermatology, Sivas Cumhuriyet University, Sivas, Turkey.
(9)Department of Dermatology, Karadeniz Technical University, Trabzon, Turkey.
(10)Department of Dermatology, Marmara University, Istanbul, Turkey.
(11)Department of Dermatology, Mersin University, Mersin, Turkey.
(12)Department of Dermatology, Kocaeli University, Kocaeli, Turkey.
(13)Department of Dermatology, Eskişehir Osmangazi University, Eskişehir, 
Turkey.

INTRODUCTION: Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal necrolysis 
(TEN) are life-threatening acute mucocutaneous disorders usually triggered by 
drugs. In this study, we aimed to evaluate the factors affecting mortality in 
patients with SJS-TEN.
METHODS: Our study is a retrospective cohort study, analyzing data collected 
from a total of 12 tertiary care centers between April 2012 and April 2022.
RESULTS: The study included 59 males and 107 females, a total of 166 patients, 
with an average age of 50.91 ± 21.25 years. Disease classification was TEN in 
50% of cases, SJS in 33.1%, and SJS-TEN overlap in 16.9%. The average SCORTEN 
within the first 24 h was 2.44 ± 1.42. Supportive care was provided to 99.4% of 
patients. The most commonly used systemic immunomodulatory treatments were 
systemic steroids (84.3%), IVIG (intravenous immunoglobulin) (49.3%), and 
cyclosporine (38.6%). Plasmapheresis was administered to five patients. While 
66.3% of patients were discharged, 24.1% resulted in exitus. Our comparative 
analysis of survivors and deceased patients found no effect of systemic 
steroids, IVIG, and cyclosporine treatments on mortality. Univariate analysis 
revealed that the SCORTEN scores on days 1 and 3 as well as the rates of 
detachment at the onset and during follow-up were significantly higher in 
deceased patients compared to survivors. The rates of fever, positive blood 
cultures, and systemic antibiotic use were higher in deceased patients compared 
to survivors. The presence of comorbidities, diabetes, and malignancy were 
significantly more common in deceased patients. Multivariate regression analysis 
indicated that over SCORTEN 2, the mortality risk exponentially rose with each 
SCORTEN increment, culminating in an 84-fold increase in mortality at SCORTEN 
5-6 (odds ratio [95% confidence interval]: 13.902-507.537, p < 0.001) compared 
to SCORTEN 0-1. Additionally, the utilization of plasmapheresis was associated 
with a 22-fold increase in mortality (odds ratio [95% confidence interval]: 
1.96-247.2, p = 0.012).
CONCLUSION: Our study found that a high SCORTEN score within the first 24 h and 
the use of plasmapheresis were related to increased mortality, while systemic 
steroids, IVIG, and cyclosporine treatments had no impact on mortality. We 
believe that data gathered from one of the most comprehensive studies which we 
conducted on SJS-TEN will enrich the literature, although additional research is 
warranted.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s13555-024-01180-6
PMCID: PMC11169098
PMID: 38758423

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.