---
reference_id: "PMID:35160337"
title: "Comparison of Medical and Surgical Treatment in Severe Bell's Palsy."
authors:
- Kim Y
- Yeo SG
- Rim HS
- Lee J
- Kim D
- Kim SS
- Park DC
- Byun JY
- Kim SH
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/jcm11030888
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparison of Medical and Surgical Treatment in Severe Bell's Palsy.
**Authors:** Kim Y, Yeo SG, Rim HS, Lee J, Kim D, Kim SS, Park DC, Byun JY, Kim SH
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm11030888](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm11030888)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2022 Feb 8;11(3):888. doi: 10.3390/jcm11030888.

Comparison of Medical and Surgical Treatment in Severe Bell's Palsy.

Kim Y(1), Yeo SG(2), Rim HS(2), Lee J(1), Kim D(3), Kim SS(4), Park DC(5), Byun 
JY(2), Kim SH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, College of Medicine, Kyung Hee 
University, Seoul 02447, Korea.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, College of 
Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 02447, Korea.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, College of Medicine, Kyung Hee 
University, Seoul 02447, Korea.
(4)Medical Research Center for Bioreaction to Reactive Oxygen Species and 
Biomedical Science Institute, Graduate School, College of Medicine, Kyung Hee 
University, Seoul 02447, Korea.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St. Vincent's Hospital, The Catholic 
University of Korea, Suwon 16247, Korea.

(1) Background: The effectiveness of decompression surgery for Bell's palsy is 
controversial. This study investigated the effects of facial nerve decompression 
in patients with severe Bell's palsy who were expected to have a poor prognosis. 
(2) Methods: We retrospectively reviewed 1721 patients with Bell's palsy who 
visited the Kyung Hee University Hospital between January 2005 and December 
2021. Of these, 45 patients with severe Bell's palsy were divided into two 
groups; 30 patients were treated conservatively with steroids and antiviral 
agents alone, while 15 patients underwent additional decompressive surgery after 
the conservative treatment. Outcomes were measured using House-Brackmann (H-B) 
grade for least 6 months after treatment was finished and conducted until full 
recovery was achieved. (3) Results: There was no significant difference in the 
rate of favorable recovery (H-B grade 1 or 2) between the surgery group and the 
conservative treatment group (75% vs. 70.0%, p > 0.05). Although H-B grade 
improvement occurred in both groups, the degree of improvement was not 
significantly different between groups. (4) Conclusions: Facial nerve 
decompression surgery in severe Bell's palsy patients did not significantly 
improve prognosis beyond that offered by conservative treatment alone. 
Additional surgical decompression may not be necessary in patients with severe 
Bell's palsy if they receive sufficient conservative treatment.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm11030888
PMCID: PMC8836601
PMID: 35160337

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.