---
reference_id: "PMID:35867195"
title: "Bicuspid Aortic Valves: an Up-to-Date Review on Genetics, Natural History, and Management."
authors:
- Rashed ER
- Dembar A
- Riasat M
- Zaidi AN
journal: Curr Cardiol Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s11886-022-01716-2
keywords:
- Aortic Valve/pathology
- Aortic Valve Insufficiency/etiology
- Aortic Valve Stenosis/surgery
- Bicuspid Aortic Valve Disease
- "Dilatation, Pathologic/pathology, surgery"
- "Heart Valve Diseases/complications, genetics, surgery"
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bicuspid Aortic Valves: an Up-to-Date Review on Genetics, Natural History, and Management.
**Authors:** Rashed ER, Dembar A, Riasat M, Zaidi AN
**Journal:** Curr Cardiol Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11886-022-01716-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11886-022-01716-2)

## Content

1. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2022 Aug;24(8):1021-1030. doi: 10.1007/s11886-022-01716-2.
Epub 2022 Jul 22.

Bicuspid Aortic Valves: an Up-to-Date Review on Genetics, Natural History, and
Management.

Rashed ER(1), Dembar A(2), Riasat M(3), Zaidi AN(4).

Author information:
(1)Mount Sinai Heart, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY,
USA.
(2)Division of Medicine and Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
New York, NY, USA.
(3)Division of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Mount Sinai
Beth Israel, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Mount Sinai Adult Congenital Heart Center, Mount Sinai Heart, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, 1 Gustave L. Levy Place, Box 1030, New York, NY, 10029,
USA. ali.zaidi@mountsinai.org.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) is the most common congenital
cardiac abnormality. It has a wide spectrum of clinical manifestations including
aortic regurgitation (AR), aortic stenosis, and an associated aortopathy with a
small but increased risk of aortic dissection. This review describes current
knowledge of BAV, from anatomy and genetics to a discussion of multifaceted
strategies utilized in the management of this unique patient population. This
review will also highlight critical knowledge gaps in areas of basic and
clinical research to enhance further understanding of this clinical entity.
RECENT FINDINGS: The current knowledge regarding pathophysiologic mechanisms,
screening, and surveillance guidelines for BAV and the associated aortopathy is
discussed. We also discuss current management techniques for aortic valve repair
versus replacement, indications for aortic surgery (root or ascending aorta),
and the emergence of the Ross procedure as a viable management option not only
in children, but also in adolescents and adults. The varied clinical phenotype
of the BAV, resulting in its specific complex hemodynamic interactions, renders
it an entity which is separate and distinct from the tricuspid aortic valve
pathologies. While various aortic histopathologic and protein alterations in BAV
patients have been described, it remains unclear if these changes are causal or
the result of hemodynamic alterations imposed by sheer stress on the
intrinsically dysfunctional BAV. Medical management for patients with BAV with
AS, AI, or dilated aortic roots/ascending aortas remains challenging and needs
further investigation. More than 50% of patients with BAV will undergo AVR
during their lifetime, and more than 25% of patients with BAV undergo aortic
surgery performed for dilation of the aortic root or ascending aorta, often
concurrently with AVR. The search for the ultimate genetic or epigenetic cause
of the different bicuspid phenotypes will ultimately be facilitated by the
next-generation sequencing tools that allow for study of large populations at
low cost. Improvements in diagnostic and stratification criteria to accurately
risk assess BAV patients are critical to this process.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11886-022-01716-2
PMID: 35867195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
