---
reference_id: "PMID:40791729"
title: BLOC1S1 variants cause lysosomal and autophagic defects resulting in a hypomyelinating leukodystrophy with epileptic encephalopathy.
authors:
- De Pace R
- Gonzalez CD
- Williamson CD
- Helman G
- Sanderson LE
- Disanza B
- Hsiao-Sánchez N
- Pizzino A
- Muirhead K
- Bonkowsky JL
- Taft RJ
- Sannaa NA
- Dias P
- Quintas AS
- Mutlu MB
- Bas H
- Oztürk H
- Mojarrad M
- Alerasool M
- Sheikhani S
- Jabbar HK
- Issa AH
- Houlden H
- Zonic E
- Barakat TS
- Tripolski K
- Romito A
- Teferedegn E
- Vossough A
- Whitehead MT
- Bhoj E
- Ahrens-Nicklas RC
- Simons C
- Wolvetang E
- van Ham TJ
- Bertoli-Avella AM
- Maroofian R
- Bonifacino JS
- Vanderver A
journal: medRxiv
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1101/2025.07.17.25331211
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BLOC1S1 variants cause lysosomal and autophagic defects resulting in a hypomyelinating leukodystrophy with epileptic encephalopathy.
**Authors:** De Pace R, Gonzalez CD, Williamson CD, Helman G, Sanderson LE, Disanza B, Hsiao-Sánchez N, Pizzino A, Muirhead K, Bonkowsky JL, Taft RJ, Sannaa NA, Dias P, Quintas AS, Mutlu MB, Bas H, Oztürk H, Mojarrad M, Alerasool M, Sheikhani S, Jabbar HK, Issa AH, Houlden H, Zonic E, Barakat TS, Tripolski K, Romito A, Teferedegn E, Vossough A, Whitehead MT, Bhoj E, Ahrens-Nicklas RC, Simons C, Wolvetang E, van Ham TJ, Bertoli-Avella AM, Maroofian R, Bonifacino JS, Vanderver A
**Journal:** medRxiv (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1101/2025.07.17.25331211](https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.07.17.25331211)

## Content

1. medRxiv [Preprint]. 2025 Jul 17:2025.07.17.25331211. doi: 
10.1101/2025.07.17.25331211.

BLOC1S1 variants cause lysosomal and autophagic defects resulting in a 
hypomyelinating leukodystrophy with epileptic encephalopathy.

De Pace R(1), Gonzalez CD(2), Williamson CD(1), Helman G(2)(3), Sanderson LE(4), 
Disanza B(5)(6), Hsiao-Sánchez N(1), Pizzino A(2), Muirhead K(2), Bonkowsky 
JL(7), Taft RJ(8), Sannaa NA(9), Dias P(10), Quintas AS(11), Mutlu MB(12), Bas 
H(13), Oztürk H(13), Mojarrad M(14)(15)(16), Alerasool M(14)(15)(16), Sheikhani 
S(17), Jabbar HK(18), Issa AH(19), Houlden H(20), Zonic E(21), Barakat TS(4), 
Tripolski K(21), Romito A(21), Teferedegn E(5)(6), Vossough A(22)(23), Whitehead 
MT(22)(23), Bhoj E(5)(6), Ahrens-Nicklas RC(5), Simons C(24)(25), Wolvetang 
E(26), van Ham TJ(4), Bertoli-Avella AM(21), Maroofian R(20), Bonifacino JS(1), 
Vanderver A(2)(3)(27).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurosciences & Cellular Structure, Eunice Kennedy Shiver 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(2)Division of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 
19104, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 
PA 19104, USA.
(4)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC University Medical Center, 
Rotterdam, 3000CA, The Netherlands.
(5)Division of Human Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(6)Center for Applied Genomics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(7)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah 
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84113, USA.
(8)Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA 92122, USA.
(9)John Hopkins Aramco Health Care, Gharb Al Dhahran, Dhahran 31311, Saudi 
Arabia.
(10)Serviço de Genética Médica, Unidade Local de Saúde de Santa Maria, Lisboa 
1649-035, Portugal.
(11)Serviço de Pediatria - Unidade de Neuropediatria, Unidade Local de Saúde de 
Santa Maria, Lisboa 1649-028, Portugal.
(12)DETAGEN Genetic Disease Evaluation Center, Kayseri Province, 38000, Turkey.
(13)Intergen Genetics and Rare Diseases Diagnosis Center, Ankara, 06510, Turkey.
(14)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Mashhad University of 
Medical Sciences, Mashhad, 91771, Iran.
(15)Medical Genetics Research Center, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, 
Mashhad, Iran.
(16)Genetic Foundation of Khorasan Razavi, Mashhad, 91771, Iran.
(17)Pediatric Department, Valiasr Hospital, Birjand University of Medical 
Sciences, Birjand, 97179 64151, Iran.
(18)Department of Paediatrics, Al-Sayyab Teaching Hospital, Basrah, 61030, Iraq.
(19)Department of Neurology, University of Basrah, Basrah, 61004, Iraq.
(20)Department of Neuromuscular Diseases, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, 
WC1N 3BG, UK.
(21)CENTOGENE GmbH, Rostock, 18055, Germany.
(22)Department of Radiology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 
PA 19104, USA.
(23)Department of Radiology, Perelmann School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(24)Center for Population Genomics, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, 
Melbourne, VIC 3052, Australia.
(25)Centre for Population Genomics, Garvan Institute of Medical Research and 
UNSW Sydney, Sydney 2011, Australia.
(26)Stem Cell Engineering Group, Australian Institute for Bioengineering and 
Nanotechnology, University of Queensland, 4067, Australia.
(27)Department of Neurology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Update in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2026 Apr 2;113(4):736-753. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2026.02.024.

BLOC1S1 encodes a subunit shared by the BLOC-1 and BORC hetero-octameric 
complexes that regulate various endolysosomal processes. Here, we report the 
identification of seven distinct variants in BLOC1S1 in eleven individuals from 
seven independent families presenting with early psychomotor delay, hypotonia, 
spasticity, epileptic encephalopathy, optic atrophy, and leuko-axonopathy with 
hypomyelination. A subset of the affected individuals also have features of 
hypopigmentation and ocular albinism that are similar, although milder, than 
those of individuals with BLOC-1-related Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome. Functional 
analyses show that BLOC1S1 knockout (KO) impairs the anterograde transport of 
lysosomes and autophagy in both non-neuronal cells and iPSC-derived neurons. 
Rescue experiments reveal that most BLOC1S1 variants exhibit reduced expression, 
decreased assembly with other BORC/BLOC-1 subunits, and/or impaired restoration 
of lysosome transport and autophagy in BLOC1S1-KO cells. Additionally, we show 
that KO of BLOC1S1 reduces pigmentation in a melanocytic cell line, and that 
five of the BLOC1S1 variants partially or fully restore pigmentation. These 
findings provide genetic, clinical, and functional evidence that 
loss-of-function (LoF) of BLOC1S1 leads to more pronounced deficits in BORC than 
BLOC-1 function. We conclude that the biallelic BLOC1S1 variants characterized 
here primarily result in a neurological disorder with prominent leukodystrophy, 
similar to the recently reported condition caused by variants in the BORCS8 
subunit of BORC. Together, these findings establish BORCopathies as a distinct 
disease entity.

DOI: 10.1101/2025.07.17.25331211
PMCID: PMC12338918
PMID: 40791729

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests. EW 
is CSO and equity holder of “The Organoid Company”. JLB: has grants from NIH; 
clinical trials with Spur Therapeutics, Calico, and Ionis; consulting with 
Ionis; writing content for UpToDate; stock in Orchard Therapeutics; and 
royalties from BioFire. EZ, AR, KT, and AMBA are employees of CENTOGENE GmbH.