---
reference_id: "PMID:30418344"
title: Abnormal Liver Enzymes.
authors:
- Melendez-Rosado J
- Alsaad A
- Stancampiano FF
- Palmer WC
journal: Gastroenterol Nurs
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1097/SGA.0000000000000346
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abnormal Liver Enzymes.
**Authors:** Melendez-Rosado J, Alsaad A, Stancampiano FF, Palmer WC
**Journal:** Gastroenterol Nurs (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1097/SGA.0000000000000346](https://doi.org/10.1097/SGA.0000000000000346)

## Content

1. Gastroenterol Nurs. 2018 Nov/Dec;41(6):497-507. doi: 
10.1097/SGA.0000000000000346.

Abnormal Liver Enzymes.

Melendez-Rosado J(1), Alsaad A, Stancampiano FF, Palmer WC.

Author information:
(1)Jose Melendez-Rosado, MD, is Gastroenterology Fellow, Cleveland Clinic 
Florida, Weston, Florida. Ali Alsaad, MBChB, is Internal Medicine Resident, Mayo 
Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida. Fernando F. Stancampiano, MD, is Assistant 
Professor, Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida. William C. 
Palmer, MD, is Assistant Professor, Gastroenterology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, 
Florida.

Abnormal liver enzymes are frequently encountered in primary care offices and 
hospitals and may be caused by a wide variety of conditions, from mild and 
nonspecific to well-defined and life-threatening. Terms such as "abnormal liver 
chemistries" or "abnormal liver enzymes," also referred to as transaminitis, 
should be reserved to describe inflammatory processes characterized by elevated 
alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, and alkaline phosphatase. 
Although interchangeably used with abnormal liver enzymes, abnormal liver 
function tests specifically denote a loss of synthetic functions usually 
evaluated by serum albumin and prothrombin time. We discuss the entities that 
most commonly cause abnormal liver enzymes, specific patterns of enzyme 
abnormalities, diagnostic modalities, and the clinical scenarios that warrant 
referral to a hepatologist.

DOI: 10.1097/SGA.0000000000000346
PMID: 30418344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]