---
reference_id: "PMID:23622130"
title: A starring role for stellate cells in the pancreatic cancer microenvironment.
authors:
- Apte MV
- Wilson JS
- Lugea A
- Pandol SJ
journal: Gastroenterology
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2012.11.037
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A starring role for stellate cells in the pancreatic cancer microenvironment.
**Authors:** Apte MV, Wilson JS, Lugea A, Pandol SJ
**Journal:** Gastroenterology (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.gastro.2012.11.037](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2012.11.037)

## Content

1. Gastroenterology. 2013 Jun;144(6):1210-9. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2012.11.037.

A starring role for stellate cells in the pancreatic cancer microenvironment.

Apte MV(1), Wilson JS, Lugea A, Pandol SJ.

Author information:
(1)Pancreatic Research Groups, University of New South Wales Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is a devastating disease, and patient outcomes 
have not improved in decades. Treatments that target tumor cells have largely 
failed. This could be because research has focused on cancer cells and the 
influence of the stroma on tumor progression has been largely ignored. The focus 
of pancreatic cancer research began to change with the identification of 
pancreatic stellate cells, which produce the pancreatic tumor stroma. There is 
compelling in vitro and in vivo evidence for the influence of pancreatic 
stellate cells on pancreatic cancer development; several recent preclinical 
studies have reported encouraging results with approaches designed to target 
pancreatic stellate cells and the stroma. We review the background and recent 
advances in these areas, along with important areas of future research that 
could improve therapy.

Copyright © 2013 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2012.11.037
PMCID: PMC3729446
PMID: 23622130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors disclose no 
conflicts.