---
reference_id: "PMID:36292677"
title: "Phenotypic Spectrum and Molecular Findings in 17 ATR-X Syndrome Italian Patients: Some New Insights."
authors:
- Vaisfeld A
- Taormina S
- Simonati A
- Neri G
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/genes13101792
keywords:
- "X-linked Nuclear Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- DNA Helicases/genetics
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Phenotype
- alpha-Thalassemia
- X-Linked Intellectual Disability
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotypic Spectrum and Molecular Findings in 17 ATR-X Syndrome Italian Patients: Some New Insights.
**Authors:** Vaisfeld A, Taormina S, Simonati A, Neri G
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes13101792](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes13101792)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2022 Oct 4;13(10):1792. doi: 10.3390/genes13101792.

Phenotypic Spectrum and Molecular Findings in 17 ATR-X Syndrome Italian 
Patients: Some New Insights.

Vaisfeld A(1)(2), Taormina S(1)(3), Simonati A(4), Neri G(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences (DIMEC), University of Bologna, 
40138 Bologna, Italy.
(2)Institute of Genomic Medicine, Catholic University School of Medicine, 00168 
Rome, Italy.
(3)Unit of Medical Genetics, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di Bologna, 
IRCCS, 40138 Bologna, Italy.
(4)Department of Surgery, Dentistry, Paediatrics and Gynaecology, University of 
Verona, 37129 Verona, Italy.

ATR-X syndrome is a rare X-linked congenital disorder caused by hypomorphic 
mutations in the ATRX gene. A typical phenotype is well defined, with cognitive 
impairment, characteristic facial dysmorphism, hypotonia, gastrointestinal, 
skeletal, urogenital, and hematological anomalies as characteristic features. 
With a few notable exceptions, general phenotypic differences related to 
specific ATRX protein domains are not well established and should not be used, 
at least at the present time, for prognostic purposes. The phenotypic spectrum 
and genotypic correlations are gradually broadening, mainly due to rapidly 
increasing accessibility to NGS. In this scenario, it is important to continue 
describing new patients, illustrating the mode and age of onset of the typical 
and non-typical features, the classical ones and those tentatively added more 
recently. This report of well-characterized and mostly unreported patients 
expands the ATR-X clinical spectrum and emphasizes the importance of better 
clinical delineation of the condition. We compare our findings to those of the 
largest ATR-X series reported so far, discussing possible explanations for the 
different drawn conclusions.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13101792
PMCID: PMC9601810
PMID: 36292677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.