---
reference_id: "PMID:38914784"
title: Mechanisms of Action of the US Food and Drug Administration-Approved Antisense Oligonucleotide Drugs.
authors:
- Sang A
- Zhuo S
- Bochanis A
- Manautou JE
- Bahal R
- Zhong XB
- Rasmussen TP
journal: BioDrugs
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s40259-024-00665-2
keywords:
- Humans
- "Oligonucleotides, Antisense/therapeutic use, pharmacology"
- United States
- United States Food and Drug Administration
- Drug Approval
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- RNA Splicing/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms of Action of the US Food and Drug Administration-Approved Antisense Oligonucleotide Drugs.
**Authors:** Sang A, Zhuo S, Bochanis A, Manautou JE, Bahal R, Zhong XB, Rasmussen TP
**Journal:** BioDrugs (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40259-024-00665-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40259-024-00665-2)

## Content

1. BioDrugs. 2024 Jul;38(4):511-526. doi: 10.1007/s40259-024-00665-2. Epub 2024
Jun  25.

Mechanisms of Action of the US Food and Drug Administration-Approved Antisense 
Oligonucleotide Drugs.

Sang A(#)(1), Zhuo S(#)(1), Bochanis A(#)(1), Manautou JE(1), Bahal R(1), Zhong 
XB(1), Rasmussen TP(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, 
USA.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, 
USA. theodore.rasmussen@uconn.edu.
(3)Institute for Systems Genomics, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA. 
theodore.rasmussen@uconn.edu.
(4)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, 
CT, USA. theodore.rasmussen@uconn.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) are single stranded nucleic acids that target 
RNA. The US Food and Drug Administration has approved ASOs for several diseases. 
ASOs utilize three principal modes of action (MOA). The first MOA is initiated 
by base-pairing between the ASO and its target mRNA, followed by RNase 
H-dependent mRNA degradation. The second MOA is triggered by ASOs that occlude 
splice acceptor sites in pre-mRNAs leading to skipping of a mutation-bearing 
exon. The third MOA involves ASOs that sterically hinder mRNA function, often 
inhibiting translation. ASOs contain a variety of modifications to the 
sugar-phosphate backbone and bases that stabilize the ASO or render them 
resistant to RNase activity. RNase H-dependent ASOs include inotersen and 
eplontersen (for hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis), fomiversen (for 
opportunistic cytomegalovirus infection), mipomersen (for familial 
hypercholesterolemia), and tofersen [for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)]. 
Splice modulating ASOs include nursinersen (for spinal muscular atrophy) and 
eteplirsen, golodirsen, viltolarsen, and casimersen (all for the treatment of 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy). In addition, a designer ASO, milasen, was used to 
treat a single individual afflicted with Batten disease. Since ASO design relies 
principally upon knowledge of mRNA sequence, the bench to bedside pipeline for 
ASOs is expedient compared with protein-directed drugs. [Graphical abstract 
available.].

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40259-024-00665-2
PMCID: PMC11695194
PMID: 38914784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest No author has an actual or 
perceived conflict of interest with the contents of this article.