---
reference_id: "PMID:36543577"
title: Chronic cough.
authors:
- Šestáková Z
journal: Cas Lek Cesk
year: '2022'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic cough.
**Authors:** Šestáková Z
**Journal:** Cas Lek Cesk (2022)

## Content

1. Cas Lek Cesk. 2022 Fall;161(6):232-235.

Chronic cough.

[Article in English]

Šestáková Z.

Cough is the most common symptom of respiratory diseases, but it is also one of 
important defense mechanisms of the human body. It is often difficult to 
determine when this defensive reflex ceases to fulfill its physiological role 
and becomes pathological. Cough is not diagnosis; it is the symptom of various 
diseases and their combination and is the most common symptom of diseases of the 
respiratory system. Often the definition of chronic cough is confused with the 
definition of chronic bronchitis, which is defined as a chronic productive cough 
lasting at least three months in two consecutive years, while other causes of 
cough are excluded. Chronic cough is associated with poor quality of life and 
can negatively affect quality of life. Diseases causing chronic cough are most 
commonly asthma, eosinophilic bronchitis, gastroesophageal reflux, post-nasal 
drip syndrome, rhinosinusitis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, pulmonary 
fibrosis, and bronchiectasis. Treatment of the underlying etiology of the cough 
leads to a success rate of up to 90 %. The cause of chronic cough may not be 
clear and therefore requires a multidisciplinary approach.

PMID: 36543577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]