---
reference_id: "PMID:39618694"
title: "The riddle of recurrent fever: a clinical approach to pediatric autoinflammatory diseases."
authors:
- Meertens B
- Hoste L
- Tavernier SJ
- Haerynck F
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2024.1448176
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The riddle of recurrent fever: a clinical approach to pediatric autoinflammatory diseases.
**Authors:** Meertens B, Hoste L, Tavernier SJ, Haerynck F
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2024.1448176](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2024.1448176)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2024 Nov 15;12:1448176. doi: 10.3389/fped.2024.1448176. 
eCollection 2024.

The riddle of recurrent fever: a clinical approach to pediatric autoinflammatory 
diseases.

Meertens B(1)(2), Hoste L(1)(2), Tavernier SJ(2)(3)(4)(5), Haerynck F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Pulmonology, Infectious Diseases and Immunology, 
Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(2)Primary Immunodeficiency Research Lab, Center for Primary Immunodeficiency 
Ghent, Jeffrey Modell Diagnosis and Research Center, Ghent University, Ghent, 
Belgium.
(3)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
(4)Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.
(5)Center for Inflammation Research, Laboratory of Molecular Signal Transduction 
in Inflammation, VIB, Ghent, Belgium.

Autoinflammatory diseases (AIDs) are a group of immunodysregulatory disorders 
resulting in the increased release or signaling of pro-inflammatory cytokines. 
Patients with AIDs present systemic inflammation in sterile conditions, which 
are mainly caused by defects in the innate immune system. Fever is one of the 
typical symptoms of this derailed immune signaling. In addition, 
autoinflammatory diseases manifest with varying other symptoms during flare-ups 
and interphasic periods. The diagnosis of these rare diseases poses numerous 
challenges. This paper provides an overview of AIDs that arise in childhood and 
in which fever commonly presents as a symptom. It outlines clinical signs, 
pathophysiology, diagnosis, and management for each syndrome. Additionally, we 
discuss a comprehensive diagnostic approach for children where an AID is 
suspected.

© 2024 Meertens, Hoste, Tavernier and Haerynck.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2024.1448176
PMCID: PMC11605516
PMID: 39618694

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.