---
reference_id: "PMID:21176769"
title: Keratin gene mutations in disorders of human skin and its appendages.
authors:
- Chamcheu JC
- Siddiqui IA
- Syed DN
- Adhami VM
- Liovic M
- Mukhtar H
journal: Arch Biochem Biophys
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2010.12.019
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- Keratins/genetics
- Mutation
- Skin/metabolism
- "Skin Diseases/genetics, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Keratin gene mutations in disorders of human skin and its appendages.
**Authors:** Chamcheu JC, Siddiqui IA, Syed DN, Adhami VM, Liovic M, Mukhtar H
**Journal:** Arch Biochem Biophys (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.abb.2010.12.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.abb.2010.12.019)

## Content

1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2011 Apr 15;508(2):123-37. doi:
10.1016/j.abb.2010.12.019.  Epub 2010 Dec 19.

Keratin gene mutations in disorders of human skin and its appendages.

Chamcheu JC(1), Siddiqui IA, Syed DN, Adhami VM, Liovic M, Mukhtar H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine and Public Health, University 
of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Keratins, the major structural protein of all epithelia are a diverse group of 
cytoskeletal scaffolding proteins that form intermediate filament networks, 
providing structural support to keratinocytes that maintain the integrity of the 
skin. Expression of keratin genes is usually regulated by differentiation of the 
epidermal cells within the stratifying squamous epithelium. Amongst the 54 known 
functional keratin genes in humans, about 22 different genes including, the 
cornea, hair and hair follicle-specific keratins have been implicated in a wide 
range of hereditary diseases. The exact phenotype of each disease usually 
reflects the spatial expression level and the types of mutated keratin genes, 
the location of the mutations and their consequences at sub-cellular levels as 
well as other epigenetic and/or environmental factors. The identification of 
specific pathogenic mutations in keratin disorders formed the basis of our 
understanding that led to re-classification, improved diagnosis with prognostic 
implications, prenatal testing and genetic counseling in severe keratin 
genodermatoses. Molecular defects in cutaneous keratin genes encoding for 
keratin intermediate filaments (KIFs) causes keratinocytes and tissue-specific 
fragility, accounting for a large number of genetic disorders in human skin and 
its appendages. These diseases are characterized by keratinocytes fragility 
(cytolysis), intra-epidermal blistering, hyperkeratosis, and keratin filament 
aggregation in severely affected tissues. Examples include epidermolysis bullosa 
simplex (EBS; K5, K14), keratinopathic ichthyosis (KPI; K1, K2, K10) i.e. 
epidermolytic ichthyosis (EI; K1, K10) and ichthyosis bullosa of Siemens (IBS; 
K2), pachyonychia congenita (PC; K6a, K6b, K16, K17), epidermolytic 
palmo-plantar keratoderma (EPPK; K9, (K1)), monilethrix (K81, K83, K86), 
ectodermal dysplasia (ED; K85) and steatocystoma multiplex. These keratins also 
have been identified to have roles in apoptosis, cell proliferation, wound 
healing, tissue polarity and remodeling. This review summarizes and discusses 
the clinical, ultrastructural, molecular genetics and biochemical 
characteristics of a broad spectrum of keratin-related genodermatoses, with 
special clinical emphasis on EBS, EI and PC. We also highlight current and 
emerging model tools for prognostic future therapies. Hopefully, disease 
modeling and in-depth understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of the 
diseases may lead to the development of novel therapies for several hereditary 
cutaneous diseases.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.abb.2010.12.019
PMCID: PMC3142884
PMID: 21176769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]