---
reference_id: "PMID:33023287"
title: COVID-19 and Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome, or is it Mast Cell Activation Syndrome?
authors:
- Theoharides TC
- Conti P
journal: J Biol Regul Homeost Agents
year: '2020'
doi: 10.23812/20-EDIT3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# COVID-19 and Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome, or is it Mast Cell Activation Syndrome?
**Authors:** Theoharides TC, Conti P
**Journal:** J Biol Regul Homeost Agents (2020)
**DOI:** [10.23812/20-EDIT3](https://doi.org/10.23812/20-EDIT3)

## Content

1. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2020 Sep-Oct,;34(5):1633-1636. doi: 
10.23812/20-EDIT3.

COVID-19 and Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome, or is it Mast Cell Activation 
Syndrome?

Theoharides TC(1)(2)(3), Conti P(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunopharmacology and Drug Discovery, Department of 
Immunology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston. MA 02111, USA.
(2)School of Graduate Biomedical Sciences, Tufts University School of Medicine, 
Boston, MA 02111, USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Tufts University School of Medicine and 
Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA 02111, USA.
(4)Postgraduate Medical School, University of Chieti, Chieti 66013, Italy.

COVID-19 derives from infection with Coronavirus [severe acute respiratory 
syndrome (SARS)-CoV-2] and is associated with high morbidity and mortality due 
to release of a storm of pro-inflammatory cytokines and thrombogenic agents 
resulting in destruction of the lungs. Many reports indicate that a considerable 
number of patients who are positive for SARS-CoV-2 are asymptomatic or have mild 
symptoms. However, increasing evidence suggests that many such patients who 
either recovered from or had mild symptoms after COVID-19 exhibit diffuse, 
multiorgan, symptoms months after the infection. These symptoms include malaise, 
myalgias, chest tightness, brain fog and other neuropsychiatric symptoms that 
were originally reported in children and named Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome 
(MIS-C). Now the US Center for Disease Control (CDC) announced the recognition 
of a similar condition in adults, named Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome 
(MIS-A). The symptoms characterizing these conditions are very similar to those 
associated with Mast Cell Activation Syndrome (MCAS, US ICD-110 code 
D89.42-idiopathic mast cell activation syndrome). Hence, the possibility of MCAS 
should be evaluated in any patient with MIS and/or multisystem inflammatory 
symptoms. In either case, these syndromes should be addressed with liposomal 
formulation (in olive pomace oil) of the flavone luteolin (e.g. PureLut® or 
FibroProtek®) together with the antihistamine rupatadine, which also has 
anti-platelet activating factor (PAF) activity and inhibits mast cells that have 
been implicated in the pathogenesis of cytokine storms in COVID-19.

Copyright 2020 Biolife Sas. www.biolifesas.org.

DOI: 10.23812/20-EDIT3
PMID: 33023287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]