---
reference_id: "PMID:37560854"
title: Coeliac Disease High-Risk Human Leukocyte Antigen Alleles in a South African Type One Diabetic Population.
authors:
- Gandini A
- Wyk NV
- Maayer T
- Gededzha MP
- Mayne E
journal: Clin Lab
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7754/Clin.Lab.2023.220819
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Coeliac Disease High-Risk Human Leukocyte Antigen Alleles in a South African Type One Diabetic Population.
**Authors:** Gandini A, Wyk NV, Maayer T, Gededzha MP, Mayne E
**Journal:** Clin Lab (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7754/Clin.Lab.2023.220819](https://doi.org/10.7754/Clin.Lab.2023.220819)

## Content

1. Clin Lab. 2023 Aug 1;69(8). doi: 10.7754/Clin.Lab.2023.220819.

Coeliac Disease High-Risk Human Leukocyte Antigen Alleles in a South African 
Type One Diabetic Population.

Gandini A, Wyk NV, Maayer T, Gededzha MP, Mayne E.

BACKGROUND: Coeliac disease (CD) is an autoimmune disorder strongly associated 
with Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) genes DQ2 and DQ8. These alleles are also 
associated with other autoimmune diseases including type 1 dia-betes (T1D) and 
these patients are consequently at a higher risk of developing CD. We examined 
the frequency of high-risk HLA alleles in a cohort of South African T1D 
pediatric patients.
METHODS: A total of 22 pediatric participants were recruited at an endocrinology 
clinic in a public sector hospital in Johannesburg, South Africa. Clinical 
details were collected, and all patients were HLA typed at the DQ loci.
RESULTS: Of our T1D patients, 63.6% had at least 1 high-risk HLA type alleles 
associated with CD. Of the patients with high-risk alleles, DQ2 was found in the 
majority which is consistent with CD literature.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides preliminary insight into the frequency of the 
HLA-DQ types associated with CD in a South African population. The high 
prevalence of high-risk alleles in our T1D population motivates continual 
monitoring and further investigations into CD in South Africa.

DOI: 10.7754/Clin.Lab.2023.220819
PMID: 37560854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]