---
reference_id: "PMID:37683329"
title: Biomarker-based risk prediction for the onset of neuroinflammation in X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy.
authors:
- Weinhofer I
- Rommer P
- Gleiss A
- Ponleitner M
- Zierfuss B
- Waidhofer-Söllner P
- Fourcade S
- Grabmeier-Pfistershammer K
- Reinert MC
- Göpfert J
- Heine A
- Yska HAF
- Casasnovas C
- Cantarín V
- Bergner CG
- Mallack E
- Forss-Petter S
- Aubourg P
- Bley A
- Engelen M
- Eichler F
- Lund TC
- Pujol A
- Köhler W
- Kühl JS
- Berger J
journal: EBioMedicine
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2023.104781
keywords:
- Humans
- "Adrenoleukodystrophy/diagnosis, blood"
- Biomarkers/blood
- Male
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Adolescent
- Prognosis
- "Neuroinflammatory Diseases/etiology, blood, diagnosis, pathology"
- Cytokines/blood
- Retrospective Studies
- Neurofilament Proteins/blood
- Risk Assessment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biomarker-based risk prediction for the onset of neuroinflammation in X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy.
**Authors:** Weinhofer I, Rommer P, Gleiss A, Ponleitner M, Zierfuss B, Waidhofer-Söllner P, Fourcade S, Grabmeier-Pfistershammer K, Reinert MC, Göpfert J, Heine A, Yska HAF, Casasnovas C, Cantarín V, Bergner CG, Mallack E, Forss-Petter S, Aubourg P, Bley A, Engelen M, Eichler F, Lund TC, Pujol A, Köhler W, Kühl JS, Berger J
**Journal:** EBioMedicine (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ebiom.2023.104781](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2023.104781)

## Content

1. EBioMedicine. 2023 Oct;96:104781. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2023.104781. Epub 2023
Sep 7.

Biomarker-based risk prediction for the onset of neuroinflammation in X-linked
adrenoleukodystrophy.

Weinhofer I(1), Rommer P(2), Gleiss A(3), Ponleitner M(2), Zierfuss B(4),
Waidhofer-Söllner P(5), Fourcade S(6), Grabmeier-Pfistershammer K(5), Reinert
MC(7), Göpfert J(8), Heine A(8), Yska HAF(9), Casasnovas C(10), Cantarín V(11),
Bergner CG(12), Mallack E(13), Forss-Petter S(14), Aubourg P(15), Bley A(16),
Engelen M(9), Eichler F(17), Lund TC(18), Pujol A(6), Köhler W(12), Kühl JS(19),
Berger J(20).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathobiology of the Nervous System, Center for Brain Research,
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. Electronic address:
Isabelle.weinhofer@meduniwien.ac.at.
(2)Department of Neurology, Comprehensive Center for Clinical Neurosciences and
Mental Health, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(3)Institute of Clinical Biometrics, Center for Medical Data Science, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(4)Department of Pathobiology of the Nervous System, Center for Brain Research,
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; Department of Neuroscience,
Centre de Recherche du CHUM, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Canada.
(5)Division of Immune Receptors and T Cell Activation, Institute of Immunology,
Center for Pathophysiology, Infectiology and Immunology, Medical University of
Vienna, Austria.
(6)Neurometabolic Diseases Laboratory, Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute
(IDIBELL), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain; Biomedical Research Networking Center on
Rare Diseases (CIBERER), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain.
(7)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent
Medicine, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(8)Applied Biomarkers and Immunoassays Working Group, NMI Natural and Medical
Sciences Institute at the University of Tübingen, Reutlingen, Germany.
(9)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Amsterdam Public Health, Amsterdam
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(10)Neurometabolic Diseases Laboratory, Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute
(IDIBELL), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain; Biomedical Research Networking Center on
Rare Diseases (CIBERER), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain; Neuromuscular Unit, Neurology
Department, Hospital Universitario Bellvitge, Bellvitge Biomedical Research
Unit, Barcelona, Spain.
(11)Infant Jesus Children´s Hospital and Biomedical Research Networking Center
on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), ISCIII, Madrid, Spain.
(12)Department of Neurology, Leukodystrophy Clinic, University of Leipzig
Medical Center, Leipzig, Germany.
(13)Leukodystrophy Center, Division of Child Neurology, Department of
Pediatrics, Weill Cornell Medical College, NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital, New
York, NY, USA.
(14)Department of Pathobiology of the Nervous System, Center for Brain Research,
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(15)Kremlin-Bicêtre-Hospital, University Paris-Saclay, Paris, France.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany.
(17)Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(18)Pediatric Blood and Marrow Transplant Program, Global Pediatrics, Division
of Pediatric Blood and Marrow Transplantation, MCRB, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(19)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Hemostaseology, University
Hospital Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(20)Department of Pathobiology of the Nervous System, Center for Brain Research,
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. Electronic address:
johannes.berger@meduniwien.ac.at.

BACKGROUND: X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD) is highly variable, ranging
from slowly progressive adrenomyeloneuropathy to severe brain demyelination and
inflammation (cerebral ALD, CALD) affecting males with childhood peak onset.
Risk models integrating blood-based biomarkers to indicate CALD onset, enabling
timely interventions, are lacking. Therefore, we evaluated the prognostic value
of blood biomarkers in addition to current neuroimaging predictors for early
detection of CALD.
METHODS: We measured blood biomarkers in a retrospective, male CALD
risk-assessment cohort consisting of 134 X-ALD patients and 66 controls and in a
phenotype-blinded validation set (25 X-ALD boys, 4-13 years) using Simoa®and
Luminex® technologies.
FINDINGS: Among 25 biomarkers indicating axonal damage, astrocye/microglia
activation, or immune-cell recruitment, neurofilament light chain (NfL) had the
highest prognostic value for early indication of childhood/adolescent CALD. A
plasma NfL cut-off level of 8.33 pg/mL, determined in the assessment cohort,
correctly discriminated CALD with an accuracy of 96% [95% CI: 80-100] in the
validation group. Multivariable logistic regression models revealed that
combining NfL with GFAP or cytokines/chemokines (IL-15, IL-12p40, CXCL8, CCL11,
CCL22, and IL-4) that were significantly elevated in CALD vs healthy controls
had no additional benefit for detecting neuroinflammation. Some
cytokines/chemokines were elevated only in childhood/adolescent CALD and already
upregulated in asymptomatic X-ALD children (IL-15, IL-12p40, and CCL7). In
adults, NfL levels distinguished CALD but were lower than in
childhood/adolescent CALD patients with similar (MRI) lesion severity. Blood
GFAP did not differentiate CALD from non-inflammatory X-ALD.
INTERPRETATION: Biomarker-based risk prediction with a plasma NfL cut-off value
of 8.33 pg/mL, determined by ROC analysis, indicates CALD onset with high
sensitivity and specificity in childhood X-ALD patients. A specific
pro-inflammatory cytokine/chemokine profile in asymptomatic X-ALD boys may
indicate a primed, immanent inflammatory state aligning with peak onset of CALD.
Age-related differences in biomarker levels in adult vs childhood CALD patients
warrants caution in predicting onset and progression of CALD in adults. Further
evaluations are needed to assess clinical utility of the NfL cut-off for risk
prognosis of CALD onset.
FUNDING: Austrian Science Fund, European Leukodystrophy Association.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2023.104781
PMCID: PMC10497986
PMID: 37683329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests MP received support
from Amicus, Merck, Novartis and Sanofi-Genzyme; BZ received support from
ACTRIMS 2022 and 2023 endMS SPRINT; JG received support from Quanterix; HAY was
supported by an emerging investigator grant from ALD connect; CGB received
grants from the German Research Foundation and the Ministry for Science and
Culture of Lower Saxony; ME received support from Minoryx and is member of the
advisory board of Minoryx, Poxel and SwanBio Therapeutics; FE is holding a
license for “Intrathecal delivery of nucleic acid sequences encoding ABCD1 for
treatment of Adrenomyeloneuropathy” (NO. 29539-021PCT), received consulting fees
from SwanBio Therapeutics and UpToDate, is founder of SwanBio Therapeutics, ALD
Connect and organizer of trial sites for ASPA, Bluebird Bio Therapeutics, Ionis
Pharmaceuticals and Sanofi; AP received consulting fees from Swanbio
Therapeutics and Sanofi and is member of the Advisory Board of Bluebird Bio
Therapeutics and MedDay Therapeutics. JSK is member of the advisory board for
Krabbe Disease of PassageBio. MCR received a grant from Novartis. EM has
received funding from the National Institutes of Health (K23NS118044). All
remaining authors declare no competing interests.
