---
reference_id: "PMID:25600227"
title: Gliptin and GLP-1 analog treatment improves survival and vascular inflammation/dysfunction in animals with lipopolysaccharide-induced endotoxemia.
authors:
- Steven S
- Hausding M
- Kröller-Schön S
- Mader M
- Mikhed Y
- Stamm P
- Zinßius E
- Pfeffer A
- Welschof P
- Agdauletova S
- Sudowe S
- Li H
- Oelze M
- Schulz E
- Klein T
- Münzel T
- Daiber A
journal: Basic Res Cardiol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s00395-015-0465-x
keywords:
- Animals
- Dipeptidyl-Peptidase IV Inhibitors/pharmacology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Endotoxemia/physiopathology
- "Glucagon-Like Peptide 1/analogs & derivatives, pharmacology"
- Inflammation/physiopathology
- Linagliptin
- Lipopolysaccharides/toxicity
- Liraglutide
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Oxidative Stress/drug effects
- Purines/pharmacology
- Pyrazines/pharmacology
- Quinazolines/pharmacology
- Rats
- "Rats, Wistar"
- Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Sitagliptin Phosphate
- Triazoles/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gliptin and GLP-1 analog treatment improves survival and vascular inflammation/dysfunction in animals with lipopolysaccharide-induced endotoxemia.
**Authors:** Steven S, Hausding M, Kröller-Schön S, Mader M, Mikhed Y, Stamm P, Zinßius E, Pfeffer A, Welschof P, Agdauletova S, Sudowe S, Li H, Oelze M, Schulz E, Klein T, Münzel T, Daiber A
**Journal:** Basic Res Cardiol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00395-015-0465-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00395-015-0465-x)

## Content

1. Basic Res Cardiol. 2015 Mar;110(2):6. doi: 10.1007/s00395-015-0465-x. Epub
2015  Jan 20.

Gliptin and GLP-1 analog treatment improves survival and vascular
inflammation/dysfunction in animals with lipopolysaccharide-induced endotoxemia.

Steven S(1), Hausding M, Kröller-Schön S, Mader M, Mikhed Y, Stamm P, Zinßius E,
Pfeffer A, Welschof P, Agdauletova S, Sudowe S, Li H, Oelze M, Schulz E, Klein
T, Münzel T, Daiber A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, 2nd Medical Clinic, Medical Center of the Johannes
Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany.

Dipeptidyl peptidase (DPP)-4 inhibitors are used to treat hyperglycemia by
increasing the incretin glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1). Previous studies showed
anti-inflammatory and antiatherosclerotic effects of DPP-4 inhibitors. Here, we
compared the effects of linagliptin versus sitagliptin and liraglutide on
survival and vascular function in animal models of endotoxic shock by
prophylactic therapy and treatment after lipopolysaccharide (LPS) injection.
Gliptins were administered either orally or subcutaneously: linagliptin
(5 mg/kg/day), sitagliptin (50 mg/kg/day) or liraglutide (200 µg/kg/day).
Endotoxic shock was induced by LPS injection (mice 17.5-20 mg/kg i.p., rats
10 mg/kg/day). Linagliptin and liraglutide treatment or DPP-4 knockout improved
the survival of endotoxemic mice, while sitagliptin was ineffective.
Linagliptin, liraglutide and sitagliptin ameliorated LPS-induced hypotension and
vascular dysfunction in endotoxemic rats, suppressed inflammatory parameters
such as whole blood nitrosyl-iron hemoglobin (leukocyte-inducible nitric oxide
synthase activity) or aortic mRNA expression of markers of inflammation as well
as whole blood and aortic reactive oxygen species formation. Hemostasis (tail
bleeding time, activated partial thromboplastin time) was impaired in
endotoxemic rats and recovered under cotreatment with linagliptin and
liraglutide. Finally, the beneficial effects of linagliptin on vascular function
and inflammatory parameters in endotoxemic mice were impaired in AMP-activated
kinase (alpha1) knockout mice. The improved survival of endotoxemic animals and
other data shown here may warrant further clinical evaluation of these drugs in
patients with septic shock beyond the potential improvement of inflammatory
complications in diabetic individuals with special emphasis on the role of
AMP-activated kinase (alpha1) in the DPP-4/GLP-1 cascade.

DOI: 10.1007/s00395-015-0465-x
PMID: 25600227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
