---
reference_id: "PMID:15868469"
title: "Peroxisome biogenesis disorders: the role of peroxisomes and metabolic dysfunction in developing brain."
authors:
- Faust PL
- Banka D
- Siriratsivawong R
- Ng VG
- Wikander TM
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-005-7059-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peroxisome biogenesis disorders: the role of peroxisomes and metabolic dysfunction in developing brain.
**Authors:** Faust PL, Banka D, Siriratsivawong R, Ng VG, Wikander TM
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-005-7059-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-005-7059-y)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2005;28(3):369-83. doi: 10.1007/s10545-005-7059-y.

Peroxisome biogenesis disorders: the role of peroxisomes and metabolic 
dysfunction in developing brain.

Faust PL(1), Banka D, Siriratsivawong R, Ng VG, Wikander TM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA. 
plf3@columbia.edu

Peroxisome biogenesis disorders, of which Zellweger syndrome is the most severe, 
result in severe neurological dysfunction associated with abnormal CNS neuronal 
migrations due to the lack of functional peroxisomes. The PEX2-/- mouse model 
for Zellweger syndrome has enabled us to evaluate the role of peroxisomes in the 
development and functioning of the nervous system. These studies have shown 
that, in addition to disturbances in neuronal migration in developing cerebral 
cortex and cerebellum, defects in neuronal differentiation, proliferation and 
survival may also contribute to the CNS malformations. However, owing to the 
multiorgan dysfunction in peroxisomal disorders, it has been difficult to 
clearly define an intrinsic role for the peroxisome in brain cells. The use of 
several in vitro cell culture assays to evaluate the migration and 
differentiation of cerebellar neurons demonstrates a persistence of defects in 
peroxisome-deficient neurons. The absence of potential systemically derived, 
extrinsic factors in these in vitro systems indicates that CNS intrinsic defects 
contribute to the pathogenesis of disease in these disorders. However, bile acid 
treatment also increases the survival and growth of PEX2-/- mice and improves 
some aspects of cerebellar development, indicating that extrinsic factors also 
affect the developing peroxisome-deficient brain. Therefore, the final phenotype 
of nervous system dysfunction in peroxisomal disorders will reflect a 
combination of both CNS intrinsic and extrinsic factors.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-005-7059-y
PMID: 15868469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]