---
reference_id: "PMID:34957305"
title: "Production, Transmission, Pathogenesis, and Control of Dengue Virus: A Literature-Based Undivided Perspective."
authors:
- Islam MT
- Quispe C
- Herrera-Bravo J
- Sarkar C
- Sharma R
- Garg N
- Fredes LI
- Martorell M
- Alshehri MM
- Sharifi-Rad J
- Daştan SD
- Calina D
- Alsafi R
- Alghamdi S
- Batiha GE
- Cruz-Martins N
journal: Biomed Res Int
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1155/2021/4224816
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Production, Transmission, Pathogenesis, and Control of Dengue Virus: A Literature-Based Undivided Perspective.
**Authors:** Islam MT, Quispe C, Herrera-Bravo J, Sarkar C, Sharma R, Garg N, Fredes LI, Martorell M, Alshehri MM, Sharifi-Rad J, Daştan SD, Calina D, Alsafi R, Alghamdi S, Batiha GE, Cruz-Martins N
**Journal:** Biomed Res Int (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2021/4224816](https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/4224816)

## Content

1. Biomed Res Int. 2021 Dec 15;2021:4224816. doi: 10.1155/2021/4224816.
eCollection  2021.

Production, Transmission, Pathogenesis, and Control of Dengue Virus: A 
Literature-Based Undivided Perspective.

Islam MT(1), Quispe C(2), Herrera-Bravo J(3)(4), Sarkar C(1), Sharma R(5), Garg 
N(6), Fredes LI(7), Martorell M(8)(9), Alshehri MM(10), Sharifi-Rad J(11), 
Daştan SD(12)(13), Calina D(14), Alsafi R(15), Alghamdi S(15), Batiha GE(16), 
Cruz-Martins N(17)(18)(19).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Life Science Faculty, Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur 
Rahman Science and Technology University, Gopalganj (Dhaka)8100, Bangladesh.
(2)Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad Arturo Prat, Avda. Arturo Prat 
2120, Iquique 1110939, Chile.
(3)Departamento de Ciencias Básicas, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Santo 
Tomas, Chile.
(4)Center of Molecular Biology and Pharmacogenetics, Scientific and 
Technological Bioresource Nucleus, Universidad de La Frontera, Temuco 4811230, 
Chile.
(5)Department of Rasa Shastra & Bhaishajya Kalpana, Faculty of Ayurveda, 
Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi-221005, Uttar 
Pradesh, India.
(6)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras 
Hindu University, Varanasi-221005, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(7)European Institute of Traditional Chinese Studies, 4000-501 Porto, Portugal.
(8)Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, Faculty of Pharmacy, and Centre for 
Healthy Living, University of Concepción, 4070386 Concepción, Chile.
(9)Universidad de Concepción, Unidad de Desarrollo Tecnológico, UDT, Concepción 
4070386, Chile.
(10)Pharmaceutical Care Department, Ministry of National Guard-Health Affairs, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(11)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad del Azuay, Cuenca, Ecuador.
(12)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Sivas Cumhuriyet University, 
58140 Sivas, Turkey.
(13)Beekeeping Development Application and Research Center, Sivas Cumhuriyet 
University, 58140 Sivas, Turkey.
(14)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, University of Medicine and Pharmacy of 
Craiova, 200349 Craiova, Romania.
(15)Laboratory Medicine Department, Faculty of Applied Medical Sciences, Umm 
Al-Qura University, Makkah, Saudi Arabia.
(16)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, 
Damanhour University, Damanhour, Egypt.
(17)Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(18)Institute for Research and Innovation in Health (i3S), University of Porto, 
Porto, Portugal.
(19)Institute of Research and Advanced Training in Health Sciences and 
Technologies (CESPU), Rua Central de Gandra, 1317, 4585-116 Gandra PRD, 
Portugal.

Dengue remains one of the most serious and widespread mosquito-borne viral 
infections in human beings, with serious health problems or even death. About 50 
to 100 million people are newly infected annually, with almost 2.5 billion 
people living at risk and resulting in 20,000 deaths. Dengue virus infection is 
especially transmitted through bites of Aedes mosquitos, hugely spread in 
tropical and subtropical environments, mostly found in urban and semiurban 
areas. Unfortunately, there is no particular therapeutic approach, but 
prevention, adequate consciousness, detection at earlier stage of viral 
infection, and appropriate medical care can lower the fatality rates. This 
review offers a comprehensive view of production, transmission, pathogenesis, 
and control measures of the dengue virus and its vectors.

Copyright © 2021 Muhammad Torequl Islam et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/4224816
PMCID: PMC8694986
PMID: 34957305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.