---
reference_id: "PMID:37403493"
title: Triaging cases of fever with vesicular rash relevant to the monkeypox epidemic.
authors:
- Sardana K
- Sachdeva S
- Narula S
- Gogate S
journal: Trop Doct
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1177/00494755231185616
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Triaging cases of fever with vesicular rash relevant to the monkeypox epidemic.
**Authors:** Sardana K, Sachdeva S, Narula S, Gogate S
**Journal:** Trop Doct (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1177/00494755231185616](https://doi.org/10.1177/00494755231185616)

## Content

1. Trop Doct. 2023 Oct;53(4):481-488. doi: 10.1177/00494755231185616. Epub 2023
Jul  4.

Triaging cases of fever with vesicular rash relevant to the monkeypox epidemic.

Sardana K(1), Sachdeva S(2), Narula S(2), Gogate S(3).

Author information:
(1)Director Professor and Head of Department, Department of Dermatology, 
Venereology, and Leprosy, ABVIMS and Dr Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, New Delhi, 
India.
(2)Senior Resident, Department of Dermatology, Venereology, and Leprosy, ABVIMS 
and Dr Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, New Delhi, India.
(3)Junior Resident, Department of Dermatology, Venereology, and Leprosy, ABVIMS 
and Dr Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, New Delhi, India.

Fever with a vesicular rash is a common clinical scenario and monkeypox (MPX) 
characteristically presents as a fever with a vesiculopustular rash. The 
clinical morphology of MPX mimics many infectious and non-infectious disorders, 
and narrowing down the differentials of vesiculopustular rash necessitates 
thorough history taking and physical examination. The clinical evaluation 
involves the assessment of the primary skin lesions, sites of involvement, 
distribution, number and size of lesions, and pattern of progression of the 
rash, along with the onset of the rash relative to the occurrence of fever and 
other systemic signs. Common disorders which are close differentials include 
Varicella, Erythema Multiforme, enteroviral exanthems, and disseminated herpes 
simplex. Distinct clinical indicators of MPX include the presence of deep-seated 
umbilicated vesiculopustules, lymphadenopathy, involvement of the palms and 
soles, centrifugal spread, and genital involvement. We delineate and enlist 
features of common disorders presenting as vesiculopustular rash, which can help 
the clinician differentiate them from MPX.

DOI: 10.1177/00494755231185616
PMID: 37403493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]