---
reference_id: "PMID:15107405"
title: Hedgehog signaling in the neural crest cells regulates the patterning and growth of facial primordia.
authors:
- Jeong J
- Mao J
- Tenzen T
- Kottmann AH
- McMahon AP
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1101/gad.1190304
keywords:
- Animals
- "Face/embryology, physiology"
- Hedgehog Proteins
- Humans
- Membrane Proteins
- Mesoderm/metabolism
- Mice
- "Neural Crest/embryology, metabolism"
- Patched Receptors
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptors, Cell Surface"
- "Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/physiology
- "Skull/embryology, metabolism"
- Smoothened Receptor
- Trans-Activators/metabolism
- Wnt Proteins
- Zebrafish Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hedgehog signaling in the neural crest cells regulates the patterning and growth of facial primordia.
**Authors:** Jeong J, Mao J, Tenzen T, Kottmann AH, McMahon AP
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.1190304](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.1190304)

## Content

1. Genes Dev. 2004 Apr 15;18(8):937-51. doi: 10.1101/gad.1190304.

Hedgehog signaling in the neural crest cells regulates the patterning and growth
of facial primordia.

Jeong J(1), Mao J, Tenzen T, Kottmann AH, McMahon AP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA.

Facial abnormalities in human SHH mutants have implicated the Hedgehog (Hh)
pathway in craniofacial development, but early defects in mouse Shh mutants have
precluded the experimental analysis of this phenotype. Here, we removed
Hh-responsiveness specifically in neural crest cells (NCCs), the multipotent
cell type that gives rise to much of the skeleton and connective tissue of the
head. In these mutants, many of the NCC-derived skeletal and nonskeletal
components are missing, but the NCC-derived neuronal cell types are unaffected.
Although the initial formation of branchial arches (BAs) is normal, expression
of several Fox genes, specific targets of Hh signaling in cranial NCCs, is lost
in the mutant. The spatially restricted expression of Fox genes suggests that
they may play an important role in BA patterning. Removing Hh signaling in NCCs
also leads to increased apoptosis and decreased cell proliferation in the BAs,
which results in facial truncation that is evident by embryonic day 11.5
(E11.5). Together, our results demonstrate that Hh signaling in NCCs is
essential for normal patterning and growth of the face. Further, our analysis of
Shh-Fox gene regulatory interactions leads us to propose that Fox genes mediate
the action of Shh in facial development.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1190304
PMCID: PMC395852
PMID: 15107405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
