---
reference_id: "PMID:28695822"
title: Arid1b haploinsufficient mice reveal neuropsychiatric phenotypes and reversible causes of growth impairment.
authors:
- Celen C
- Chuang JC
- Luo X
- Nijem N
- Walker AK
- Chen F
- Zhang S
- Chung AS
- Nguyen LH
- Nassour I
- Budhipramono A
- Sun X
- Bok LA
- McEntagart M
- Gevers EF
- Birnbaum SG
- Eisch AJ
- Powell CM
- Ge WP
- Santen GW
- Chahrour M
- Zhu H
journal: Elife
year: '2017'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.25730
keywords:
- Animals
- "Behavior, Animal"
- Brain/pathology
- "Developmental Disabilities/genetics, physiopathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Growth Hormone-Releasing Hormone/metabolism
- Haploinsufficiency
- Heterozygote
- Insulin-Like Growth Factor I/metabolism
- "Mental Disorders/genetics, physiopathology"
- Mice
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/metabolism
- Transcription Factors/deficiency
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arid1b haploinsufficient mice reveal neuropsychiatric phenotypes and reversible causes of growth impairment.
**Authors:** Celen C, Chuang JC, Luo X, Nijem N, Walker AK, Chen F, Zhang S, Chung AS, Nguyen LH, Nassour I, Budhipramono A, Sun X, Bok LA, McEntagart M, Gevers EF, Birnbaum SG, Eisch AJ, Powell CM, Ge WP, Santen GW, Chahrour M, Zhu H
**Journal:** Elife (2017)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.25730](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.25730)

## Content

1. Elife. 2017 Jul 11;6:e25730. doi: 10.7554/eLife.25730.

Arid1b haploinsufficient mice reveal neuropsychiatric phenotypes and reversible 
causes of growth impairment.

Celen C(1)(2), Chuang JC(1)(2), Luo X(1)(2)(3), Nijem N(4)(5), Walker AK(6)(7), 
Chen F(1)(4)(6), Zhang S(1)(2), Chung AS(1)(2), Nguyen LH(1)(2), Nassour 
I(1)(2), Budhipramono A(1)(2), Sun X(1)(2), Bok LA(8), McEntagart M(9), Gevers 
EF(10), Birnbaum SG(7), Eisch AJ(11), Powell CM(6)(7), Ge WP(1)(4)(6), Santen 
GW(12), Chahrour M(4)(5), Zhu H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Children's Research Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, United States.
(2)Departments of Pediatrics and Internal Medicine, Center for Regenerative 
Science and Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, 
United States.
(3)Department of Bioinformatics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, United States.
(4)Departments of Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, United States.
(5)Eugene McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, United States.
(6)Departments of Neurology and Neurotherapeutics, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, United States.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, United States.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Máxima Medical Center, Veldhoven, The Netherlands.
(9)Medical Genetics, St George's University Hospitals, NHS Foundation Trust, 
United Kingdom Caroline Brain, Endocrinology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for 
Children, London, United Kingdom.
(10)William Harvey Research Institute, Barts and the London, Queen Mary 
University of London, London, United Kingdom.
(11)Department of Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Children's Hospital 
of Philadelphia, and Mahoney Institute of Neuroscience, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, United States.
(12)Department of Clinical genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
The Netherlands.

Sequencing studies have implicated haploinsufficiency of ARID1B, a SWI/SNF 
chromatin-remodeling subunit, in short stature (Yu et al., 2015), autism 
spectrum disorder (O'Roak et al., 2012), intellectual disability (Deciphering 
Developmental Disorders Study, 2015), and corpus callosum agenesis (Halgren et 
al., 2012). In addition, ARID1B is the most common cause of Coffin-Siris 
syndrome, a developmental delay syndrome characterized by some of the above 
abnormalities (Santen et al., 2012; Tsurusaki et al., 2012; Wieczorek et al., 
2013). We generated Arid1b heterozygous mice, which showed social behavior 
impairment, altered vocalization, anxiety-like behavior, neuroanatomical 
abnormalities, and growth impairment. In the brain, Arid1b haploinsufficiency 
resulted in changes in the expression of SWI/SNF-regulated genes implicated in 
neuropsychiatric disorders. A focus on reversible mechanisms identified 
Insulin-like growth factor (IGF1) deficiency with inadequate compensation by 
Growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) and Growth hormone (GH), 
underappreciated findings in ARID1B patients. Therapeutically, GH 
supplementation was able to correct growth retardation and muscle weakness. This 
model functionally validates the involvement of ARID1B in human disorders, and 
allows mechanistic dissection of neurodevelopmental diseases linked to 
chromatin-remodeling.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.25730
PMCID: PMC5515576
PMID: 28695822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that no competing interests 
exist.