---
reference_id: "PMID:7881943"
title: Juvenile polyposis.
authors:
- Desai DC
- Neale KF
- Talbot IC
- Hodgson SV
- Phillips RK
journal: Br J Surg
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1002/bjs.1800820106
keywords:
- Adenomatous Polyposis Coli/pathology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Gastrointestinal Neoplasms/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Humans
- "Intestinal Polyps/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- "Polyps/genetics, pathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Juvenile polyposis.
**Authors:** Desai DC, Neale KF, Talbot IC, Hodgson SV, Phillips RK
**Journal:** Br J Surg (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1002/bjs.1800820106](https://doi.org/10.1002/bjs.1800820106)

## Content

1. Br J Surg. 1995 Jan;82(1):14-7. doi: 10.1002/bjs.1800820106.

Juvenile polyposis.

Desai DC(1), Neale KF, Talbot IC, Hodgson SV, Phillips RK.

Author information:
(1)Imperial Cancer Research Fund Colorectal Unit, St Mark's Hospital, London, 
UK.

Juvenile polyposis is an uncommon condition characterized by the development of 
multiple juvenile polyps, predominantly in the colon but also in the rest of the 
gastrointestinal tract. The condition usually presents in childhood; only 15 per 
cent of patients present as adults. The rarer and often fatal form, namely, 
juvenile polyposis of infancy, is typified by diarrhoea, protein-losing 
enteropathy, bleeding and rectal prolapse. The more common form of juvenile 
polyposis (affecting the colon, stomach and small bowel) occurs in the first or 
second decade with rectal bleeding and anaemia. A family history of the 
condition is found in 20-50 per cent of patients with apparently an autosomal 
dominant trait. The gene for juvenile polyposis has not yet been identified. 
Epithelial dysplasia is common and the cumulative risk of colorectal cancer is > 
50 per cent. Various extracolonic abnormalities may also occur. Most patients 
are treated surgically for colonic polyps, although endoscopic polypectomy is 
also an option. The rest of the gastrointestinal tract should be screened as 
should asymptomatic first-degree relatives.

DOI: 10.1002/bjs.1800820106
PMID: 7881943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]