---
reference_id: "PMID:40916936"
title: "Isocitrate dehydrogenase mutation and microenvironment in gliomas: do immunotherapy approaches matter?"
authors:
- Platten M
journal: Curr Opin Neurol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000001426
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Isocitrate dehydrogenase mutation and microenvironment in gliomas: do immunotherapy approaches matter?
**Authors:** Platten M
**Journal:** Curr Opin Neurol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1097/WCO.0000000000001426](https://doi.org/10.1097/WCO.0000000000001426)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Neurol. 2025 Dec 1;38(6):706-710. doi: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000001426.
 Epub 2025 Sep 3.

Isocitrate dehydrogenase mutation and microenvironment in gliomas: do 
immunotherapy approaches matter?

Platten M(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Cooperation Unit (CCU) Neuroimmunology and Brain Tumor Immunology, 
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ).
(2)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), DKFZ, Core Center Heidelberg, Heidelberg.
(3)Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Mannheim Center for 
Translation Neuroscience (MCTN), Heidelberg University, Mannheim.
(4)Helmholtz Institute for Translational Oncology Mainz (HI-TRON Mainz) - A 
Helmholtz Institute of the DKFZ, Mainz.
(5)DKFZ Hector Cancer Institute at the University Medical Center Mannheim, 
Mannheim, Germany.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Gliomas with mutations in the gene for isocitrate 
dehydrogenase (IDH) display a unique immune microenvironment that is distinct 
from IDH-wildtype gliomas. This unique immune microenvironment is shaped by 
2-hydroxyglutarate (2-HG), an oncometabolite produced by mutant IDH. These 
features provide an opportunity to develop and test targeted immunotherapies for 
IDH-mutant gliomas.
RECENT FINDINGS: IDH-mutant gliomas are characterized by an immunosuppressive 
tumor immune microenvironment (TIME) that suppresses the infiltration and 
activation of tumor-specific T cells. This is owed both to direct effects of the 
oncometabolite 2-hydroxyglutarate on glioma-infiltrating T cells and myeloid 
cells and indirect effects on the chemotactic profile of tumor cells. These 
immunosuppressive effects are reversed by IDH inhibitors recently approved for 
the treatments of IDH-mutant gliomas. At the same time, clinical trials have 
demonstrated encouraging results for targeted immunotherapies using vaccines 
targeting the most frequent mutation IDH1R132H.
SUMMARY: The reversal of the immunosuppressive effects by IDH inhibitors has 
opened exciting avenues for combinatorial immunotherapies such as vaccines and 
immune checkpoint inhibitors.

Copyright © 2025 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000001426
PMID: 40916936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]