---
reference_id: "PMID:16280652"
title: Autoimmune destruction of pancreatic beta cells.
authors:
- Yoon JW
- Jun HS
journal: Am J Ther
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1097/01.mjt.0000178767.67857.63
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmune destruction of pancreatic beta cells.
**Authors:** Yoon JW, Jun HS
**Journal:** Am J Ther (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.mjt.0000178767.67857.63](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.mjt.0000178767.67857.63)

## Content

1. Am J Ther. 2005 Nov-Dec;12(6):580-91. doi: 10.1097/01.mjt.0000178767.67857.63.

Autoimmune destruction of pancreatic beta cells.

Yoon JW(1), Jun HS.

Author information:
(1)Rosalind Franklin Comprehensive Diabetes Center, Department of Pathology, 
Chicago Medical School, North Chicago, IL 60064, USA. 
ji-won.yoon@rosalindfranklin.edu

Type 1 diabetes results from the destruction of insulin-producing pancreatic 
beta cells by a beta cell-specific autoimmune process. Beta cell autoantigens, 
macrophages, dendritic cells, B lymphocytes, and T lymphocytes have been shown 
to be involved in the pathogenesis of autoimmune diabetes. Beta cell 
autoantigens are thought to be released from beta cells by cellular turnover or 
damage and are processed and presented to T helper cells by antigen-presenting 
cells. Macrophages and dendritic cells are the first cell types to infiltrate 
the pancreatic islets. Naive CD4+ T cells that circulate in the blood and 
lymphoid organs, including the pancreatic lymph nodes, may recognize major 
histocompatibility complex and beta cell peptides presented by dendritic cells 
and macrophages in the islets. These CD4+ T cells can be activated by 
interleukin (IL)-12 released from macrophages and dendritic cells. While this 
process takes place, beta cell antigen-specific CD8+ T cells are activated by 
IL-2 produced by the activated TH1 CD4+ T cells, differentiate into cytotoxic T 
cells and are recruited into the pancreatic islets. These activated TH1 CD4+ T 
cells and CD8+ cytotoxic T cells are involved in the destruction of beta cells. 
In addition, beta cells can also be damaged by granzymes and perforin released 
from CD8+ cytotoxic T cells and by soluble mediators such as cytokines and 
reactive oxygen molecules released from activated macrophages in the islets. 
Thus, activated macrophages, TH1 CD4+ T cells, and beta cell-cytotoxic CD8+ T 
cells act synergistically to destroy beta cells, resulting in autoimmune type 1 
diabetes.

DOI: 10.1097/01.mjt.0000178767.67857.63
PMID: 16280652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]