---
reference_id: "PMID:28756072"
title: Epidemiology of Takayasu arteritis.
authors:
- Onen F
- Akkoc N
journal: Presse Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2017.05.034
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- HLA-B52 Antigen/genetics
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Prevalence
- Prognosis
- Sex Distribution
- "Takayasu Arteritis/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of Takayasu arteritis.
**Authors:** Onen F, Akkoc N
**Journal:** Presse Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lpm.2017.05.034](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lpm.2017.05.034)

## Content

1. Presse Med. 2017 Jul-Aug;46(7-8 Pt 2):e197-e203. doi:
10.1016/j.lpm.2017.05.034.  Epub 2017 Jul 26.

Epidemiology of Takayasu arteritis.

Onen F(1), Akkoc N(2).

Author information:
(1)Dokuz Eylul university school of medicine, internal medicine/division of
rheumatology, Mithatpasa Cad., Izmir, 35340, Turkey. Electronic address:
fatos.onen@gmail.com.
(2)Dokuz Eylul university school of medicine, internal medicine/division of
rheumatology, Mithatpasa Cad., Izmir, 35340, Turkey.

Takayasu arteritis (TA), a granulomatous large vessel vasculitis involves mostly
the aorta and its proximal branches and occurs most commonly in young females.
The data on the epidemiology of TA is limited, probably due to the rarity of the
disease. Although the disease has a worldwide distribution, it is generally
thought to be much more common among Asian populations. The incidences of TA
were estimated to be 1-2 per million in Japan and 2.2 per million in Kuwait.
Recent epidemiologic studies suggest that TA is being increasingly recognized in
Europe with reported incidence estimates varying from 0.4 to 1.5 per million.
The highest ever prevalence of TA at 40 per million was estimated in Japan and
the lowest ever one at 0.9 per million in US. The reported prevalences in the
European populations vary between the ranges of 4.7 per million and 33 per
million. These variations between the studies may be derived from geographical
and genetic differences between the populations, but also may be due to the
methodological differences.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lpm.2017.05.034
PMID: 28756072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
