---
reference_id: "PMID:37594736"
title: The Origin of Antithyroid Drugs.
authors:
- Sawin CT
- Cooper DS
journal: Thyroid
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1089/thy.2022.0410
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Origin of Antithyroid Drugs.
**Authors:** Sawin CT, Cooper DS
**Journal:** Thyroid (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1089/thy.2022.0410](https://doi.org/10.1089/thy.2022.0410)

## Content

1. Thyroid. 2023 Dec;33(12):1395-1401. doi: 10.1089/thy.2022.0410. Epub 2023 Aug 
18.

The Origin of Antithyroid Drugs.

Sawin CT(1), Cooper DS(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, The Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Background: When the antithyroid drugs were discovered in the early 1940s, they 
were immediately recognized as a revolutionary new treatment for 
hyperthyroidism. Although much has been learned about their mechanism of action 
and clinical utility, they continue to be used today in much the same way as 
they have been since their introduction. Summary: In 1995, Dr. Clark Sawin gave 
an address on the history of antithyroid drug development at the 11th 
International Thyroid Congress in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. In his review, Dr. 
Sawin recounted the original observations by Drs. Julia and Cosmo Mackenzie and 
Curt Richter at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, and how their 
work ultimately led to Dr. Edwin (Ted) B. Astwood's seminal 1943 report on the 
use of thiourea and thiouracil in the Journal of the American Medical 
Association. He also described the development of propylthiouracil and 
methimazole as less toxic alternatives. He concluded his remarks by noting the 
often-serendipitous pathway of drug development and the role of pharmaceutical 
companies in the process. Conclusions: Antithyroid drugs remain a cornerstone of 
thyroid therapeutics. It is informative to review the process by which they came 
into use, as this is a seminal part of the history of thyroid disease in the 
20th century. This knowledge may also spark additional research leading to new 
pharmacotherapies for patients with hyperthyroidism.

DOI: 10.1089/thy.2022.0410
PMID: 37594736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]