---
reference_id: "PMID:38653530"
title: Disease flares with baricitinib dose reductions and development of flare criteria in patients with CANDLE/PRAAS.
authors:
- Cetin Gedik K
- Ortega-Villa AM
- Materne G
- Rastegar A
- Montealegre Sanchez GA
- Reinhardt A
- Brogan PA
- Berkun Y
- Murias S
- Robles M
- Schalm S
- de Jesus AA
- Goldbach-Mansky R
journal: Ann Rheum Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1136/ard-2023-225463
keywords:
- Humans
- "Purines/administration & dosage"
- "Pyrazoles/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Sulfonamides/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Azetidines/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Female
- Male
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Drug Tapering
- Symptom Flare Up
- Lipodystrophy
- "Janus Kinase Inhibitors/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Hereditary Autoinflammatory Diseases/drug therapy, diagnosis"
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disease flares with baricitinib dose reductions and development of flare criteria in patients with CANDLE/PRAAS.
**Authors:** Cetin Gedik K, Ortega-Villa AM, Materne G, Rastegar A, Montealegre Sanchez GA, Reinhardt A, Brogan PA, Berkun Y, Murias S, Robles M, Schalm S, de Jesus AA, Goldbach-Mansky R
**Journal:** Ann Rheum Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1136/ard-2023-225463](https://doi.org/10.1136/ard-2023-225463)

## Content

1. Ann Rheum Dis. 2024 Aug 27;83(9):1181-1188. doi: 10.1136/ard-2023-225463.

Disease flares with baricitinib dose reductions and development of flare
criteria in patients with CANDLE/PRAAS.

Cetin Gedik K(1)(2), Ortega-Villa AM(3), Materne G(4), Rastegar A(4),
Montealegre Sanchez GA(5), Reinhardt A(6), Brogan PA(7)(8), Berkun Y(9), Murias
S(10), Robles M(11), Schalm S(12), de Jesus AA(4), Goldbach-Mansky R(1).

Author information:
(1)Translational Autoinflammatory Diseases Section, LCIM, NIAID, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA raphaela.goldbach-mansky@nih.gov
cetingedikk@upmc.edu.
(2)Division of Pediatric Rheumatology, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(3)Biostatistics Research Branch, Division of Clinical Research, NIAID, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(4)Translational Autoinflammatory Diseases Section, LCIM, NIAID, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(5)Division of Clinical Research, NIAID, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(6)Boys Town National Research Hospital, Omaha, Nebraska, USA.
(7)University College London Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health,
London, UK.
(8)Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Hadassah Hebrew University Medical Center,
Jerusalem, Israel.
(10)Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain.
(11)Eskenazi Health Center, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.
(12)Rheumatologie im Zentrum, Munich, Germany.

OBJECTIVES: Patients with chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatosis with
lipodystrophy and elevated temperature/proteasome-associated autoinflammatory
syndrome (CANDLE/PRAAS) respond to the janus kinase inhibitor 1/2 inhibition
with baricitinib at exposures higher than in rheumatoid arthritis. Baricitinib
dose reductions to minimise exposure triggered disease flares which we used to
develop 'flare criteria'.
METHODS: Of 10 patients with CANDLE/PRAAS treated with baricitinib in an
open-label expanded-access programme, baricitinib doses were reduced 14 times in
9 patients between April 2014 and December 2019. Retrospective data analysis of
daily diary scores and laboratory markers collected before and after the dose
reductions were used to develop 'clinical' and 'subclinical' flare criteria.
Disease flare rates were compared among patients with <25% and >25% dose
reductions and during study visits when patients received recommended
'optimized' baricitinib doses (high-dose visits) versus lower than recommended
baricitinib doses (low-dose visits) using two-sided χ2 tests.
RESULTS: In the 9/10 patients with CANDLE with dose reduction, 7/14 (50%) times
the dose was reduced resulted in a disease flare. All four dose reductions of
>25% triggered a disease flare (p <0.05). Assessment of clinical and laboratory
changes during disease flares allowed the development of disease flare criteria
that were assessed during visits when patients received high or low doses of
baricitinib. Disease flare criteria were reached during 43.14% of low-dose
visits compared with 12.75% of high-dose visits (p <0.0001). Addition of an
interferon score as an additional flare criterion increased the sensitivity to
detect disease flares.
CONCLUSION: We observed disease flares and rebound inflammation with baricitinib
dose reductions and proposed flare criteria that can assist in monitoring
disease activity and in designing clinical studies in CANDLE/PRAAS.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2024. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published
by BMJ on behalf of EULAR.

DOI: 10.1136/ard-2023-225463
PMCID: PMC11420725
PMID: 38653530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: PAB received consulting and
lecture fees and travel support from SOBI, lecture fees from Novartis and serves
as a trustee of society, a patient led Kawasaki charity (unpaid). SM received
lecture and presentation fees and travel support from Abbvie, Novartis, Roche,
Pfizer. SS received lecture fee from Novartis and presentation fee from Pfizer.
RG-M received study support under government CRADAs from Eli Lilly, IFM and SOBI
and serves in a leadership position at the TARN initiative and as liaison to the
Autoinflammatory Alliance (unpaid).
