---
reference_id: "PMID:36225116"
title: "Klinefelter Syndrome: What should we tell prospective parents?"
authors:
- White M
- Zacharin MR
- Fawcett S
- McGillivray G
journal: Prenat Diagn
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/pd.6250
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Klinefelter Syndrome: What should we tell prospective parents?
**Authors:** White M, Zacharin MR, Fawcett S, McGillivray G
**Journal:** Prenat Diagn (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pd.6250](https://doi.org/10.1002/pd.6250)

## Content

1. Prenat Diagn. 2023 Feb;43(2):240-249. doi: 10.1002/pd.6250. Epub 2022 Oct 21.

Klinefelter Syndrome: What should we tell prospective parents?

White M(1)(2)(3), Zacharin MR(1), Fawcett S(4), McGillivray G(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology & Diabetes, The Royal Children's Hospital, 
Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Health Services Research Unit, The Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, 
Victoria, Australia.
(3)Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, University of Melbourne, 
Carlton, Victoria, Australia.
(4)Clinical Genetics Service, The Royal Women's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.
(5)Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, 
The Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(6)Department of Perinatal Medicine, Mercy Hospital for Women, Heidelberg, 
Victoria, Australia.

Klinefelter syndrome (KS) or 47,XXY is the most common sex chromosome aneuploidy 
(SCA), occurring at a prevalence of 1 in 600 male pregnancies. Historically, 
only 25% of individuals with KS came to medical attention, for a range of issues 
across the life course including under-virilisation at birth, developmental and 
social concerns in childhood, absence, delay or arrest of puberty in adolescence 
or infertility in adulthood. Our understanding of the phenotypic spectrum of KS 
has been largely influenced by this ascertainment bias. With increasing uptake 
of antenatal noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT), a corresponding increase in 
identification of KS has been documented. Population-based longitudinal data 
from infancy to adulthood on these individuals is lacking, which impedes 
balanced antenatal genetic counselling and raises issues for prospective parents 
and clinicians alike.

© 2022 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/pd.6250
PMID: 36225116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]