---
reference_id: "PMID:38929273"
title: Alpha-1-Antitrypsin Deficiency in Children-Unmet Needs Concerning the Liver Manifestation.
authors:
- Lemke J
- Weigert A
- Bagci S
- Born M
- Ganschow R
- Katzer D
journal: Children (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/children11060694
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alpha-1-Antitrypsin Deficiency in Children-Unmet Needs Concerning the Liver Manifestation.
**Authors:** Lemke J, Weigert A, Bagci S, Born M, Ganschow R, Katzer D
**Journal:** Children (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/children11060694](https://doi.org/10.3390/children11060694)

## Content

1. Children (Basel). 2024 Jun 6;11(6):694. doi: 10.3390/children11060694.

Alpha-1-Antitrypsin Deficiency in Children-Unmet Needs Concerning the Liver 
Manifestation.

Lemke J(1), Weigert A(1), Bagci S(1)(2), Born M(3), Ganschow R(1), Katzer D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital 
of Bonn Children's Hospital, 53127 Bonn, Germany.
(2)Department of Neonatology and Pediatric Intensive Care Medicine, University 
Hospital of Bonn Children's Hospital, 53127 Bonn, Germany.
(3)Department of Pediatric Radiology, University Hospital of Bonn Children's 
Hospital, 53127 Bonn, Germany.

OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to analyse the clinical course of 45 children with 
severe alpha-1-antitrypsin deficiency (AATD) registered in our clinic to detect 
possible predictors of poor outcomes.
METHODS: The clinical and biological data of 45 patients with homozygous or 
compound heterozygous AATD were analysed. The data were collected 
retrospectively going back to 2005 and prospectively from May 2020 until October 
2021. It was based on questionnaires, laboratory values, sonography, and biopsy 
findings. Liver disease was classified into four grades depending on the grade 
of liver disease: mild or no liver disease, moderate disease, severe disease, 
and liver transplantation.
RESULTS: Thirty-nine patients (86.7%) had a Pi*ZZ and five (11.1%) a Pi*SZ 
genotype. One patient showed a new, not-yet-described compound heterozygous 
genotype (Pi*Z + Asp95Asn). A total of 66.7% of the cohort showed mild or no 
liver disease, 20% moderate, and 13.3% severe. AATD was diagnosed in most cases 
because of liver abnormalities, such as the elevation of transaminases (42.2%). 
A total of 29.4% of the patients with neonatal icterus prolongatus developed 
severe liver disease, and 25.7% were born small for their gestational age (SGA). 
Diseases of the atopic type were reported in 47.4% of the cases.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of neonatal icterus prolongatus in the first weeks of 
life was significantly more likely in severe courses of liver disease (r = 
0.371, p = 0.012). A tendency toward atopic comorbidity in AAT-deficient 
children needs to be further evaluated.

DOI: 10.3390/children11060694
PMCID: PMC11202262
PMID: 38929273

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.