---
reference_id: "PMID:2732824"
title: Effect of Le Fort III osteotomy on mandibular growth in patients with Crouzon and Apert syndromes.
authors:
- Bu BH
- Kaban LB
- Vargervik K
journal: J Oral Maxillofac Surg
year: '1989'
doi: 10.1016/s0278-2391(89)80002-3
keywords:
- Acrocephalosyndactylia/pathology
- Adolescent
- Cephalometry
- Child
- Craniofacial Dysostosis/pathology
- Humans
- "Mandible/growth & development, pathology"
- Maxilla/surgery
- Osteotomy/methods
- Reference Standards
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of Le Fort III osteotomy on mandibular growth in patients with Crouzon and Apert syndromes.
**Authors:** Bu BH, Kaban LB, Vargervik K
**Journal:** J Oral Maxillofac Surg (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0278-2391(89)80002-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0278-2391(89)80002-3)

## Content

1. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 1989 Jul;47(7):666-71. doi: 
10.1016/s0278-2391(89)80002-3.

Effect of Le Fort III osteotomy on mandibular growth in patients with Crouzon 
and Apert syndromes.

Bu BH(1), Kaban LB, Vargervik K.

Author information:
(1)University of California, San Francisco 94143.

Midface advancement by Le Fort III osteotomy is a common procedure in 
craniofacial surgery. However, little data exist concerning the effect of 
midface advancement on mandibular growth. This is a retrospective study of 38 
patients from two craniofacial centers who had Le Fort III osteotomy. The aims 
of this investigation were to document the size and shape of the mandible in 
Crouzon and Apert syndromes and to determine the effect on these parameters of 
downward and forward movement of the midface. The syndrome patients had 
increased gonial angle, increased MP-SN, increased ramus height, and increased 
ratio of ramus height to body length when compared with normal standards. 
Patients operated during growth and those operated when growth was completed had 
similar mandibular size and shape indicating that Le Fort III osteotomy had no 
measurable effect on these parameters. Inclination of the mandible to the 
anterior cranial base was increased by the operation and remained unchanged 
during the follow-up period. The results of this study indicate that the size 
and morphology of the mandible are similar in Crouzon and Apert syndromes. The 
pattern of growth is more vertical in the syndrome patients than in normals. Le 
Fort III osteotomy in growing children does not result in altered mandibular 
size and shape despite backward rotation of the mandible as a result of midface 
advancement.

DOI: 10.1016/s0278-2391(89)80002-3
PMID: 2732824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]