---
reference_id: "PMID:29503224"
title: Identification of one novel homozygous mutation in the NPR2 gene in a patient from Taiwan with acromesomelic dysplasia Maroteaux type.
authors:
- Lin WD
- Wang CH
- Tsai FJ
journal: Pediatr Neonatol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.pedneo.2017.11.017
keywords:
- Adult
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/genetics"
- Female
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Receptors, Atrial Natriuretic Factor/genetics"
- Atrial Natriuretic Factor Receptor B
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of one novel homozygous mutation in the NPR2 gene in a patient from Taiwan with acromesomelic dysplasia Maroteaux type.
**Authors:** Lin WD, Wang CH, Tsai FJ
**Journal:** Pediatr Neonatol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pedneo.2017.11.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pedneo.2017.11.017)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neonatol. 2018 Jun;59(3):322-323. doi: 10.1016/j.pedneo.2017.11.017. 
Epub 2017 Dec 7.

Identification of one novel homozygous mutation in the NPR2 gene in a patient 
from Taiwan with acromesomelic dysplasia Maroteaux type.

Lin WD(1), Wang CH(2), Tsai FJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Research, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, 
Taiwan; School of Post Baccalaureate Chinese Medicine, China Medical University, 
Taichung, Taiwan.
(2)Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Children's Hospital of China Medical 
University, Taichung, Taiwan; School of Medicine, China Medical University, 
Taichung, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Medical Research, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, 
Taiwan; Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Children's Hospital of China 
Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan; School of Chinese Medicine, China Medical 
University, Taichung, Taiwan; Department of Medical Genetics, China Medical 
University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan; Department of Health and Nutrition 
Biotechnology, Asia University, Taichung, Taiwan. Electronic address: 
d0704@mail.cmuh.org.tw.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pedneo.2017.11.017
PMID: 29503224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]