---
reference_id: "PMID:24771178"
title: Cone-rod dystrophy caused by a novel homozygous RPE65 mutation in Leber congenital amaurosis.
authors:
- Jakobsson C
- Othman IS
- Munier FL
- Schorderet DF
- Abouzeid H
journal: Klin Monbl Augenheilkd
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1368221
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Humans
- "Leber Congenital Amaurosis/diagnosis, genetics"
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide/genetics"
- "Retinitis Pigmentosa/diagnosis, genetics"
- Yemen
- cis-trans-Isomerases/genetics
- Retinoid Isomerohydrolase
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cone-rod dystrophy caused by a novel homozygous RPE65 mutation in Leber congenital amaurosis.
**Authors:** Jakobsson C, Othman IS, Munier FL, Schorderet DF, Abouzeid H
**Journal:** Klin Monbl Augenheilkd (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0034-1368221](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0034-1368221)

## Content

1. Klin Monbl Augenheilkd. 2014 Apr;231(4):405-10. doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1368221. 
Epub 2014 Apr 25.

Cone-rod dystrophy caused by a novel homozygous RPE65 mutation in Leber 
congenital amaurosis.

Jakobsson C(1), Othman IS(2), Munier FL(1), Schorderet DF(1), Abouzeid H(1).

Author information:
(1)IRO-Institute for Research in Ophthalmology, Sion, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to describe an unexpected phenotype in a 
family with Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) due to a retinal pigment 
epithelium-specific protein 65 kDa (RPE65) homozygous mutation.
HISTORY AND SIGNS: We analyzed a family from Yemen in which 3 individuals were 
affected with LCA. Linkage analysis using markers flanking the known LCA genes 
was done, followed by direct sequencing of RPE65.
THERAPY AND OUTCOME: Severe visual impairment and night blindness were observed 
during infancy. We observed photophobia only in the 8-year-old patient. The 
youngest affected had bilateral hyperopia of +3.50 and visual acuity of 1/60. 
The oldest two had visual acuity limited to hand movements in the right eye (OD) 
and counting fingers in the left eye (OS) for the oldest and of 5/60 OD, 6/60 OS 
for the other. They showed disc pallor, attenuated vessels, white flecks in the 
retina mid-periphery and bull's eye maculopathy. ERGs of the oldest child were 
completely unresponsive. Genomic sequencing identified a novel homozygous 
missense mutation, IVS2-3C>G, in the second RPE65 intron.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a novel LCA-related homozygous RPE65 mutation 
associated with a severe clinical presentation including an early and severe 
cone dysfunction. This is in contrast with the presentation associated with 
other RPE65 mutations predominantly causing rod-cone dystrophy with residual 
visual function.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0034-1368221
PMID: 24771178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]