---
reference_id: "PMID:37189863"
title: "Pediatric Myxedema Due to Autoimmune Hypothyroidism: A Rare Complication of a Common Disorder."
authors:
- Bonino E
- Matarazzo P
- Buganza R
- Tuli G
- Munarin J
- Bondone C
- de Sanctis L
journal: Children (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/children10040614
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric Myxedema Due to Autoimmune Hypothyroidism: A Rare Complication of a Common Disorder.
**Authors:** Bonino E, Matarazzo P, Buganza R, Tuli G, Munarin J, Bondone C, de Sanctis L
**Journal:** Children (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/children10040614](https://doi.org/10.3390/children10040614)

## Content

1. Children (Basel). 2023 Mar 24;10(4):614. doi: 10.3390/children10040614.

Pediatric Myxedema Due to Autoimmune Hypothyroidism: A Rare Complication of a 
Common Disorder.

Bonino E(1)(2)(3), Matarazzo P(1)(2), Buganza R(1)(2), Tuli G(1)(2), Munarin 
J(1)(2)(3), Bondone C(4), de Sanctis L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Regina Margherita Children's Hospital, 
Città della Salute e della Scienza, 10126 Torino, Italy.
(2)Department of Public Health and Pediatric Sciences, University of Turin, 
10126 Torino, Italy.
(3)Postgraduate School of Pediatrics, University of Turin, 10126 Torino, Italy.
(4)Department of Pediatric Emergency, Regina Margherita Children's Hospital, 
Città della Salute e della Scienza, 10126 Torino, Italy.

In children, hypothyroidism usually presents non-specific symptoms; symptoms can 
emerge gradually, compromising a timely diagnosis. We report the case of a 
13-year-old male, who was admitted to the hospital due to swelling of the torso 
and neck. Besides these symptoms, the child was healthy, except for a 
significant growth delay. Ultrasound evaluation and blood tests led to the 
diagnosis of myxedema secondary to severe hypothyroidism, which was due to 
autoimmune thyroiditis. Further investigations revealed pericardial effusion and 
pituitary hyperplasia, with hyper-prolactinemia. Treatment with levothyroxine 
led to edema regression and clinical, hemato-chemical and radiological 
improvement. After 6 months, growth velocity increased, although the recovery of 
growth already lost was not guaranteed. Brain MRI showed regression of pituitary 
hyperplasia. The diagnostic delay in this case was probably due to the patient's 
apparent good health, and the underestimation of growth restriction. This report 
underlines the importance of growth monitoring in adolescence, a critical period 
for identifying endocrine conditions; if undiagnosed, these conditions can lead 
to serious complications, such as myxedema in hypothyroidism, with potential 
effects beyond growth on multiple organs.

DOI: 10.3390/children10040614
PMCID: PMC10137292
PMID: 37189863

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.