---
reference_id: "PMID:29851705"
title: "Pityriasis Lichenoides, Atypical Pityriasis Lichenoides, and Related Conditions: A Study of 66 Cases."
authors:
- Borra T
- Custrin A
- Saggini A
- Fink-Puches R
- Cota C
- Vermi W
- Facchetti F
- Cerroni L
journal: Am J Surg Pathol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000001093
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Biopsy
- Child
- Disease Progression
- Female
- "Gene Rearrangement, T-Lymphocyte"
- "Genes, T-Cell Receptor"
- Genetic Markers
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- "Lymphomatoid Papulosis/genetics, immunology, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Multiplex Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Mycosis Fungoides/genetics, immunology, pathology"
- Phenotype
- "Pityriasis Lichenoides/genetics, immunology, pathology"
- "Skin/immunology, pathology"
- "Skin Neoplasms/genetics, immunology, pathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pityriasis Lichenoides, Atypical Pityriasis Lichenoides, and Related Conditions: A Study of 66 Cases.
**Authors:** Borra T, Custrin A, Saggini A, Fink-Puches R, Cota C, Vermi W, Facchetti F, Cerroni L
**Journal:** Am J Surg Pathol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PAS.0000000000001093](https://doi.org/10.1097/PAS.0000000000001093)

## Content

1. Am J Surg Pathol. 2018 Aug;42(8):1101-1112. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000001093.

Pityriasis Lichenoides, Atypical Pityriasis Lichenoides, and Related Conditions:
A Study of 66 Cases.

Borra T(1)(2), Custrin A(1)(3), Saggini A(1)(4), Fink-Puches R(1), Cota C(5),
Vermi W(2), Facchetti F(2), Cerroni L(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Unit Dermatopathology, Department of Dermatology, Medical University
of Graz, Graz, Austria.
(2)Section of Pathology, Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine,
University of Brescia, Brescia.
(3)Institute of Pathologic Anatomy, University of Trieste, Trieste.
(4)Institute of Anatomic Pathology, Department of Biomedicine and Prevention,
University of Rome Tor Vergata.
(5)San Gallicano Dermatological Institute, Rome, Italy.

Pityriasis lichenoides (PLs) is an uncommon skin disease of unknown etiology. In
recent years, an atypical form of PL has been described, showing overlapping
features with mycosis fungoides (MF) and lymphomatoid papulosis. We studied 66
patients with an initial histopathologic diagnosis of PL (M:F=34:32; median age,
25 y; range, 7 to 85 y). According to clinical and phenotypic features, cases
were classified into 4 categories: (1) Conventional PL (characteristic clinical
features of PL without phenotypic aberrations) (n=20; M:F=8:12; median age,
37 y; range, 9 to 74 y); (2) Atypical form of PL (characteristic clinical
features of PL with phenotypic aberrations) (n=25; M:F=16:9; median age, 21 y;
range, 7 to 72 y). Four of these patients subsequently developed MF; (3)
Lymphomatoid papulosis (waxing and waning lesions and positivity for CD30)
(n=10; M:F=4:6; median age, 41 y; range, 16 to 83 y); (4) MF (clinical features
typical of MF) (n=11; M:F=6:5; median age, 17 y; range, 8 to 85 y). Molecular
analyses of clonality of the infiltrate did not reveal relevant differences
among these 4 groups. Our study suggests that patients with an initial
histopathologic diagnosis of PL may belong to different groups, showing that
clinicopathologic correlation and complete phenotypic analyses are paramount in
order to achieve proper classification. Although the relationship between PL and
MF is yet a matter of debate, at the present state of knowledge, patients with a
clinicopathologic presentation consistent with PL but with aberrant phenotypic
features should be monitored in order to detect a possible evolution into MF.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000001093
PMID: 29851705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
