---
reference_id: "PMID:29923966"
title: Efficacy and Safety of Immunosuppressive Agents for Thyroid Eye Disease.
authors:
- Strianese D
journal: Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1097/IOP.0000000000001131
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and Safety of Immunosuppressive Agents for Thyroid Eye Disease.
**Authors:** Strianese D
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1097/IOP.0000000000001131](https://doi.org/10.1097/IOP.0000000000001131)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Plast Reconstr Surg. 2018 Jul/Aug;34(4S Suppl 1):S56-S59. doi: 
10.1097/IOP.0000000000001131.

Efficacy and Safety of Immunosuppressive Agents for Thyroid Eye Disease.

Strianese D(1).

Author information:
(1)King Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia and Department of 
Neuroscience, Reproductive Sciences and Dentistry - University of Naples 
Federico II, Naples, Italy.

PURPOSE: To present an update on the efficacy and safety of immunosuppressive 
therapy for thyroid eye disease (TED) and to offer a general recommendation for 
management of TED, in light of these reports.
METHODS: Data were retrieved from a literature search on PubMed, using the 
following words: thyroid eye disease, immunosuppressant, corticosteroid, 
methotrexate, azathioprine, cyclosporine, cyclophosphamide, rituximab, 
etanercept, adalimumab, tocilizumab, teprotumumab, adverse effects, side 
effects, and complications.
RESULTS: Corticosteroids continue to be the primary medical therapy for TED. 
Recent research has offered insight into potential differences between oral 
corticosteroid and intravenous corticosteroid treatment regimens in terms of 
efficacy and side-effect profiles, which proved more favorable for the latter. 
The use of some traditional immunosuppressive agents, such as methotrexate and 
mycophenolate, seems suitable as steroid-sparing medications. In recent years, 
many scientific reports demonstrated the effectiveness of biologic 
immunosuppressive agents in the management of TED. Etanercept, adalimumab, and 
tocilizumab have been shown to be effective in reduction of the inflammatory 
signs with the possible added advantage of preventing relapse of the disease. 
Teprotumumab may control the disease activity, and it seems to be very effective 
in preventing disease progression. Infliximab might be useful in severe TED 
resistant to steroids and orbital decompression.
CONCLUSIONS: Steroid therapy remains the first-line therapy for moderate/severe 
and severe vision-threatening TED. The biological agents may provide a deep and 
long-standing block of inflammatory activity in TED, with the hope to lower the 
risk of recurrences and to reduce the need of surgical intervention in 
moderate-to-severe disease. Indeed, the actual incidence of adverse effects is 
not yet well assessed because of the paucity of studies. Therefore, their use 
should be limited to those cases that really need an alternative therapy to 
steroids, handled by expert physician in this field.

DOI: 10.1097/IOP.0000000000001131
PMID: 29923966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]