---
reference_id: "PMID:29054555"
title: Evidence-based guidelines for supportive care of patients with Ebola virus disease.
authors:
- Lamontagne F
- Fowler RA
- Adhikari NK
- Murthy S
- Brett-Major DM
- Jacobs M
- Uyeki TM
- Vallenas C
- Norris SL
- Fischer WA 2nd
- Fletcher TE
- Levine AC
- Reed P
- Bausch DG
- Gove S
- Hall A
- Shepherd S
- Siemieniuk RA
- Lamah MC
- Kamara R
- Nakyeyune P
- Soka MJ
- Edwin A
- Hazzan AA
- Jacob ST
- Elkarsany MM
- Adachi T
- Benhadj L
- Clément C
- Crozier I
- Garcia A
- Hoffman SJ
- Guyatt GH
journal: Lancet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31795-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evidence-based guidelines for supportive care of patients with Ebola virus disease.
**Authors:** Lamontagne F, Fowler RA, Adhikari NK, Murthy S, Brett-Major DM, Jacobs M, Uyeki TM, Vallenas C, Norris SL, Fischer WA 2nd, Fletcher TE, Levine AC, Reed P, Bausch DG, Gove S, Hall A, Shepherd S, Siemieniuk RA, Lamah MC, Kamara R, Nakyeyune P, Soka MJ, Edwin A, Hazzan AA, Jacob ST, Elkarsany MM, Adachi T, Benhadj L, Clément C, Crozier I, Garcia A, Hoffman SJ, Guyatt GH
**Journal:** Lancet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31795-6](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31795-6)

## Content

1. Lancet. 2018 Feb 17;391(10121):700-708. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31795-6.
Epub  2017 Oct 17.

Evidence-based guidelines for supportive care of patients with Ebola virus 
disease.

Lamontagne F(1), Fowler RA(2), Adhikari NK(2), Murthy S(3), Brett-Major DM(4), 
Jacobs M(5), Uyeki TM(6), Vallenas C(7), Norris SL(7), Fischer WA 2nd(8), 
Fletcher TE(9), Levine AC(10), Reed P(11), Bausch DG(12), Gove S(13), Hall 
A(14), Shepherd S(15), Siemieniuk RA(16), Lamah MC(17), Kamara R(18), Nakyeyune 
P(19), Soka MJ(20), Edwin A(21), Hazzan AA(22), Jacob ST(23), Elkarsany MM(24), 
Adachi T(25), Benhadj L(26), Clément C(27), Crozier I(28), Garcia A(29), Hoffman 
SJ(30), Guyatt GH(31).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada; 
Centre de recherche du CHUS de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada. Electronic 
address: francois.lamontagne@usherbrooke.ca.
(2)Department of Medicine, Interdepartmental Division of Critical Care Medicine, 
University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; Department of Critical Care Medicine 
and Sunnybrook Research Institute, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre, Toronto, 
ON, Canada.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada.
(4)US Military HIV Research Program, Henry M. Jackson Foundation, Bethesda, MD, 
USA.
(5)Royal Free London NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(6)US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(7)World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
(8)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(9)Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, UK.
(10)Ebola Research Team, International Medical Corps, Washington, DC, USA; 
Department of Emergency Medicine, Warren Alpert Medical School, Providence, RI, 
USA.
(11)Center for Global Health Engagement-Uniformed Services University of the 
Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD, USA; US Public Health Service, Rockville, MD, 
USA.
(12)World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland; Tulane School of Public 
Health and Tropical Medicine, New Orleans, LA, USA.
(13)Integrated Management of Adolescent and Adult Illness-Integrated Management 
of Childhood Illness) Alliance, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(14)London, UK.
(15)Alliance for International Medical Action, Dakar, Senegal.
(16)Department of Health Research Methods, Evidence, and Impact, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(17)Doctors Without Borders, Conakry, Guinea.
(18)Ministry of Health and Sanitation, Freetown, Sierra Leone.
(19)London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(20)Ministry of Health, Monrovia, Liberia.
(21)Palliative Care Service, Korle Bu Teaching Hospital, Accra, Ghana; Ghana 
Health Service Ethical Review Committee, Accra, Ghana.
(22)Department of Health Research Methods, Evidence, and Impact, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada; Department of Healthcare Studies, The College 
at Brockport, State University of New York, NY, USA.
(23)Division of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(24)Karary University, Khartoum, Sudan.
(25)Department of Infectious Diseases, Toshima Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(26)Department of Community Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, 
Sherbrooke, Canada; Centre de recherche, Hôpital Charles-Le Moyne, Longueuil, 
QC, Canada.
(27)Polyclinique Bordeaux Nord Aquitaine, Bordeaux, France.
(28)Infectious Diseases Institute, College of Health Sciences, Makerere 
University, Kampala, Uganda.
(29)Doctors Without Borders, Geneva, Switzerland.
(30)Department of Health Research Methods, Evidence, and Impact, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada; Global Strategy Lab, Dahdaleh Institute for 
Global Health Research, Faculty of Health, and Osgoode Hall Law School, York 
University, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(31)Department of Health Research Methods, Evidence, and Impact, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada; Department of Medicine, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON, Canada.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2019 Mar 16;393(10176):1100. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(19)30295-8.

The 2013-16 Ebola virus disease outbreak in west Africa was associated with 
unprecedented challenges in the provision of care to patients with Ebola virus 
disease, including absence of pre-existing isolation and treatment facilities, 
patients' reluctance to present for medical care, and limitations in the 
provision of supportive medical care. Case fatality rates in west Africa were 
initially greater than 70%, but decreased with improvements in supportive care. 
To inform optimal care in a future outbreak of Ebola virus disease, we employed 
the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) 
methodology to develop evidence-based guidelines for the delivery of supportive 
care to patients admitted to Ebola treatment units. Key recommendations include 
administration of oral and, as necessary, intravenous hydration; systematic 
monitoring of vital signs and volume status; availability of key biochemical 
testing; adequate staffing ratios; and availability of analgesics, including 
opioids, for pain relief.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(17)31795-6
PMCID: PMC6636325
PMID: 29054555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests STJ is a senior medical 
adviser for Shift Labs. SLN, RAS, and GHG are members of the GRADE Working 
Group. SLN has published numerous papers related to GRADE, and her career 
benefited from this relationship. TEF and SJH have been consultants to WHO. All 
other authors declare no competing interests.