---
reference_id: "PMID:31034989"
title: "Intrafamilial variability of limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, LGMD1D type."
authors:
- Zima J
- Eaton A
- Pál E
- Till Á
- Ito YA
- Warman-Chardon J
- Hartley T
- Cagnone G
- Melegh BI
- Care4Rare Canada
- Boycott KM
- Melegh B
- Hadzsiev K
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2019.04.012
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- HSP40 Heat-Shock Proteins/genetics
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Chaperones/genetics
- Muscle Weakness/genetics
- "Muscle, Skeletal/pathology, ultrastructure"
- "Muscular Dystrophies, Limb-Girdle/congenital, diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intrafamilial variability of limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, LGMD1D type.
**Authors:** Zima J, Eaton A, Pál E, Till Á, Ito YA, Warman-Chardon J, Hartley T, Cagnone G, Melegh BI, Care4Rare Canada, Boycott KM, Melegh B, Hadzsiev K
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2019.04.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2019.04.012)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2020 Feb;63(2):103655. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2019.04.012. Epub 
2019 Apr 27.

Intrafamilial variability of limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, LGMD1D type.

Zima J(1), Eaton A(2), Pál E(3), Till Á(4), Ito YA(2), Warman-Chardon J(5), 
Hartley T(2), Cagnone G(6), Melegh BI(4); Care4Rare Canada(2); Boycott KM(2), 
Melegh B(4), Hadzsiev K(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Pécs, Clinical Center, Medical 
School, Pécs, Hungary; Szentágothai Research Centre, University of Pécs, Pécs, 
Hungary. Electronic address: zima.judith@pte.hu.
(2)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, University of 
Ottawa, Canada.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of Pécs, Clinical Center, Medical School, 
Pécs, Hungary; Neuropathology Unit, Department of Pathology, University of Pécs, 
Clinical Center, Medical School, Pécs, Hungary.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Pécs, Clinical Center, Medical 
School, Pécs, Hungary; Szentágothai Research Centre, University of Pécs, Pécs, 
Hungary.
(5)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, University of 
Ottawa, Canada; Department of Medicine, Division of Neurology, The Ottawa 
Hospital and University of Ottawa, Canada.
(6)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Québec, Canada.

LGMD1D is an autosomal dominant limb girdle muscular dystrophy caused by 
variants in the DNAJB6 gene. This is typically an adult-onset disorder 
characterized by moderately progressive proximal muscle weakness without 
respiratory or bulbar involvement; however phenotypic variability is often 
observed with some individuals having earlier onset and more severe symptoms. 
Here, we present a family with a novel NM_005494.2:c.271T > G p.(Phe91Val) 
variant in DNAJB6 with a late-onset, mild and slowly progressive form of the 
disease, including one individual, who in her 7th decade of life has subclinical 
LGMD1D with only mild features on muscle biopsy and MRI. Unlike previously 
reported cases where missense variants affecting the Phe91 amino acid residue 
are associated with a more severe form of the disease, this family represents 
the mild end of the LGMD1D clinical spectrum. Therefore, this family adds 
further complexity to the genotype-phenotype correlation in DNAJB6-associated 
muscular dystrophies.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2019.04.012
PMID: 31034989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]