---
reference_id: "PMID:22349354"
title: An investigation and pathological analysis of two fatal cases of cadmium poisoning.
authors:
- Chang YF
- Wen JF
- Cai JF
- Xiao-Ying W
- Yang L
- Guo YD
journal: Forensic Sci Int
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.forsciint.2012.01.032
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An investigation and pathological analysis of two fatal cases of cadmium poisoning.
**Authors:** Chang YF, Wen JF, Cai JF, Xiao-Ying W, Yang L, Guo YD
**Journal:** Forensic Sci Int (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.forsciint.2012.01.032](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.forsciint.2012.01.032)

## Content

1. Forensic Sci Int. 2012 Jul 10;220(1-3):e5-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.forsciint.2012.01.032. Epub 2012 Feb 19.

An investigation and pathological analysis of two fatal cases of cadmium 
poisoning.

Chang YF(1), Wen JF, Cai JF, Xiao-Ying W, Yang L, Guo YD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Forensic Science, School of Basic Medicine Science, Central 
South University, No. 172 Tongzipo Road of Yuelu District, Changsha City, PR 
China. changyunfeng880@163.com

Pollution associated with population growth, and with industrial and urban 
development has led to a serious decline in the water quality of Chinese rivers. 
Cadmium (Cd) is recognized as one of the most toxic metals and is strongly 
accumulated by organisms. Humans are exposed to cadmium originating from the 
environment and from industrial pollution. In spite of thousands of published 
studies on Cd, there is little information on its pathological features seen in 
human autopsy. The gross and pathological findings of forensic autopsies of two 
case of cadmium poisoning are presented and related to an epidemiological 
investigation. In both cases, multiple organ damage was observed, involving 
brain, lung, liver, kidney, red blood cells, and platelets, which is consistent 
with reports in the literature. In particular, in both cases, transmission 
electron microscopy revealed a large number of dense lysosomal and phagocytic 
particles in the cytoplasm near the nucleus, indicating the need for a genotoxic 
study of cadmium. Our observations provide new clues for the future recognition 
and prevention of Cd poisoning.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.forsciint.2012.01.032
PMID: 22349354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]