---
reference_id: "PMID:22536370"
title: Routine multiplex mutational profiling of melanomas enables enrollment in genotype-driven therapeutic trials.
authors:
- Lovly CM
- Dahlman KB
- Fohn LE
- Su Z
- Dias-Santagata D
- Hicks DJ
- Hucks D
- Berry E
- Terry C
- Duke M
- Su Y
- Sobolik-Delmaire T
- Richmond A
- Kelley MC
- Vnencak-Jones CL
- Iafrate AJ
- Sosman J
- Pao W
journal: PLoS One
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035309
keywords:
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Clinical Trials as Topic
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Eligibility Determination
- GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits/genetics
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits, Gq-G11"
- Genetic Testing
- Humans
- Male
- "Melanoma/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- Molecular Diagnostic Techniques
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Point Mutation
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-kit/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)/genetics
- "Skin Neoplasms/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Routine multiplex mutational profiling of melanomas enables enrollment in genotype-driven therapeutic trials.
**Authors:** Lovly CM, Dahlman KB, Fohn LE, Su Z, Dias-Santagata D, Hicks DJ, Hucks D, Berry E, Terry C, Duke M, Su Y, Sobolik-Delmaire T, Richmond A, Kelley MC, Vnencak-Jones CL, Iafrate AJ, Sosman J, Pao W
**Journal:** PLoS One (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0035309](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0035309)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35309. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035309. Epub 2012 Apr
20.

Routine multiplex mutational profiling of melanomas enables enrollment in
genotype-driven therapeutic trials.

Lovly CM(1), Dahlman KB, Fohn LE, Su Z, Dias-Santagata D, Hicks DJ, Hucks D,
Berry E, Terry C, Duke M, Su Y, Sobolik-Delmaire T, Richmond A, Kelley MC,
Vnencak-Jones CL, Iafrate AJ, Sosman J, Pao W.

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt-Ingram
Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee,
United States of America.

PURPOSE: Knowledge of tumor mutation status is becoming increasingly important
for the treatment of cancer, as mutation-specific inhibitors are being developed
for clinical use that target only sub-populations of patients with particular
tumor genotypes. Melanoma provides a recent example of this paradigm. We report
here development, validation, and implementation of an assay designed to
simultaneously detect 43 common somatic point mutations in 6 genes (BRAF, NRAS,
KIT, GNAQ, GNA11, and CTNNB1) potentially relevant to existing and emerging
targeted therapies specifically in melanoma.
METHODS: The test utilizes the SNaPshot method (multiplex PCR, multiplex primer
extension, and capillary electrophoresis) and can be performed rapidly with high
sensitivity (requiring 5-10% mutant allele frequency) and minimal amounts of DNA
(10-20 nanograms). The assay was validated using cell lines, fresh-frozen
tissue, and formalin-fixed paraffin embedded tissue. Clinical characteristics
and the impact on clinical trial enrollment were then assessed for the first 150
melanoma patients whose tumors were genotyped in the Vanderbilt molecular
diagnostics lab.
RESULTS: Directing this test to a single disease, 90 of 150 (60%) melanomas from
sites throughout the body harbored a mutation tested, including 57, 23, 6, 3,
and 2 mutations in BRAF, NRAS, GNAQ, KIT, and CTNNB1, respectively. Among BRAF
V600 mutations, 79%, 12%, 5%, and 4% were V600E, V600K, V600R, and V600M,
respectively. 23 of 54 (43%) patients with mutation harboring metastatic disease
were subsequently enrolled in genotype-driven trials.
CONCLUSION: We present development of a simple mutational profiling screen for
clinically relevant mutations in melanoma. Adoption of this genetically-informed
approach to the treatment of melanoma has already had an impact on clinical
trial enrollment and prioritization of therapy for patients with the disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035309
PMCID: PMC3335021
PMID: 22536370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: WP: Consulting for
Bristol-Myers Squibb; funding from AstraZeneca. DDS and AJI submitted a patent
application for the SNaPshot genotyping methods described, which are the subject
of licensing discussions. This does not alter the authors' adherence to all the
PLoS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.
