---
reference_id: "PMID:24636849"
title: Amyloid beta-related angiitis--a case report and comprehensive review of literature of 94 cases.
authors:
- Danve A
- Grafe M
- Deodhar A
journal: Semin Arthritis Rheum
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2014.02.001
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Brain/pathology
- "Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy/complications, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Vasculitis/complications, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Amyloid beta-related angiitis--a case report and comprehensive review of literature of 94 cases.
**Authors:** Danve A, Grafe M, Deodhar A
**Journal:** Semin Arthritis Rheum (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.semarthrit.2014.02.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.semarthrit.2014.02.001)

## Content

1. Semin Arthritis Rheum. 2014 Aug;44(1):86-92. doi: 
10.1016/j.semarthrit.2014.02.001. Epub 2014 Feb 11.

Amyloid beta-related angiitis--a case report and comprehensive review of 
literature of 94 cases.

Danve A(1), Grafe M(2), Deodhar A(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Arthritis & Rheumatic Diseases (OP-09), Oregon Health & Science 
University, 3181, SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR 97239. Electronic 
address: drdanve@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Pathology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR.
(3)Division of Arthritis & Rheumatic Diseases (OP-09), Oregon Health & Science 
University, 3181, SW Sam Jackson Park Road, Portland, OR 97239.

BACKGROUND: Amyloid Beta-Related Angiitis (ABRA) is a rare cause of central 
nervous system vasculitis complicating cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Data 
regarding its prevalence, clinical features, management, and outcomes are scant.
OBJECTIVES: To describe a patient with ABRA and discuss clinical features and 
management of ABRA.
METHODS: A case report and review of literature were conducted of all reported 
cases of ABRA in the English literature.
RESULTS: The exact etiology of ABRA is not clear, though it is thought to be 
secondary to an inflammatory response to beta amyloid (Aβ) in the walls of blood 
vessels. Role of ApoE e4/e4 genotype and its association with autoimmune 
diseases have been reported. ABRA shares many clinical features with primary CNS 
vasculitis. Patients with ABRA are relatively younger than those with 
non-inflammatory cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA), but older than patients with 
primary central nervous system vasculitis (PCNSV). Acute-onset cognitive 
behavioral abnormalities, focal neurological deficits, seizures, or unusual 
headaches are the most common presentations of ABRA. Majority have elevated CSF 
proteins. Up to 70% of patients have ApoE e4/e4 genotype. MRI is the most 
important diagnostic tool and is almost always abnormal. Characteristically, MRI 
shows hyperintensities on T2-weighted (T2W) or fluid-attenuation inversion 
recovery (FLAIR) images with minimal gadolinium enhancement. On 
susceptibility-weighted images (SWI), a majority of the patients have the 
presence of microbleeds at cortico-subcortical junction. It may be possible to 
diagnose typical patients based on clinical features and MRI findings alone, 
obviating the need for brain biopsy. Brain biopsy is the gold standard and shows 
transmural granulomatous vasculitis superimposed on CAA. ABRA responds well to 
steroids in majority. Patients usually need additional immunosuppressants, 
especially to prevent relapse. MRI abnormalities resolve with treatment and 
recur with the relapse.
CONCLUSIONS: ABRA is a rare but treatable cause of progressive dementia and 
should be considered in the differential diagnosis of rapid-onset CNS 
dysfunction in patients older than 60 years. It has characteristic MRI findings 
and responds well to steroids and other immunosuppressant therapy.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.semarthrit.2014.02.001
PMID: 24636849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]