---
reference_id: "PMID:37554741"
title: Collagenous colitis associated with novel sprue-like intestinal diseases.
authors:
- Freeman HJ
journal: Gastroenterol Hepatol Bed Bench
year: '2023'
doi: 10.22037/ghfbb.v16i2.2698
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Collagenous colitis associated with novel sprue-like intestinal diseases.
**Authors:** Freeman HJ
**Journal:** Gastroenterol Hepatol Bed Bench (2023)
**DOI:** [10.22037/ghfbb.v16i2.2698](https://doi.org/10.22037/ghfbb.v16i2.2698)

## Content

1. Gastroenterol Hepatol Bed Bench. 2023;16(2):145-150. doi: 
10.22037/ghfbb.v16i2.2698.

Collagenous colitis associated with novel sprue-like intestinal diseases.

Freeman HJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (Gastroenterology), University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Almost a half-century ago, an unusual and distinct form of colitis was first 
recognized, collagenous colitis, characterized by sub-epithelial 
trichrome-positive deposits having the ultrastructural features of collagen. 
Later, other reports documented more extensive collagenous dis-ease in these 
patients, sometimes in the stomach and small bowel, a close linkage with other 
forms of microscopic colitis and its association with celiac and other 
immune-mediated diseases. Moreover, emerging genetic methods permitted large 
studies of collagenous colitis to complement these intriguing clinical and 
pathological studies. Finally, recent and related studies have further 
demonstrated these immune-based forms of colitis, with new sprue-like intestinal 
diseases caused by novel medications, recently detected viral infections and 
vaccinations.

DOI: 10.22037/ghfbb.v16i2.2698
PMCID: PMC10404830
PMID: 37554741

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.