---
reference_id: "PMID:35850931"
title: Identification of two novel ACAT1 variant associated with beta-ketothiolase deficiency in a 9-month-old boy.
authors:
- Wang Y
- Gao Q
- Wang W
- Xin X
- Yin Y
- Zhao C
- Jin Y
journal: J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1515/jpem-2022-0158
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of two novel ACAT1 variant associated with beta-ketothiolase deficiency in a 9-month-old boy.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Gao Q, Wang W, Xin X, Yin Y, Zhao C, Jin Y
**Journal:** J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1515/jpem-2022-0158](https://doi.org/10.1515/jpem-2022-0158)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2022 Jul 18;35(9):1194-1200. doi: 
10.1515/jpem-2022-0158. Print 2022 Sep 27.

Identification of two novel ACAT1 variant associated with beta-ketothiolase 
deficiency in a 9-month-old boy.

Wang Y(1), Gao Q(2), Wang W(1), Xin X(1), Yin Y(1), Zhao C(1), Jin Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Shandong Provincial Hospital 
Affiliated to Shandong First Medical University, Jinan, Shandong Province, P.R. 
China.
(2)Department of Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, Shandong Provincial Hospital, 
Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong Province, P.R. 
China.

OBJECTIVES: Mitochondrial acetoacetyl-CoA thiolase (beta-ketothiolase, T2) is 
necessary for the catabolism of ketone bodies andisoleucine. T2 deficiency is an 
autosomal recessive metabolic disorder caused by variant in the ACAT1 gene. In 
this report, we describe two novel ACAT1 variant identified in a Chinese family.
CASE PRESENTATION: The 9-month-old male proband was admitted to the pediatric 
intensive care unit for altered consciousness. At the time of admission, the 
patient had acidosis, drowsiness, and respiratory failure. Both urine organic 
acid analyses and LC-MS/MS suggested T2 deficiency. Novel compound heterozygous 
variant (c.871G>C and c.1016_1017del) in the ACAT1 gene were detected in the 
proband by WES and verified through direct sequencing. Family analysis 
demonstrated that the first variant was transmitted from his father and the 
second variant was from his mother, indicating autosomal recessive inheritance. 
This report is the first to describe the association of these variant with T2 
deficiency based on genetic testing. Although these variant were identified in 
the patient's elder sister and elder brother, they continue to be asymptomatic.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified two novel ACAT1 variants associated with T2 
deficiency. The identification expands the spectrum of known variant linked to 
the disorder.

© 2022 Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin/Boston.

DOI: 10.1515/jpem-2022-0158
PMID: 35850931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]