---
reference_id: "PMID:8089280"
title: "Sweet's syndrome (acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis)."
authors:
- von den Driesch P
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1016/s0190-9622(94)70215-2
keywords:
- Adult
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- "Sweet Syndrome/diagnosis, epidemiology, immunology, pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sweet's syndrome (acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis).
**Authors:** von den Driesch P
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0190-9622(94)70215-2](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0190-9622(94)70215-2)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 1994 Oct;31(4):535-56; quiz 557-60. doi: 
10.1016/s0190-9622(94)70215-2.

Sweet's syndrome (acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis).

von den Driesch P(1).

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Dermatology, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany.

Comment in
    J Am Acad Dermatol. 1995 Jul;33(1):144-5.

Acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis, first described in 1964 by Robert Douglas 
Sweet, has been termed Sweet's syndrome. Classic Sweet's syndrome occurs in 
middle-aged women after a nonspecific infection of the respiratory or 
gastrointestinal tract. Raised erythematous plaques with pseudoblistering and 
occasionally pustules occur on the face, neck, chest, and extremities, 
accompanied by fever and general malaise. Involvement of the eyes, joints, and 
oral mucosa as well as internal manifestations of Sweet's syndrome in the lung, 
liver, kidneys, and central nervous system has been described. The disease is 
thought to be a hypersensitivity reaction. Parainflammatory (e.g., infections, 
autoimmune disorders, vaccination) and paraneoplastic (e.g., hemoproliferative 
disorders, solid malignant tumors) occurrence is found in approximately 25% of 
the cases and 2% are associated with pregnancy. Sweet's syndrome responds 
rapidly to systemic therapy with corticosteroids but recurs in about 25% of the 
cases. Alternative treatment modalities (e.g., potassium iodide, colchicine, 
dapsone, clofazimine, cyclosporine) have also been used. This article presents 
data from 38 patients with Sweet's syndrome and reviews its epidemiology, 
clinical spectrum, histologic features, laboratory results, differential 
diagnosis, pathogenic mechanisms, associated diseases, and treatment.

DOI: 10.1016/s0190-9622(94)70215-2
PMID: 8089280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]