---
reference_id: "PMID:38847098"
title: "Anticoagulation Versus Antiplatelets in Spontaneous Cervical Artery Dissection: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Yaghi S
- Shu L
- Fletcher L
- Fayad FH
- Shah A
- Herning A
- Isho N
- Mansour P
- Joudi K
- Zaidat B
- Mahmoud NA
- Abdul Khalek F
- Xiao H
- Goldstein E
- Ghannam M
- Siegler JE
- Salehi Omran S
- Bakradze E
- Nguyen TN
- Keser Z
- Khan M
- Bavarsad Shahripour R
- de Havenon A
- Henninger N
- Heldner MR
- Field TS
- Aziz Y
- Mistry EA
- Furie K
- Engelter S
- Markus HS
journal: Stroke
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.124.047310
keywords:
- Humans
- Platelet Aggregation Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "Anticoagulants/therapeutic use, adverse effects"
- Vertebral Artery Dissection/drug therapy
- "Ischemic Stroke/drug therapy, prevention & control"
- "Stroke/prevention & control, drug therapy"
- "Carotid Artery, Internal, Dissection/drug therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anticoagulation Versus Antiplatelets in Spontaneous Cervical Artery Dissection: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Yaghi S, Shu L, Fletcher L, Fayad FH, Shah A, Herning A, Isho N, Mansour P, Joudi K, Zaidat B, Mahmoud NA, Abdul Khalek F, Xiao H, Goldstein E, Ghannam M, Siegler JE, Salehi Omran S, Bakradze E, Nguyen TN, Keser Z, Khan M, Bavarsad Shahripour R, de Havenon A, Henninger N, Heldner MR, Field TS, Aziz Y, Mistry EA, Furie K, Engelter S, Markus HS
**Journal:** Stroke (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1161/STROKEAHA.124.047310](https://doi.org/10.1161/STROKEAHA.124.047310)

## Content

1. Stroke. 2024 Jul;55(7):1776-1786. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.124.047310. Epub 2024
 Jun 7.

Anticoagulation Versus Antiplatelets in Spontaneous Cervical Artery Dissection:
A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.

Yaghi S(1), Shu L(1), Fletcher L(2), Fayad FH(1), Shah A(1), Herning A(3), Isho
N(4), Mansour P(5), Joudi K(1), Zaidat B(6), Mahmoud NA(7), Abdul Khalek F(8),
Xiao H(9), Goldstein E(1), Ghannam M(10), Siegler JE(11), Salehi Omran S(12),
Bakradze E(13), Nguyen TN(14), Keser Z(15), Khan M(15), Bavarsad Shahripour
R(16), de Havenon A(17), Henninger N(18), Heldner MR(19), Field TS(20), Aziz
Y(21), Mistry EA(21), Furie K(1), Engelter S(#)(22), Markus HS(#)(23).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology (S.Y., L.S., F.H.F., A.S., K.J., E.G., K.F.),
Providence, RI.
(2)Brown University Library, Health and Biomedical Library Services (L.F.),
Providence, RI.
(3)Boston University Medical School, MA (A.H.).
(4)University of Washington Medical School, Seattle (N.I.).
(5)American University of Beirut Medical School, Lebanon (P.M.).
(6)Mount Saini School of Medicine, New York (B.Z.).
(7)Department of Neurology, University of Oklahoma, Norman (N.A.M.).
(8)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Luminis Health, Annapolis, MD
(F.A.K.).
(9)Department of Economics, University of California Santa Barbara (H.X.).
(10)Department of Neurology, University of Iowa, Iowa City (M.G.).
(11)Department of Neurology, University of Chicago, IL (J.E.S.).
(12)Department of Neurology, University of Colorado, Aurora (S.S.O.).
(13)Department of Neurology, University of Alabama at Birmingham (E.B.).
(14)Department of Neurology, Boston University, MA (T.N.N.).
(15)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN (Z.K., M.K.).
(16)Department of Neurology, University of California San Diego (R.B.S.).
(17)Department of Neurology, Yale New Haven Hospital, CT (A.d.H.).
(18)Department of Neurology, University of Massachusetts, Chan Medical School,
Worcester (N.H.).
(19)Department of Neurology, Inselspital, University Hospital and University of
Bern, Switzerland (M.R.H.).
(20)Division of Neurology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, CA
(T.S.F.).
(21)Department of Neurology, University of Cincinnati, OH (Y.A., E.A.M.).
(22)Neurology and Neurorehabilitation, University Department of Geriatric
Medicine FELIX PLATTER, University of Basel, Department of Neurology and Stroke
Center, and University Hospital Basel, Department of Clinical Research,
Switzerland (S.E.).
(23)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, United
Kingdom (H.S.M.).
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: It is uncertain whether antiplatelets or anticoagulants are more
effective in preventing early recurrent stroke in patients with cervical artery
dissection. Following the publication of the observational Antithrombotic for
STOP-CAD (Stroke Prevention in Cervical Artery Dissection) study, which has more
than doubled available data, we performed an updated systematic review and
meta-analysis comparing antiplatelets versus anticoagulation in cervical artery
dissection.
METHODS: The systematic review was registered in PROSPERO (CRD42023468063). We
searched 5 databases using a combination of keywords that encompass different
antiplatelets and anticoagulants, as well as cervical artery dissection. We
included relevant randomized trials and included observational studies of
dissection unrelated to major trauma. Where studies were sufficiently similar,
we performed meta-analyses for efficacy (ischemic stroke) and safety (major
hemorrhage, symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage, and death) outcomes using
relative risks.
RESULTS: We identified 11 studies (2 randomized trials and 9 observational
studies) that met the inclusion criteria. These included 5039 patients (30%
[1512] treated with anticoagulation and 70% [3527]) treated with antiplatelets].
In meta-analysis, anticoagulation was associated with a lower ischemic stroke
risk (relative risk, 0.63 [95% CI, 0.43 to 0.94]; P=0.02; I2=0%) but higher
major bleeding risk (relative risk, 2.25 [95% CI, 1.07 to 4.72]; P=0.03, I2=0%).
The risks of death and symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage were similar between
the 2 treatments. Effect sizes were larger in randomized trials. There are
insufficient data on the efficacy and safety of dual antiplatelet therapy or
direct oral anticoagulants.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study of patients with cervical artery dissection,
anticoagulation was superior to antiplatelet therapy in reducing ischemic stroke
but carried a higher major bleeding risk. This argues for an individualized
therapeutic approach incorporating the net clinical benefit of ischemic stroke
reduction and bleeding risks. Large randomized clinical trials are required to
clarify optimal antithrombotic strategies for management of cervical artery
dissection.

DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.124.047310
PMID: 38847098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures Dr Henninger has received funding
from the National Institutes of Health ([NIH]; NS131756, NR020231) during the
conduct of this study, unrelated to the present work. Dr Nguyen discloses
advisory board for Brainomix and Aruna and is an Associate Editor for Stroke. Dr
Siegler has served as a consultant for AstraZeneca and has received funding from
the NIH (R61NS135583), vizai, Philips, and Medtronic, unrelated to this work. Dr
Field has received in-kind study medication from Bayer and discloses advisory
board participation for Bayer, AstraZeneca, Roche, HLS Therapeutics, and
Novartis, is on the board of DESTINE Health, and has served as an expert
witness. Dr Mistry receives funding from the NIH/National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke and Patient Centered Outcomes Research
Institute. She serves as a consultant for AbbVie and RAPID AI and serves on the
steering committee for SilverCreek Pharmaceuticals. She reports a nonfinancial
relationship with Translational Sciences Inc. She is also an Associate Editor
for Stroke and is employed by the University of Cincinnati. Dr de Havenon is a
consultant for Integra, TitinKM, and Novo Nordisk, own stocks in Certus, and
receives grant support from the NIH. Dr Fletcher received funds from the Library
association and is an officer of the Association of College and Research
Libraries and the Medical Library Association. Dr Furie is a consultant for
Janssen Biotech. Dr Markus receives infrastructural support provided by the
Cambridge British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence (RE/18/1/34212)
and by the Cambridge University Hospitals NIHR Biomedical Research Centre
(NIHR203312).
