---
reference_id: "PMID:35051635"
title: "Does the Relationship Between Bone Cement and the Intravertebral Cleft of Kummell Disease Affect the Efficacy of PKP?"
authors:
- Lv NN
- Hou MZ
- Zhou ZZ
- Feng XX
- Liu HJ
- Shan FR
- Li EH
- Guan BY
- He SJ
- Liu MM
journal: World Neurosurg
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.wneu.2022.01.050
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Does the Relationship Between Bone Cement and the Intravertebral Cleft of Kummell Disease Affect the Efficacy of PKP?
**Authors:** Lv NN, Hou MZ, Zhou ZZ, Feng XX, Liu HJ, Shan FR, Li EH, Guan BY, He SJ, Liu MM
**Journal:** World Neurosurg (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.wneu.2022.01.050](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wneu.2022.01.050)

## Content

1. World Neurosurg. 2022 Apr;160:e430-e435. doi: 10.1016/j.wneu.2022.01.050. Epub
 2022 Jan 18.

Does the Relationship Between Bone Cement and the Intravertebral Cleft of 
Kummell Disease Affect the Efficacy of PKP?

Lv NN(1), Hou MZ(2), Zhou ZZ(2), Feng XX(3), Liu HJ(3), Shan FR(4), Li EH(4), 
Guan BY(4), He SJ(5), Liu MM(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Lianyungang Second People's Hospital 
Affiliated to Bengbu Medical College, The Second People's Hospital of 
Lianyungang, Lianyungang, Jiangsu, China; Department of Orthopedic Surgery, The 
First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow 
University, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China.
(3)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Lianyungang Second People's Hospital 
Affiliated to Bengbu Medical College, The Second People's Hospital of 
Lianyungang, Lianyungang, Jiangsu, China.
(4)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Xining First Medical Group, Xining, 
Qinghai, China.
(5)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Affiliated Danyang Hospital of Nantong 
University, The People's Hospital of Danyang, Danyang, Jiangsu, China.
(6)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Xining First Medical Group, Xining, 
Qinghai, China. Electronic address: drliumingming@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: To study the relationship between distribution of bone cement and 
intravertebral cleft of patients with Kummell disease on the clinical effect of 
percutaneous kyphoplasty (PKP).
METHODS: According to the relationship between the distribution of bone cement 
and the cleft in the vertebrae, a total of 92 patients with Kummell disease who 
underwent PKP in our hospital were divided into 2 groups. Specifically, the bone 
cement of patients in group A was localized in the cleft of the vertebrae and 
did not infiltrate around the cleft, while that of group B patients not only 
filled the cleft of the vertebrae, but also distributed diffusely around the 
cleft of the vertebrae. The amount of bone cement injected, leakage rate, visual 
analogue scale (VAS) score, Oswestry Disability Index (ODI), and vertebral 
imaging changes before operation, and 2 days and 1 year after operation were 
compared between the 2 groups.
RESULTS: The amount of bone cement injected and the permeability of bone cement 
in group B were higher than those in group A (P < 0.05). The scores of VAS and 
ODI in both groups were significantly improved after operation, but the two 
scores in group B were better than those in group A one year after operation. 
The height of anterior vertebral body and Cobb's angle of kyphosis in the 2 
groups were significantly improved after operation, but 1 year after operation, 
those in group B were better than those in group A.
CONCLUSIONS: PKP was an effective method for treating Kummell disease. At the 
same time, the relationship between the distribution of bone cement and the 
cleft in the vertebral body was an important factor affecting the curative 
effect after PKP. The effect of the distribution pattern of bone cement filled 
with intravertebral cleft and diffusely distributed around the fissures was 
better than that of bone cement confined in the vertebral cleft.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.wneu.2022.01.050
PMID: 35051635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]