---
reference_id: "PMID:25270261"
title: "Dynamic modelling of hepatitis C virus transmission among people who inject drugs: a methodological review."
authors:
- Cousien A
- Tran VC
- Deuffic-Burban S
- Jauffret-Roustide M
- Dhersin JS
- Yazdanpanah Y
journal: J Viral Hepat
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/jvh.12337
keywords:
- Antiviral Agents/therapeutic use
- Cost-Benefit Analysis
- Drug Users
- Hepacivirus
- "Hepatitis C/drug therapy, epidemiology, prevention & control, transmission"
- Humans
- "Models, Theoretical"
- Vaccination
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dynamic modelling of hepatitis C virus transmission among people who inject drugs: a methodological review.
**Authors:** Cousien A, Tran VC, Deuffic-Burban S, Jauffret-Roustide M, Dhersin JS, Yazdanpanah Y
**Journal:** J Viral Hepat (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jvh.12337](https://doi.org/10.1111/jvh.12337)

## Content

1. J Viral Hepat. 2015 Mar;22(3):213-29. doi: 10.1111/jvh.12337. Epub 2014 Oct 1.

Dynamic modelling of hepatitis C virus transmission among people who inject
drugs: a methodological review.

Cousien A(1), Tran VC, Deuffic-Burban S, Jauffret-Roustide M, Dhersin JS,
Yazdanpanah Y.

Author information:
(1)IAME, UMR 1137, INSERM, Paris, France; IAME, UMR 1137, Sorbonne Paris Cité,
Univ Paris Diderot, Paris, France.

Equipment sharing among people who inject drugs (PWID) is a key risk factor in
infection by hepatitis C virus (HCV). Both the effectiveness and
cost-effectiveness of interventions aimed at reducing HCV transmission in this
population (such as opioid substitution therapy, needle exchange programmes or
improved treatment) are difficult to evaluate using field surveys. Ethical
issues and complicated access to the PWID population make it difficult to gather
epidemiological data. In this context, mathematical modelling of HCV
transmission is a useful alternative for comparing the cost and effectiveness of
various interventions. Several models have been developed in the past few years.
They are often based on strong hypotheses concerning the population structure.
This review presents compartmental and individual-based models to underline
their strengths and limits in the context of HCV infection among PWID. The final
section discusses the main results of the papers.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/jvh.12337
PMID: 25270261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
