---
reference_id: "PMID:20301389"
title: Spastic Paraplegia 11.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Stevanin G
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spastic Paraplegia 11.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Stevanin G

## Content

1. Spastic Paraplegia 11.

Stevanin G(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2008 Mar 27 [updated 2019 Dec 19].

Author information:
(1)Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle Epinière, INSERM, CNRS, Sorbonne 
University;, École Pratique des Hautes Études, Paris Sciences et Lettres 
Research University, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Spastic paraplegia 11 (SPG11) is characterized by 
progressive spasticity and weakness of the lower limbs frequently associated 
with the following: mild intellectual disability with learning difficulties in 
childhood and/or progressive cognitive decline; peripheral neuropathy; 
pseudobulbar involvement; and increased reflexes in the upper limbs. Less 
frequent findings include: cerebellar signs (ataxia, nystagmus, saccadic 
pursuit); retinal degeneration; pes cavus; scoliosis; and parkinsonism with 
characteristic brain MRI features that include thinning of the corpus callosum. 
Onset occurs mainly during infancy or adolescence (range: age 1-31 years) and in 
rare cases as late as age 60 years. Most affected individuals become wheelchair 
bound one or two decades after disease onset.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SPG11 is established in a proband with 
characteristic clinical and MRI findings and biallelic pathogenic variants in 
SPG11 identified on molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Care by a multidisciplinary team; 
physiotherapy to stretch spastic muscles; antispastic drugs such as baclofen; 
botulin toxin and intrathecal baclofen for severe and disabling spasticity when 
oral drugs are ineffective. Urodynamic evaluation when bladder dysfunction is 
evident; anticholinergic drugs for urinary urgency. Treatment of psychiatric 
manifestations by standard protocols. Prevention of secondary complications: 
Treatment of sphincter disturbances to prevent urinary tract infection secondary 
to bladder dysfunction. Surveillance: Evaluation every six months to adjust 
physiotherapy and medications.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SPG11 is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If each 
parent is known to be heterozygous for an SPG11 pathogenic variant, each sib of 
an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, a 50% 
chance of being a carrier, and a 25% chance of being unaffected and not a 
carrier. Carrier testing for at-risk family members and prenatal testing for 
at-risk pregnancies are possible once the pathogenic variants in a family are 
known.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301389