---
reference_id: "PMID:21035104"
title: Prodynorphin mutations cause the neurodegenerative disorder spinocerebellar ataxia type 23.
authors:
- Bakalkin G
- Watanabe H
- Jezierska J
- Depoorter C
- Verschuuren-Bemelmans C
- Bazov I
- Artemenko KA
- Yakovleva T
- Dooijes D
- Van de Warrenburg BP
- Zubarev RA
- Kremer B
- Knapp PE
- Hauser KF
- Wijmenga C
- Nyberg F
- Sinke RJ
- Verbeek DS
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.10.001
keywords:
- "Cerebellum/chemistry, cytology"
- Dynorphins/analysis
- "Enkephalins/analysis, genetics"
- Female
- Glutamate Plasma Membrane Transport Proteins/analysis
- Humans
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- "Protein Precursors/analysis, genetics"
- Purkinje Cells/chemistry
- Spinocerebellar Degenerations/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prodynorphin mutations cause the neurodegenerative disorder spinocerebellar ataxia type 23.
**Authors:** Bakalkin G, Watanabe H, Jezierska J, Depoorter C, Verschuuren-Bemelmans C, Bazov I, Artemenko KA, Yakovleva T, Dooijes D, Van de Warrenburg BP, Zubarev RA, Kremer B, Knapp PE, Hauser KF, Wijmenga C, Nyberg F, Sinke RJ, Verbeek DS
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.10.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.10.001)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Nov 12;87(5):593-603. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.10.001.
Epub  2010 Oct 28.

Prodynorphin mutations cause the neurodegenerative disorder spinocerebellar 
ataxia type 23.

Bakalkin G(1), Watanabe H, Jezierska J, Depoorter C, Verschuuren-Bemelmans C, 
Bazov I, Artemenko KA, Yakovleva T, Dooijes D, Van de Warrenburg BP, Zubarev RA, 
Kremer B, Knapp PE, Hauser KF, Wijmenga C, Nyberg F, Sinke RJ, Verbeek DS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Biosciences, Uppsala University, Sweden.

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Nov 12;87(5):736.

Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are dominantly inherited neurodegenerative 
disorders characterized by progressive cerebellar ataxia and dysarthria. We have 
identified missense mutations in prodynorphin (PDYN) that cause SCA23 in four 
Dutch families displaying progressive gait and limb ataxia. PDYN is the 
precursor protein for the opioid neuropeptides, α-neoendorphin, and dynorphins A 
and B (Dyn A and B). Dynorphins regulate pain processing and modulate the 
rewarding effects of addictive substances. Three mutations were located in Dyn 
A, a peptide with both opioid activities and nonopioid neurodegenerative 
actions. Two of these mutations resulted in excessive generation of Dyn A in a 
cellular model system. In addition, two of the mutant Dyn A peptides induced 
toxicity above that of wild-type Dyn A in cultured striatal neurons. The fourth 
mutation was located in the nonopioid PDYN domain and was associated with 
altered expression of components of the opioid and glutamate system, as evident 
from analysis of SCA23 autopsy tissue. Thus, alterations in Dyn A activities 
and/or impairment of secretory pathways by mutant PDYN may lead to glutamate 
neurotoxicity, which underlies Purkinje cell degeneration and ataxia. PDYN 
mutations are identified in a small subset of ataxia families, indicating that 
SCA23 is an infrequent SCA type (∼0.5%) in the Netherlands and suggesting 
further genetic SCA heterogeneity.

Copyright © 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.10.001
PMCID: PMC2978951
PMID: 21035104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]