---
reference_id: "PMID:37930488"
title: "Microbial Waterborne Diseases in India: Status, Interventions, and Future Perspectives."
authors:
- Sharma MD
- Mishra P
- Ali A
- Kumar P
- Kapil P
- Grover R
- Verma R
- Saini A
- Kulshrestha S
journal: Curr Microbiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00284-023-03462-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Microbial Waterborne Diseases in India: Status, Interventions, and Future Perspectives.
**Authors:** Sharma MD, Mishra P, Ali A, Kumar P, Kapil P, Grover R, Verma R, Saini A, Kulshrestha S
**Journal:** Curr Microbiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00284-023-03462-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00284-023-03462-2)

## Content

1. Curr Microbiol. 2023 Nov 6;80(12):400. doi: 10.1007/s00284-023-03462-2.

Microbial Waterborne Diseases in India: Status, Interventions, and Future 
Perspectives.

Sharma MD(1)(2), Mishra P(3), Ali A(1)(2), Kumar P(1)(2), Kapil P(1)(2), Grover 
R(4), Verma R(5), Saini A(4), Kulshrestha S(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Applied Sciences and Biotechnology, Shoolini University of 
Biotechnology and Management Sciences, Bajhol, Solan, Himachal Pradesh, India.
(2)Center for Omics and Biodiversity Research, Shoolini University of 
Biotechnology and Management Sciences, Bajhol, Solan, Himachal Pradesh, India.
(3)Institute of Bioresource and Agriculture, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong 
Kong, China.
(4)Shoolini Institute of Life Sciences and Business Management, The Mall, Solan, 
Himachal Pradesh, India.
(5)Amity School of Law, Amity University, Noida, UP, India.
(6)Faculty of Applied Sciences and Biotechnology, Shoolini University of 
Biotechnology and Management Sciences, Bajhol, Solan, Himachal Pradesh, India. 
saurabh_kul2000@yahoo.co.in.
(7)Center for Omics and Biodiversity Research, Shoolini University of 
Biotechnology and Management Sciences, Bajhol, Solan, Himachal Pradesh, India. 
saurabh_kul2000@yahoo.co.in.

Water plays a vital role as a natural resource since life is unsustainable 
without it. If water is polluted or contaminated, it results in several health 
issues among people. Millions of people are infected with waterborne diseases 
globally, and India is no exception. In the present review, we have analyzed the 
outbreaks of waterborne diseases that occurred in several Indian states between 
2014 and 2020, identified the key infections, and provided insights into the 
performance of sanitation improvement programs. We noted that acute diarrheal 
disease (ADD), typhoid, cholera, hepatitis, and shigellosis are common 
waterborne diseases in India. These diseases have caused about 11,728 deaths 
between 2014 and 2018 out of which 10,738 deaths occurred only after 2017. The 
outbreaks of these diseases have been rising because of a lack of adequate 
sanitation, poor hygiene, and the absence of proper disposal systems. Despite 
various efforts by the government such as awareness campaigns, guidance on diet 
for infected individuals, and sanitation improvement programs, the situation is 
still grim. Disease hotspots and risk factors must be identified, water, 
sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) services must be improved, and ongoing policies 
must be effectively implemented to improve the situation. The efforts must be 
customized to the local environment. In addition, the possible effects of 
climate change must be projected, and strategies must be accordingly optimized.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00284-023-03462-2
PMID: 37930488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]