---
reference_id: "PMID:36986374"
title: "Ophthalmic Manifestations of the Monkeypox Virus: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Gandhi AP
- Gupta PC
- Padhi BK
- Sandeep M
- Suvvari TK
- Shamim MA
- Satapathy P
- Sah R
- León-Figueroa DA
- Rodriguez-Morales AJ
- Barboza JJ
- Dziedzic A
journal: Pathogens
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/pathogens12030452
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ophthalmic Manifestations of the Monkeypox Virus: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Gandhi AP, Gupta PC, Padhi BK, Sandeep M, Suvvari TK, Shamim MA, Satapathy P, Sah R, León-Figueroa DA, Rodriguez-Morales AJ, Barboza JJ, Dziedzic A
**Journal:** Pathogens (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/pathogens12030452](https://doi.org/10.3390/pathogens12030452)

## Content

1. Pathogens. 2023 Mar 14;12(3):452. doi: 10.3390/pathogens12030452.

Ophthalmic Manifestations of the Monkeypox Virus: A Systematic Review and 
Meta-Analysis.

Gandhi AP(1), Gupta PC(2), Padhi BK(3), Sandeep M(4), Suvvari TK(5), Shamim 
MA(6), Satapathy P(7), Sah R(8)(9)(10), León-Figueroa DA(11)(12), 
Rodriguez-Morales AJ(13), Barboza JJ(14), Dziedzic A(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Community Medicine, ESIC Medical College & Hospital, 
Sanathnagar, Hyderabad 500038, India.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research, Chandigarh 160012, India.
(3)Department of Community Medicine and School of Public Health, Postgraduate 
Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh 160012, India.
(4)School of Medical Sciences, University of Hyderabad, Telangana 500046, India.
(5)Medicine and Surgery, Rangaraya Medical College, Kakinada 533003, Andhra 
Pradesh, India.
(6)Department of Pharmacology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Jodhpur 
342005, India.
(7)Department of Virology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research, Chandigarh 160012, India.
(8)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Medicine, Tribhuvan University 
Teaching Hospital, Kathmandu 46000, Nepal.
(9)Department of Microbiology, Dr. D.Y. Patil Medical College, Hospital and 
Research Centre, Dr. D.Y. Patil Vidyapeeth, Pune 411018, Maharashtra, India.
(10)Datta Meghe Institute of Higher Education and Research, Jawaharlal Nehru 
Medical College, Wardha 442001, India.
(11)Facultad de Medicina Humana, Universidad de San Martín de Porres, Chiclayo 
15011, Peru.
(12)Centro de Investigación en Atención Primaria en Salud, Universidad Peruana 
Cayetano Heredia, Lima 15102, Peru.
(13)Grupo de Investigación Biomedicina, Faculty of Medicine, Fundacion 
Universitaria Autonoma de las Américas, Sede Pereira, Risaralda, Pereira 660003, 
Colombia.
(14)Escuela de Medicina, Universidad Cesar Vallejo, Trujillo 13007, Peru.
(15)Department of Conservative Dentistry with Endodontics, Medical University of 
Silesia, 40-055 Katowice, Poland.

BACKGROUND: The accurate estimation of the prevalence of mpox-induced ophthalmic 
lesions will enable health departments to allocate resources more effectively 
during the ongoing mpox pandemic. The aim of this meta-analysis was to estimate 
the global prevalence of ophthalmic manifestations in mpox patients.
METHODS: A systematic search was carried out in seven databases-Pub Med, Scopus, 
Web of Science, EMBASE, ProQuest, EBSCOHost, and Cochrane-for studies published 
on or before 12 December 2022. The pooled prevalence of ophthalmic 
manifestations was estimated by the random effects model. Risk of bias 
assessment of the studies and sub-group analysis to explain heterogeneity were 
undertaken.
RESULTS: Overall, 12 studies were included, with 3239 confirmed mpox cases, 
among which 755 patients reported ophthalmic manifestations. The pooled 
prevalence of ophthalmic manifestations was 9% (95% confidence interval (CI), 
3-24). Studies from Europe reported a very low prevalence of ocular 
manifestations of 0.98% (95% CI 0.14-2.31), compared to studies from Africa with 
a substantially higher prevalence of 27.22% (95% CI 13.69-43.26).
CONCLUSIONS: A wide variation in the prevalence of ocular manifestations among 
mpox patients was observed globally. Healthcare workers involved in mpox-endemic 
African countries should be aware of ocular manifestations for early detection 
and management.

DOI: 10.3390/pathogens12030452
PMCID: PMC10056031
PMID: 36986374

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.