---
reference_id: "PMID:35137184"
title: Obesity Due to Steroid Receptor Coactivator-1 Deficiency Is Associated With Endocrine and Metabolic Abnormalities.
authors:
- Cacciottolo TM
- Henning E
- Keogh JM
- Bel Lassen P
- Lawler K
- Bounds R
- Ahmed R
- Perdikari A
- Mendes de Oliveira E
- Smith M
- Godfrey EM
- Johnson E
- Hodson L
- Clément K
- van der Klaauw AA
- Farooqi IS
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1210/clinem/dgac067
keywords:
- Female
- Fibrosis
- Humans
- Male
- Nuclear Receptor Coactivator 1/genetics
- "Obesity, Morbid/complications, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Obesity Due to Steroid Receptor Coactivator-1 Deficiency Is Associated With Endocrine and Metabolic Abnormalities.
**Authors:** Cacciottolo TM, Henning E, Keogh JM, Bel Lassen P, Lawler K, Bounds R, Ahmed R, Perdikari A, Mendes de Oliveira E, Smith M, Godfrey EM, Johnson E, Hodson L, Clément K, van der Klaauw AA, Farooqi IS
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1210/clinem/dgac067](https://doi.org/10.1210/clinem/dgac067)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2022 May 17;107(6):e2532-e2544. doi:
10.1210/clinem/dgac067.

Obesity Due to Steroid Receptor Coactivator-1 Deficiency Is Associated With
Endocrine and Metabolic Abnormalities.

Cacciottolo TM(1), Henning E(1), Keogh JM(1), Bel Lassen P(2), Lawler K(1),
Bounds R(1), Ahmed R(1), Perdikari A(1), Mendes de Oliveira E(1), Smith M(1),
Godfrey EM(3), Johnson E(4), Hodson L(4), Clément K(2), van der Klaauw AA(1),
Farooqi IS(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Cambridge Metabolic Research Laboratories and NIHR Cambridge
Biomedical Research Centre, Wellcome-MRC Institute of Metabolic Science, Box
289, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK.
(2)Sorbonne Université, INSERM, Nutrition and Obesities: Systemic Approaches
(NutriOmics) Research Group and Assistance Publique hôpitaux de Paris, Nutrition
Department, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, 75013 Paris, France.
(3)Department of Radiology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK.
(4)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of
Oxford, Churchill Hospital and National Institute for Health Research Oxford
Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford University Hospitals Foundation Trust,
Headington, Oxford OX3 7LE, UK.

CONTEXT: Genetic variants affecting the nuclear hormone receptor coactivator
steroid receptor coactivator, SRC-1, have been identified in people with severe
obesity and impair melanocortin signaling in cells and mice. As a result, obese
patients with SRC-1 deficiency are being treated with a melanocortin 4 receptor
agonist in clinical trials.
OBJECTIVE: Here, our aim was to comprehensively describe and characterize the
clinical phenotype of SRC-1 variant carriers to facilitate diagnosis and
clinical management.
METHODS: In genetic studies of 2462 people with severe obesity, we identified 23
rare heterozygous variants in SRC-1. We studied 29 adults and 18 children who
were SRC-1 variant carriers and performed measurements of metabolic and
endocrine function, liver imaging, and adipose tissue biopsies. Findings in
adult SRC-1 variant carriers were compared to 30 age- and body mass index
(BMI)-matched controls.
RESULTS: The clinical spectrum of SRC-1 variant carriers included increased food
intake in children, normal basal metabolic rate, multiple fractures with minimal
trauma (40%), persistent diarrhea, partial thyroid hormone resistance, and
menorrhagia. Compared to age-, sex-, and BMI-matched controls, adult SRC-1
variant carriers had more severe adipose tissue fibrosis (46.2% vs 7.1%
respectively, P = .03) and a suggestion of increased liver fibrosis (5/13 cases
vs 2/13 in controls, odds ratio = 3.4), although this was not statistically
significant.
CONCLUSION: SRC-1 variant carriers exhibit hyperphagia in childhood, severe
obesity, and clinical features of partial hormone resistance. The presence of
adipose tissue fibrosis and hepatic fibrosis in young patients suggests that
close monitoring for the early development of obesity-associated metabolic
complications is warranted.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Endocrine Society.

DOI: 10.1210/clinem/dgac067
PMCID: PMC9113786
PMID: 35137184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
