---
reference_id: "PMID:25710710"
title: New insights into iron regulation and erythropoiesis.
authors:
- Kim A
- Nemeth E
journal: Curr Opin Hematol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1097/MOH.0000000000000132
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New insights into iron regulation and erythropoiesis.
**Authors:** Kim A, Nemeth E
**Journal:** Curr Opin Hematol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MOH.0000000000000132](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOH.0000000000000132)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Hematol. 2015 May;22(3):199-205. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0000000000000132.

New insights into iron regulation and erythropoiesis.

Kim A(1), Nemeth E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, California, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Iron homeostasis and erythropoiesis regulate each other to 
ensure optimal delivery of oxygen and iron to cells and tissues. Defining the 
mechanisms of this crosstalk is important for understanding the pathogenesis of 
common conditions associated with disordered iron metabolism and erythropoiesis.
RECENT FINDINGS: Stress erythropoiesis causes suppression of hepcidin to 
increase iron availability for hemoglobin synthesis. The erythroid hormone 
erythroferrone (ERFE) was identified as the mediator of this process. ERFE and 
additional candidates (TWSG1 and GDF15) may also mediate hepcidin suppression in 
ineffective erythropoiesis. Several mechanisms by which iron regulates 
erythropoiesis were also recently identified. Iron deficiency suppresses 
erythropoietin production via the IRP1-HIF2α axis to prevent excessive iron 
usage by erythropoiesis during systemic iron restriction. Iron restriction also 
directly impairs erythroid maturation by inhibiting aconitase, and this can be 
reversed by the administration of the aconitase product isocitrate. Another 
novel target is GDF11, which is thought to autoinhibit erythroid maturation. 
GDF11 traps show promising pharmacologic activity in models of both ineffective 
erythropoiesis and iron-restricted anemia.
SUMMARY: This review summarizes exciting advances in understanding the 
mechanisms of iron and erythropoietic regulation, and development of novel 
therapeutic tools for disorders resulting from dysregulation of iron metabolism 
or erythropoiesis.

DOI: 10.1097/MOH.0000000000000132
PMCID: PMC4509743
PMID: 25710710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]