---
reference_id: "PMID:28000146"
title: "Cannabinoid Hyperemesis Syndrome: Diagnosis, Pathophysiology, and Treatment-a Systematic Review."
authors:
- Sorensen CJ
- DeSanto K
- Borgelt L
- Phillips KT
- Monte AA
journal: J Med Toxicol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s13181-016-0595-z
keywords:
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- Marijuana Abuse/complications
- Syndrome
- "Vomiting/chemically induced, diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cannabinoid Hyperemesis Syndrome: Diagnosis, Pathophysiology, and Treatment-a Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Sorensen CJ, DeSanto K, Borgelt L, Phillips KT, Monte AA
**Journal:** J Med Toxicol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13181-016-0595-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13181-016-0595-z)

## Content

1. J Med Toxicol. 2017 Mar;13(1):71-87. doi: 10.1007/s13181-016-0595-z. Epub 2016
 Dec 20.

Cannabinoid Hyperemesis Syndrome: Diagnosis, Pathophysiology, and Treatment-a
Systematic Review.

Sorensen CJ(1), DeSanto K(2), Borgelt L(3), Phillips KT(4), Monte AA(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Denver Health Residency in Emergency Medicine, Denver Health and Hospital
Authority, Denver, CO, 80204, USA. Cecilia.Sorensen@denverem.org.
(2)Health Sciences Library, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus,
Aurora, CO, USA.
(3)Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Colorado
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.
(4)School of Psychological Sciences, University of Northern Colorado, Greeley,
CO, USA.
(5)Denver Health Residency in Emergency Medicine, Denver Health and Hospital
Authority, Denver, CO, 80204, USA.
(6)Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Colorado School of Medicine,
Aurora, CO, USA.
(7)Rocky Mountain Poison & Drug Center, Denver Health and Hospital Authority,
Denver, CO, USA.

Comment in
    J Med Toxicol. 2017 Jun;13(2):197. doi: 10.1007/s13181-017-0608-6.
    J Med Toxicol. 2017 Jun;13(2):198. doi: 10.1007/s13181-017-0610-z.
    J Med Toxicol. 2017 Jun;13(2):199-200. doi: 10.1007/s13181-017-0612-x.
    J Med Toxicol. 2017 Jun;13(2):201. doi: 10.1007/s13181-017-0613-9.

Cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome (CHS) is a syndrome of cyclic vomiting
associated with cannabis use. Our objective is to summarize the available
evidence on CHS diagnosis, pathophysiology, and treatment. We performed a
systematic review using MEDLINE, Ovid MEDLINE, Embase, Web of Science, and the
Cochrane Library from January 2000 through September 24, 2015. Articles eligible
for inclusion were evaluated using the Grading and Recommendations Assessment,
Development, and Evaluation (GRADE) criteria. Data were abstracted from the
articles and case reports and were combined in a cumulative synthesis. The
frequency of identified diagnostic characteristics was calculated from the
cumulative synthesis and evidence for pathophysiologic hypothesis as well as
treatment options were evaluated using the GRADE criteria. The systematic search
returned 2178 articles. After duplicates were removed, 1253 abstracts were
reviewed and 183 were included. Fourteen diagnostic characteristics were
identified, and the frequency of major characteristics was as follows: history
of regular cannabis for any duration of time (100%), cyclic nausea and vomiting
(100%), resolution of symptoms after stopping cannabis (96.8%), compulsive hot
baths with symptom relief (92.3%), male predominance (72.9%), abdominal pain
(85.1%), and at least weekly cannabis use (97.4%). The pathophysiology of CHS
remains unclear with a dearth of research dedicated to investigating its
underlying mechanism. Supportive care with intravenous fluids, dopamine
antagonists, topical capsaicin cream, and avoidance of narcotic medications has
shown some benefit in the acute setting. Cannabis cessation appears to be the
best treatment. CHS is a cyclic vomiting syndrome, preceded by daily to weekly
cannabis use, usually accompanied by symptom improvement with hot bathing, and
resolution with cessation of cannabis. The pathophysiology underlying CHS is
unclear. Cannabis cessation appears to be the best treatment.

DOI: 10.1007/s13181-016-0595-z
PMCID: PMC5330965
PMID: 28000146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Sorensen has no conflicts of interest to
declare. Kristen DeSanto has no conflicts of interest to declare. Dr. Borgelt
receives support from the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment
and the University of Colorado Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical
Sciences. Dr. Phillips receives support from NIH on Drug Abuse R15 DA041656 and
R01 DA034957, and Dr. Monte receives support from NIH 1 K23 GM110516 and NIH
CTSI UL1 TR001082.
