---
reference_id: "PMID:12474143"
title: "Mutations in COX15 produce a defect in the mitochondrial heme biosynthetic pathway, causing early-onset fatal hypertrophic cardiomyopathy."
authors:
- Antonicka H
- Mattman A
- Carlson CG
- Glerum DM
- Hoffbuhr KC
- Leary SC
- Kennaway NG
- Shoubridge EA
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1086/345489
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- "Cardiomyopathy, Hypertrophic/enzymology, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Fibroblasts
- "Heme/analogs & derivatives, biosynthesis"
- Humans
- "Membrane Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics, metabolism"
- "Mitochondria, Heart/enzymology, metabolism"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- "Myocardium/enzymology, metabolism, pathology"
- Saccharomyces cerevisiae Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in COX15 produce a defect in the mitochondrial heme biosynthetic pathway, causing early-onset fatal hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Antonicka H, Mattman A, Carlson CG, Glerum DM, Hoffbuhr KC, Leary SC, Kennaway NG, Shoubridge EA
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1086/345489](https://doi.org/10.1086/345489)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2003 Jan;72(1):101-14. doi: 10.1086/345489. Epub 2002 Dec 9.

Mutations in COX15 produce a defect in the mitochondrial heme biosynthetic 
pathway, causing early-onset fatal hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Antonicka H(1), Mattman A, Carlson CG, Glerum DM, Hoffbuhr KC, Leary SC, 
Kennaway NG, Shoubridge EA.

Author information:
(1)Montreal Neurological Institute, Montreal, Quebec H3A 2B4, Canada.

Deficiencies in the activity of cytochrome c oxidase (COX), the terminal enzyme 
in the respiratory chain, are a frequent cause of autosomal recessive 
mitochondrial disease in infants. These patients are clinically and genetically 
heterogeneous, and all defects so far identified in this group have been found 
in genes coding for accessory proteins that play important roles in the assembly 
of the COX holoenzyme complex. Many patients, however, remain without a 
molecular diagnosis. We have used a panel of retroviral vectors expressing human 
COX assembly factors in these patients to identify the molecular basis for the 
COX deficiency by functional complementation. Here we show that overexpression 
of COX15, a protein involved in the synthesis of heme A, the heme prosthetic 
group for COX, can functionally complement the isolated COX deficiency in 
fibroblasts from a patient with fatal, infantile hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. 
Mutation analysis of COX15 in the patient identified a missense mutation (C700T) 
on one allele, changing a conserved arginine to tryptophan (R217W), and a 
splice-site mutation in intron 3 on the other allele (C447-3G), resulting in a 
deletion of exon 4. This splicing error introduces a frameshift and a premature 
stop codon, resulting in an unstable mRNA and, likely, a null allele. 
Mitochondrial heme A content was reduced in the patient's heart and fibroblast 
mitochondria, and levels of heme O were increased in the patient's heart. COX 
activity and the total amount of fully assembled enzyme were reduced by 50%-70% 
in patient fibroblasts. Expression of COX15 increased heme A content and rescued 
COX activity. These results suggest that reduced availability of heme A stalls 
the assembly of COX. This study establishes COX15 as an additional cause, along 
with SCO2, of fatal infantile, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy associated with 
isolated COX deficiency.

DOI: 10.1086/345489
PMCID: PMC378614
PMID: 12474143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]