---
reference_id: "PMID:25575015"
title: "Endocrine disorders in Fanconi anemia: recommendations for screening and treatment."
authors:
- Petryk A
- Kanakatti Shankar R
- Giri N
- Hollenberg AN
- Rutter MM
- Nathan B
- Lodish M
- Alter BP
- Stratakis CA
- Rose SR
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-4357
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endocrine disorders in Fanconi anemia: recommendations for screening and treatment.
**Authors:** Petryk A, Kanakatti Shankar R, Giri N, Hollenberg AN, Rutter MM, Nathan B, Lodish M, Alter BP, Stratakis CA, Rose SR
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2014-4357](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2014-4357)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Mar;100(3):803-11. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-4357.
Epub  2015 Jan 9.

Endocrine disorders in Fanconi anemia: recommendations for screening and 
treatment.

Petryk A(1), Kanakatti Shankar R, Giri N, Hollenberg AN, Rutter MM, Nathan B, 
Lodish M, Alter BP, Stratakis CA, Rose SR.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology (A.P., B.N.), University of Minnesota 
Masonic Children's Hospital, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55454; Department of 
Pediatrics (R.K.S.), Children's Hospital of Richmond at Virginia Commonwealth 
University, Richmond, Virginia 23229; Clinical Genetics Branch (N.G., B.P.A.), 
Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, 
Rockville, Maryland 20850; Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism 
(A.N.H.), Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02215; Division of Endocrinology (M.M.R., S.R.R.), 
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College 
of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229; Pediatric Endocrinology Inter-Institute 
Training Program (M.L.), National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 
20892; and Section on Endocrinology and Genetics (M.L., C.A.S.), Program on 
Developmental Endocrinology and Genetics, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

CONTEXT: Endocrine problems are common in patients with Fanconi anemia (FA). 
About 80% of children and adults with FA have at least one endocrine 
abnormality, including short stature, GH deficiency, abnormal glucose or insulin 
metabolism, dyslipidemia, hypothyroidism, pubertal delay, hypogonadism, or 
impaired fertility. The goal of this report is to provide an overview of 
endocrine abnormalities and guidelines for routine screening and treatment to 
allow early diagnosis and timely intervention.
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION: This work is based on a comprehensive literature review, 
including relevant articles published between 1971 and 2014, and proceedings of 
a Consensus Conference held by the Fanconi Anemia Research Fund in 2013.
EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS: The panel of experts collected published evidence and 
discussed its relevance to reflect current information about the endocrine care 
of children and adults with FA before the Consensus Conference and through 
subsequent deliberations that led to the consensus.
CONCLUSIONS: Individuals with FA should be routinely screened for endocrine 
abnormalities, including evaluation of growth; glucose, insulin, and lipid 
metabolism; thyroid function; puberty; gonadal function; and bone mineral 
metabolism. Inclusion of an endocrinologist as part of the multidisciplinary 
patient care team is key to providing comprehensive care for patients with FA.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2014-4357
PMCID: PMC4333044
PMID: 25575015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]