---
reference_id: "PMID:9590293"
title: Mutation and deletion of the pseudoautosomal gene SHOX cause Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis.
authors:
- Shears DJ
- Vassal HJ
- Goodman FR
- Palmer RW
- Reardon W
- Superti-Furga A
- Scambler PJ
- Winter RM
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1038/ng0198-70
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- DNA
- Female
- Genetic Linkage
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Lod Score
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Short Stature Homeobox Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation and deletion of the pseudoautosomal gene SHOX cause Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis.
**Authors:** Shears DJ, Vassal HJ, Goodman FR, Palmer RW, Reardon W, Superti-Furga A, Scambler PJ, Winter RM
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0198-70](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0198-70)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1998 May;19(1):70-3. doi: 10.1038/ng0198-70.

Mutation and deletion of the pseudoautosomal gene SHOX cause Leri-Weill 
dyschondrosteosis.

Shears DJ(1), Vassal HJ, Goodman FR, Palmer RW, Reardon W, Superti-Furga A, 
Scambler PJ, Winter RM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Institute of Child Health, London, UK.

Leri-Weill Dyschondrosteosis (LWD; OMIM 127300) is a dominantly inherited 
skeletal dysplasia characterized by disproportionate short stature with 
predominantly mesomelic limb shortening. Expression is variable and consistently 
more severe in females, who frequently display the Madelung deformity of the 
forearm (shortening and bowing of the radius with dorsal subluxation of the 
distal ulna). The rare Langer Mesomelic Dysplasia (LD; OMIM 249700), 
characterized by severe short stature with hypoplasia/aplasia of the ulna and 
fibula, has been postulated to be the homozygous form of LWD (refs 4-6). In a 
six-generation pedigree with LWD, we established linkage to the marker DXYS6814 
in the pseudoautosomal region (PAR1) of the X and Y chromosomes (Z max=6.28; 
theta=0). Linkage analysis of three smaller pedigrees increased the lod score to 
8.68 (theta=0). We identified submicroscopic PAR1 deletions encompassing the 
recently described short stature homeobox-containing gene SHOX (refs 7,8) 
segregating with the LWD phenotype in 5 families. A point mutation leading to a 
premature stop in exon 4 of SHOX was identified in one LWD family.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0198-70
PMID: 9590293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]