---
reference_id: "PMID:11921414"
title: The insulin gene in diabetes.
authors:
- Pugliese A
- Miceli D
journal: Diabetes Metab Res Rev
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1002/dmrr.261
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The insulin gene in diabetes.
**Authors:** Pugliese A, Miceli D
**Journal:** Diabetes Metab Res Rev (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1002/dmrr.261](https://doi.org/10.1002/dmrr.261)

## Content

1. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2002 Jan-Feb;18(1):13-25. doi: 10.1002/dmrr.261.

The insulin gene in diabetes.

Pugliese A(1), Miceli D.

Author information:
(1)Immunogenetics, Diabetes Research Institute, University of Miami School of 
Medicine, Miami, Florida, FL 33136, USA. apuglies@med.miami.edu

Lack of insulin production or abnormalities affecting insulin secretion are key 
to the development of almost all forms of diabetes, including the common type 1 
(insulin-dependent) and type 2 (non-insulin-dependent) diabetes and the more 
rare forms of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). Because insulin has 
such a central role in the pathogenesis of both forms of diabetes, the insulin 
gene (INS) has always been considered a candidate susceptibility gene. A number 
of studies have shown that the allelic variation and parent-of-origin effects 
affect the transmission and expression of the insulin gene in pancreatic 
beta-cells and extra-pancreatic tissues. These observations have led to the 
formulation of new hypotheses to explain the biological mechanisms by which 
functional differences in the expression of the insulin gene may contribute to 
diabetes susceptibility.

Copyright 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/dmrr.261
PMID: 11921414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]