---
reference_id: "PMID:28332488"
title: Parkinson disease.
authors:
- Poewe W
- Seppi K
- Tanner CM
- Halliday GM
- Brundin P
- Volkmann J
- Schrag AE
- Lang AE
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2017.13
keywords:
- "Antiparkinson Agents/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Biomarkers/analysis
- "Dopamine Agonists/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Genetic Therapy/methods
- Humans
- "Levodopa/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- Oxidative Stress
- "Parkinson Disease/complications, diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Quality of Life/psychology
- alpha-Synuclein/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Parkinson disease.
**Authors:** Poewe W, Seppi K, Tanner CM, Halliday GM, Brundin P, Volkmann J, Schrag AE, Lang AE
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrdp.2017.13](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrdp.2017.13)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2017 Mar 23;3:17013. doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2017.13.

Parkinson disease.

Poewe W(1), Seppi K(1), Tanner CM(2)(3), Halliday GM(4)(5), Brundin P(6), 
Volkmann J(7), Schrag AE(8), Lang AE(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical University Innsbruck, Anichstrasse 35, 
A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria.
(2)Parkinson's Disease Research Education and Clinical Center, San Francisco 
Veteran's Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, California, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of California - San Francisco, San 
Francisco, California, USA.
(4)Brain and Mind Centre, Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, 
New South Wales, Australia.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, University of New South Wales &Neuroscience Research 
Australia, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
(6)Van Andel Research Institute, Center for Neurodegenerative Science, Grand 
Rapids, Michigan, USA.
(7)Department of Neurology, University Hospital of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(8)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK.
(9)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2020 Apr 23;6(1):31. doi: 10.1038/s41572-020-0163-3.

Parkinson disease is the second-most common neurodegenerative disorder that 
affects 2-3% of the population ≥65 years of age. Neuronal loss in the substantia 
nigra, which causes striatal dopamine deficiency, and intracellular inclusions 
containing aggregates of α-synuclein are the neuropathological hallmarks of 
Parkinson disease. Multiple other cell types throughout the central and 
peripheral autonomic nervous system are also involved, probably from early 
disease onwards. Although clinical diagnosis relies on the presence of 
bradykinesia and other cardinal motor features, Parkinson disease is associated 
with many non-motor symptoms that add to overall disability. The underlying 
molecular pathogenesis involves multiple pathways and mechanisms: α-synuclein 
proteostasis, mitochondrial function, oxidative stress, calcium homeostasis, 
axonal transport and neuroinflammation. Recent research into diagnostic 
biomarkers has taken advantage of neuroimaging in which several modalities, 
including PET, single-photon emission CT (SPECT) and novel MRI techniques, have 
been shown to aid early and differential diagnosis. Treatment of Parkinson 
disease is anchored on pharmacological substitution of striatal dopamine, in 
addition to non-dopaminergic approaches to address both motor and non-motor 
symptoms and deep brain stimulation for those developing intractable 
L-DOPA-related motor complications. Experimental therapies have tried to restore 
striatal dopamine by gene-based and cell-based approaches, and most recently, 
aggregation and cellular transport of α-synuclein have become therapeutic 
targets. One of the greatest current challenges is to identify markers for 
prodromal disease stages, which would allow novel disease-modifying therapies to 
be started earlier.

DOI: 10.1038/nrdp.2017.13
PMID: 28332488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]