---
reference_id: "PMID:34506099"
title: "X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy: phenotype-genotype correlation in hemizygous males and heterozygous females with ABCD1 mutations."
authors:
- Zemanova M
- Chrastina P
- Dvorakova L
- Reboun M
- Vlaskova H
- Jahnova H
- El-Lababidi N
- Cepova J
- Honzik T
- Zeman J
journal: Neuro Endocrinol Lett
year: '2021'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy: phenotype-genotype correlation in hemizygous males and heterozygous females with ABCD1 mutations.
**Authors:** Zemanova M, Chrastina P, Dvorakova L, Reboun M, Vlaskova H, Jahnova H, El-Lababidi N, Cepova J, Honzik T, Zeman J
**Journal:** Neuro Endocrinol Lett (2021)

## Content

1. Neuro Endocrinol Lett. 2021 Sep 10;42(5):359-367.

X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy: phenotype-genotype correlation in hemizygous
males and heterozygous females with ABCD1 mutations.

Zemanova M(1), Chrastina P(2), Dvorakova L(2), Reboun M(2), Vlaskova H(2),
Jahnova H(2), El-Lababidi N(2), Cepova J(1), Honzik T(2), Zeman J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Chemistry and Clinical Biochemistry, 2nd Faculty of
Medicine, University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Paediatrics and Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University and General Faculty Hospital, Prague, Czech
Republic.

OBJECTIVES: X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD) causes cerebral
adrenoleukodystrophy (cALD), myelopathy and/or adrenal insufficiency in males,
and myelopathy/peripheral neuropathy in females. These distinct phenotypes are
scarcely linked to a specific mutations. The objective herein was to find a link
between the phenotype with the genotype mutation, serum very long-chain fatty
acids (VLCFA), and the diet with Lorenzo´s and GTO oils in hemizygous males and
heterozygous females.
METHODS: A retrospective study design with follow-up of 45 hemizygous males and
50 heterozygous females carrying mutations in ABCD1 from 35 unrelated families
with X-ALD. Mutation analysis was performed by Sanger sequencing of PCR and/or
RT-PCR and the severity of missense mutations was evaluated using GERP++ score
and CADD score.
RESULTS: Twenty-five described and eight novel ABCD1 mutations were identified.
Fifteen males and 23 females had severe mutations while 30 males and 27 females
had less detrimental ones. cALD developed in 25 males (56%) including nine boys
with severe mutations, 10 boys with less detrimental mutations and 6 adults with
adrenomyelopathy. Myelopathy and/or adrenal insufficiency developed in 14 males
(31%), six were asymptomatic. Adrenal insufficiency developed in two of five
boys treated with hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT).
Myelopathy/peripheral neuropathy developed in 26% of females. No correlation was
found between the disease severity and the genotype, GERP++ and CADD scores,
presence/absence of aberrant ALDP protein or X-inactivation. VLCFA were higher
in males than heterozygous females and decreased during Lorenzo´s and GTO oils
diet without a clear clinical impact on the disease.
CONCLUSION: The prognosis was unfavourable in most males and significant part of
females. Therapy with early HSCT is effective. Thus, the need for early
diagnosis with the neonatal screening is crucial.

PMID: 34506099
