---
reference_id: "PMID:20629849"
title: High prevalence and risk factors of thromboembolism in stage IV melanoma.
authors:
- Sparsa A
- Durox H
- Doffoel-Hantz V
- Munyangango EM
- Bédane C
- Cendras J
- Gantois C
- Boulinguez S
- Bonnetblanc JM
journal: J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1468-3083.2010.03795.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High prevalence and risk factors of thromboembolism in stage IV melanoma.
**Authors:** Sparsa A, Durox H, Doffoel-Hantz V, Munyangango EM, Bédane C, Cendras J, Gantois C, Boulinguez S, Bonnetblanc JM
**Journal:** J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1468-3083.2010.03795.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-3083.2010.03795.x)

## Content

1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2011 Mar;25(3):340-4. doi: 
10.1111/j.1468-3083.2010.03795.x.

High prevalence and risk factors of thromboembolism in stage IV melanoma.

Sparsa A(1), Durox H, Doffoel-Hantz V, Munyangango EM, Bédane C, Cendras J, 
Gantois C, Boulinguez S, Bonnetblanc JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology of University Hospital, DUPUYTREN, Limoges, France. 
a.sparsa@free.fr

BACKGROUND: Patients with cancer are at a high risk of thromboembolism (TE), 
which contributes to morbidity and mortality. Several case reports of 
thromboembolic events have been reported in patients with melanoma in the 
literature.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to evaluate the prevalence of venous 
thromboembolism (VTE) in stage IV melanoma and determine risk factors, outcomes 
associated with the development of VTE and the number of haemorrhagic 
complications in patients under anti-coagulant treatment.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In this retrospective study, we included all consecutive 
patients with stage IV melanoma among 290 patients followed-up in the department 
of Dermatology each year between January 2005 and 31 December 2007. The 
diagnosis of VTE was confirmed by venous ultrasound, pulmonary 
perfusion-ventilation technetium scan and angiography. The primary outcome was 
to evaluate the number of TE diagnosed in stage IV melanoma patients. The 
secondary outcomes were to study the influence of TE on survival, its prevalence 
according to metastatic sites and to evaluate the number of haemorrhagic 
complications.
RESULTS: Twenty-four VTE events were found [25.2% (CI: 16.5-34)]. Eighteen VTE 
were deep venous thrombosis in lower limbs associated with pulmonary embolism 
(PE) in 50% of cases. Twenty-five percent were asymptomatic and were revealed in 
the pulmonary scan performed for follow-up. Eight percent of VTE events revealed 
stage IV melanoma. Seventeen patients developed thrombosis at home after 
stopping heparin prophylaxis. Seven thrombotic events occurred during oral 
anti-coagulant therapy.
CONCLUSION: We found as high a prevalence of VTE in stage IV melanoma as in lung 
and gastrointestinal cancers. All patients suffered thrombotic events when they 
were treated with chemotherapy and at home when they stopped heparin 
prophylaxis. Therefore, heparin prophylaxis should be maintained at home.

© 2010 The Authors. Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and 
Venereology © 2010 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-3083.2010.03795.x
PMID: 20629849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]