---
reference_id: "PMID:20392236"
title: Physiological role of alkaline phosphatase explored in hypophosphatasia.
authors:
- Whyte MP
journal: Ann N Y Acad Sci
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2010.05387.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Physiological role of alkaline phosphatase explored in hypophosphatasia.
**Authors:** Whyte MP
**Journal:** Ann N Y Acad Sci (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1749-6632.2010.05387.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-6632.2010.05387.x)

## Content

1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2010 Mar;1192:190-200. doi:
10.1111/j.1749-6632.2010.05387.x.

Physiological role of alkaline phosphatase explored in hypophosphatasia.

Whyte MP(1).

Author information:
(1)Shriners Hospital for Children, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. 
mwhyte@shrinenet.org

Hypophosphatasia (HPP) is the instructive rickets or osteomalacia caused by 
loss-of-function mutation(s) within TNSALP, the gene that encodes the "tissue 
nonspecific" isoenzyme of alkaline phosphatase (TNSALP). HPP reveals a critical 
role for this enzyme in skeletal mineralization. Increased extracellular levels 
of pyridoxal 5'-phosphate and inorganic pyrophosphate (PP(i)) demonstrate that 
TNSALP is a phosphomonoester phosphohydrolase and a pyrophosphatase that 
hydrolyzes much lower concentrations of natural substrates than the artificial 
substrates of laboratory assays. Clearly, TNSALP acts at physiological pH and 
"alkaline phosphatase" is a misnomer. Aberrations of vitamin B(6) metabolism in 
HPP revealed that TNSALP is an ectoenzyme. PP(i) excesses cause 
chondrocalcinosis and sometimes arthropathy. The skeletal disease is due to 
PP(i) inhibition of hydroxyapatite crystal growth extracellularly so that 
crystals form within matrix vesicles but fail to enlarge after these structures 
rupture. Trials of alkaline phosphatase replacement therapy for HPP suggest that 
TNSALP functions at the level of skeletal tissues.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2010.05387.x
PMID: 20392236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]