---
reference_id: "PMID:34169570"
title: "Cultured epidermal autografts for treatment of stable vitiligo: Quantitative analysis of color matching with surrounding normally pigmented skin."
authors:
- Toriyama K
- Kato H
- Sato H
- Tanaka T
- Inoie M
- Morita A
journal: J Dermatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.16028
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cultured epidermal autografts for treatment of stable vitiligo: Quantitative analysis of color matching with surrounding normally pigmented skin.
**Authors:** Toriyama K, Kato H, Sato H, Tanaka T, Inoie M, Morita A
**Journal:** J Dermatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/1346-8138.16028](https://doi.org/10.1111/1346-8138.16028)

## Content

1. J Dermatol. 2021 Sep;48(9):1405-1408. doi: 10.1111/1346-8138.16028. Epub 2021 
Jun 25.

Cultured epidermal autografts for treatment of stable vitiligo: Quantitative 
analysis of color matching with surrounding normally pigmented skin.

Toriyama K(1), Kato H(2), Sato H(1), Tanaka T(3), Inoie M(3), Morita A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery, Nagoya City University 
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan.
(2)Department of Geriatric and Environmental Dermatology, Nagoya City University 
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan.
(3)Japan Tissue Engineering Co. Ltd, Gamagori, Japan.

Cultured epidermal autografts (CEA) are surgical therapeutic alternatives for 
patients with stable vitiligo resistant to conventional medical treatments. In 
the present study, we assessed color matching before and at 12 months after CEA 
treatment. Eleven patients with 16 vitiligo lesions were included in this 
prospective study. The recipient sites were prepared by CO2 laser superficial 
ablation and subjected to CEA application. We clinically evaluated and 
categorized the color matching of the repigmented skin as well as the percentage 
of repigmentation. We also obtained three color values (L*a*b*) for the vitiligo 
lesions and surrounding normally pigmented skin. We then calculated the color 
differences between the two regions and compared them before and at 12 months 
after treatment. The mean percentage of repigmentation was 63.3% at 12 months. 
Six of the 16 lesions were categorized as "same as" and had color difference 
values of ≤5 at 12 months after treatment. Clinical evaluation of the color 
matching coincided well with the calculated color difference values. CEA 
application after CO2 laser superficial ablation was useful for treating 
vitiligo assessed by the percentage of repigmentation and color matching. 
Quantification of color differences may be a useful parameter for evaluating 
color matching in vitiligo.

© 2021 The Authors. The Journal of Dermatology published by John Wiley & Sons 
Australia, Ltd on behalf of Japanese Dermatological Association.

DOI: 10.1111/1346-8138.16028
PMCID: PMC8453891
PMID: 34169570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: T.T. and M.I. are employees of Japan Tissue 
Engineering. K.T., H.K., H.S., and A.M. have no conflicts of interest.