---
reference_id: "PMID:27164717"
title: Definition and diagnostic criteria of sleep-related hypermotor epilepsy.
authors:
- Tinuper P
- Bisulli F
- Cross JH
- Hesdorffer D
- Kahane P
- Nobili L
- Provini F
- Scheffer IE
- Tassi L
- Vignatelli L
- Bassetti C
- Cirignotta F
- Derry C
- Gambardella A
- Guerrini R
- Halasz P
- Licchetta L
- Mahowald M
- Manni R
- Marini C
- Mostacci B
- Naldi I
- Parrino L
- Picard F
- Pugliatti M
- Ryvlin P
- Vigevano F
- Zucconi M
- Berkovic S
- Ottman R
journal: Neurology
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002666
keywords:
- Brain/physiopathology
- Electroencephalography
- "Epilepsy/diagnosis, etiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Terminology as Topic
- Video Recording
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Definition and diagnostic criteria of sleep-related hypermotor epilepsy.
**Authors:** Tinuper P, Bisulli F, Cross JH, Hesdorffer D, Kahane P, Nobili L, Provini F, Scheffer IE, Tassi L, Vignatelli L, Bassetti C, Cirignotta F, Derry C, Gambardella A, Guerrini R, Halasz P, Licchetta L, Mahowald M, Manni R, Marini C, Mostacci B, Naldi I, Parrino L, Picard F, Pugliatti M, Ryvlin P, Vigevano F, Zucconi M, Berkovic S, Ottman R
**Journal:** Neurology (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000002666](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000002666)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2016 May 10;86(19):1834-42. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002666. Epub
 2016 Apr 15.

Definition and diagnostic criteria of sleep-related hypermotor epilepsy.

Tinuper P(1), Bisulli F(1), Cross JH(1), Hesdorffer D(1), Kahane P(1), Nobili
L(1), Provini F(1), Scheffer IE(1), Tassi L(1), Vignatelli L(1), Bassetti C(1),
Cirignotta F(1), Derry C(1), Gambardella A(1), Guerrini R(1), Halasz P(1),
Licchetta L(1), Mahowald M(1), Manni R(1), Marini C(1), Mostacci B(1), Naldi
I(1), Parrino L(1), Picard F(1), Pugliatti M(1), Ryvlin P(1), Vigevano F(1),
Zucconi M(1), Berkovic S(1), Ottman R(1).

Author information:
(1)From IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche (P.T., F.B., F. Provini, L.V.,
L.L., B.M., I.N.), Bologna; Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences
(P.T., F.B., F. Provini, L.L.), University of Bologna, Italy; University College
London-Institute of Child Health (J.H.C.), Great Ormond Street Hospital for
Children NHS Foundation Trust, London and Young Epilepsy, Lingfield, UK;
Department of Epidemiology (D.H., R.O.), Mailman School of Public Health, and
G.H. Sergievsky Center, College of Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia University,
New York, NY; Unité Médicale Epilepsie et Malaises (P.K.), Pôle de Neurologie et
Psychiatrie, CHU de Grenoble, France; "C. Munari" Center for Epilepsy Surgery
(L.N., L.T.), Niguarda Hospital, Milan, Italy; Epilepsy Research Centre
(I.E.S.), Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, Austin Health,
Australia; Department of Neurology (C.B.), University of Bern, Switzerland; Unit
of Neurology (F.C.), S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, University of Bologna, Italy;
Department of Clinical Neurosciences (C.D.), Western General Hospital,
Edinburgh, UK; Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences (A.G.), Institute of
Neurology, University Magna Græcia, Catanzaro, Italy; Neurology Unit and
Laboratories (R.G., C.M.), A. Meyer Children's Hospital, Florence, Italy;
National Institute of Clinical Neuroscience (P.H.), Budapest, Hungary;
Department of Neurology (M.M.), University of Minnesota Medical School,
Minneapolis; Institute of Neurology Mondino (R.M.), University of Pavia; Sleep
Disorders Center (L.P.), Department of Neurology, University of Parma, Italy;
Department of Neurology (F. Picard), University Hospital and Medical School of
Geneva, Switzerland; Department of Biomedical and Surgical Sciences (M.P.),
University of Ferrara, Italy; Department of Clinical Neurosciences (P.R.), CHUV,
Lausanne, Switzerland; Functional Neurology and Epileptology (P.R.), Hospices
Civils de Lyon and CRNL, Lyon; Epilepsy Institute (P.R.), IDEE, Lyon, France

The syndrome known as nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy is recognized worldwide
and has been studied in a wide range of clinical and scientific settings
(epilepsy, sleep medicine, neurosurgery, pediatric neurology, epidemiology,
genetics). Though uncommon, it is of considerable interest to practicing
neurologists because of complexity in differential diagnosis from more common,
benign sleep disorders such as parasomnias, or other disorders like psychogenic
nonepileptic seizures. Moreover, misdiagnosis can have substantial adverse
consequences on patients' lives. At present, there is no consensus definition of
this disorder and disagreement persists about its core electroclinical features
and the spectrum of etiologies involved. To improve the definition of the
disorder and establish diagnostic criteria with levels of certainty, a consensus
conference using formal recommended methodology was held in Bologna in September
2014. It was recommended that the name be changed to sleep-related hypermotor
epilepsy (SHE), reflecting evidence that the attacks are associated with sleep
rather than time of day, the seizures may arise from extrafrontal sites, and the
motor aspects of the seizures are characteristic. The etiology may be genetic or
due to structural pathology, but in most cases remains unknown. Diagnostic
criteria were developed with 3 levels of certainty: witnessed (possible) SHE,
video-documented (clinical) SHE, and video-EEG-documented (confirmed) SHE. The
main research gaps involve epidemiology, pathophysiology, treatment, and
prognosis.

© 2016 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002666
PMCID: PMC4862248
PMID: 27164717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
