---
reference_id: "PMID:25160979"
title: "Levels of alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin are surrogate end points of outcomes of patients with primary biliary cirrhosis: an international follow-up study."
authors:
- Lammers WJ
- van Buuren HR
- Hirschfield GM
- Janssen HL
- Invernizzi P
- Mason AL
- Ponsioen CY
- Floreani A
- Corpechot C
- Mayo MJ
- Battezzati PM
- Parés A
- Nevens F
- Burroughs AK
- Kowdley KV
- Trivedi PJ
- Kumagi T
- Cheung A
- Lleo A
- Imam MH
- Boonstra K
- Cazzagon N
- Franceschet I
- Poupon R
- Caballeria L
- Pieri G
- Kanwar PS
- Lindor KD
- Hansen BE
- Global PBC Study Group
journal: Gastroenterology
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2014.08.029
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Alkaline Phosphatase/blood
- Bilirubin/blood
- Biomarkers
- Cholagogues and Choleretics/therapeutic use
- "Education, Medical, Continuing"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- "Liver Cirrhosis, Biliary/drug therapy, metabolism, mortality"
- "Liver Transplantation/statistics & numerical data"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Prognosis
- Risk Factors
- Survival Analysis
- Ursodeoxycholic Acid/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Levels of alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin are surrogate end points of outcomes of patients with primary biliary cirrhosis: an international follow-up study.
**Authors:** Lammers WJ, van Buuren HR, Hirschfield GM, Janssen HL, Invernizzi P, Mason AL, Ponsioen CY, Floreani A, Corpechot C, Mayo MJ, Battezzati PM, Parés A, Nevens F, Burroughs AK, Kowdley KV, Trivedi PJ, Kumagi T, Cheung A, Lleo A, Imam MH, Boonstra K, Cazzagon N, Franceschet I, Poupon R, Caballeria L, Pieri G, Kanwar PS, Lindor KD, Hansen BE, Global PBC Study Group
**Journal:** Gastroenterology (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.gastro.2014.08.029](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2014.08.029)

## Content

1. Gastroenterology. 2014 Dec;147(6):1338-49.e5; quiz e15. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2014.08.029. Epub 2014 Aug 23.

Levels of alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin are surrogate end points of
outcomes of patients with primary biliary cirrhosis: an international follow-up
study.

Lammers WJ(1), van Buuren HR(1), Hirschfield GM(2), Janssen HL(3), Invernizzi
P(4), Mason AL(5), Ponsioen CY(6), Floreani A(7), Corpechot C(8), Mayo MJ(9),
Battezzati PM(10), Parés A(11), Nevens F(12), Burroughs AK(13), Kowdley KV(14),
Trivedi PJ(2), Kumagi T(15), Cheung A(3), Lleo A(4), Imam MH(16), Boonstra K(6),
Cazzagon N(7), Franceschet I(7), Poupon R(8), Caballeria L(11), Pieri G(13),
Kanwar PS(14), Lindor KD(17), Hansen BE(18); Global PBC Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus University Medical
Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)NIHR Biomedical Research Unit and Centre for Liver Research, University of
Birmingham, Birmingham, England.
(3)Liver Clinic, Toronto Western & General Hospital, University Health Network,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Liver Unit and Center for Autoimmune Liver Diseases, Humanitas Clinical and
Research Center, Rozzano, Italy.
(5)Divison of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Alberta, Edmonton,
Alberta, Canada.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Surgery, Oncology and Gastroenterology, University of Padua,
Padua, Italy.
(8)Centre de Référence des Maladies Inflammatoires des VoiesBiliaires, Hôpital
Saint-Antoine, APHP, Paris, France.
(9)Digestive and Liver Diseases, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas.
(10)Department of Health Sciences, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan,
Italy.
(11)Liver Unit, Hospital Clínic, CIBERehd, IDIBAPS, University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain.
(12)Department of Hepatology, University Hospitals Leuven, KU Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium.
(13)The Sheila Sherlock Liver Centre, The Royal Free Hospital, London, England.
(14)Liver Center of Excellence, Digestive Disease Institute, Virginia Mason
Medical Center, Seattle, Washington.
(15)Liver Clinic, Toronto Western & General Hospital, University Health Network,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Gastroenterology and Metabology, Ehime
University Graduate School of Medicine, Ehime, Japan.
(16)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota.
(17)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota; College of Health Solutions, Arizona State University, Phoenix,
Arizona.
(18)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus University Medical
Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address: b.hansen@erasmusmc.nl.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2015 Apr;148(4):860-1. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2015.02.047.
    Gastroenterology. 2015 Apr;148(4):860. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2014.11.050.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Noninvasive surrogate end points of long-term outcomes of
patients with primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) are needed to monitor disease
progression and evaluate potential treatments. We performed a meta-analysis of
individual patient data from cohort studies to evaluate whether patients' levels
of alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin correlate with their outcomes and can be
used as surrogate end points.
METHODS: We performed a meta-analysis of data from 4845 patients included in 15
North American and European long-term follow-up cohort studies. Levels of
alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin were analyzed in different settings and
subpopulations at different time points relative to the clinical end point
(liver transplantation or death).
RESULTS: Of the 4845 patients, 1118 reached a clinical end point. The median
follow-up period was 7.3 years; 77% survived for 10 years after study
enrollment. Levels of alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin measured at study
enrollment (baseline) and each year for 5 years were strongly associated with
clinical outcomes (lower levels were associated with longer transplant-free
survival). At 1 year after study enrollment, levels of alkaline phosphatase that
were 2.0 times the upper limit of normal (ULN) best predicted patient outcome (C
statistic, 0.71) but not significantly better than other thresholds. Of patients
with alkaline phosphatase levels ≤ 2.0 times the ULN, 84% survived for 10 years
compared with 62% of those with levels >2.0 times the ULN (P < .0001). Absolute
levels of alkaline phosphatase 1 year after study enrollment predicted patient
outcomes better than percentage change in level. One year after study
enrollment, a bilirubin level 1.0 times the ULN best predicted patient
transplant-free survival (C statistic, 0.79). Of patients with bilirubin levels
≤ 1.0 times the ULN, 86% survived for 10 years after study enrollment compared
with 41% of those with levels >1.0 times the ULN (P < .0001). Combining levels
of alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin increased the ability to predict patient
survival times. We confirmed the predictive value of alkaline phosphatase and
bilirubin levels in multiple subgroups, such as patients who had not received
treatment with ursodeoxycholic acid, and at different time points after study
enrollment.
CONCLUSIONS: Levels of alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin can predict outcomes
(liver transplantation or death) of patients with PBC and might be used as
surrogate end points in therapy trials.

Copyright © 2014 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2014.08.029
PMID: 25160979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
