---
reference_id: "PMID:8546743"
title: "The epidemiology of Wegener's granulomatosis. Estimates of the five-year period prevalence, annual mortality, and geographic disease distribution from population-based data sources."
authors:
- Cotch MF
- Hoffman GS
- Yerg DE
- Kaufman GI
- Targonski P
- Kaslow RA
journal: Arthritis Rheum
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1002/art.1780390112
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Female
- "Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis/epidemiology, mortality"
- "Hospitalization/statistics & numerical data"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- New York/epidemiology
- Prevalence
- United States/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The epidemiology of Wegener's granulomatosis. Estimates of the five-year period prevalence, annual mortality, and geographic disease distribution from population-based data sources.
**Authors:** Cotch MF, Hoffman GS, Yerg DE, Kaufman GI, Targonski P, Kaslow RA
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheum (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1002/art.1780390112](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.1780390112)

## Content

1. Arthritis Rheum. 1996 Jan;39(1):87-92. doi: 10.1002/art.1780390112.

The epidemiology of Wegener's granulomatosis. Estimates of the five-year period 
prevalence, annual mortality, and geographic disease distribution from 
population-based data sources.

Cotch MF(1), Hoffman GS, Yerg DE, Kaufman GI, Targonski P, Kaslow RA.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To estimate the prevalence, annual mortality, and geographic 
distribution of Wegener's granulomatosis.
METHODS: Analysis of national vital statistics data and hospitalization data 
from a national survey and from all New York State inpatient facilities.
RESULTS: Between 1979 and 1988, 1,784 death certificates in the United States 
listed Wegener's granulomatosis as a cause of death. Nationally, an estimated 
10,771 hospitalizations included Wegener's granulomatosis among the discharge 
diagnoses. In New York State, there were 978 hospitalizations among 571 
individuals with Wegener's granulomatosis.
CONCLUSION: The prevalence of Wegener's granulomatosis in the United States is 
approximately 3.0 per 100,000 persons. Clear differences in the geographic 
distribution of Wegener's granulomatosis are apparent when analysis consider 
rates of disease in individual counties. Contrary to previous reports, 
associations between disease exacerbations and season were not apparent.

DOI: 10.1002/art.1780390112
PMID: 8546743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]