---
reference_id: "PMID:9463307"
title: "Ataxia with isolated vitamin E deficiency: heterogeneity of mutations and phenotypic variability in a large number of families."
authors:
- Cavalier L
- Ouahchi K
- Kayden HJ
- Di Donato S
- Reutenauer L
- Mandel JL
- Koenig M
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1086/301699
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Africa, Northern"
- Age of Onset
- "Ataxia/classification, complications, genetics"
- Base Sequence
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Europe
- Family
- Female
- Genetic Variation
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Point Mutation
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- Sequence Deletion
- "Vitamin E Deficiency/complications, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ataxia with isolated vitamin E deficiency: heterogeneity of mutations and phenotypic variability in a large number of families.
**Authors:** Cavalier L, Ouahchi K, Kayden HJ, Di Donato S, Reutenauer L, Mandel JL, Koenig M
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1086/301699](https://doi.org/10.1086/301699)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1998 Feb;62(2):301-10. doi: 10.1086/301699.

Ataxia with isolated vitamin E deficiency: heterogeneity of mutations and 
phenotypic variability in a large number of families.

Cavalier L(1), Ouahchi K, Kayden HJ, Di Donato S, Reutenauer L, Mandel JL, 
Koenig M.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Genetique et de Biologie Moleculaire et Cellulaire, Centre 
National de la Recherche Scientifique/Institut Nationale de la Sante et de la 
Recherche Medicale/Universite Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg, France.

Ataxia with vitamin E deficiency (AVED), or familial isolated vitamin E 
deficiency, is a rare autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disease 
characterized clinically by symptoms with often striking resemblance to those of 
Friedreich ataxia. We recently have demonstrated that AVED is caused by 
mutations in the gene for alpha-tocopherol transfer protein (alpha-TTP). We now 
have identified a total of 13 mutations in 27 families. Four mutations were 
found in >=2 independent families: 744delA, which is the major mutation in North 
Africa, and 513insTT, 486delT, and R134X, in families of European origin. 
Compilation of the clinical records of 43 patients with documented mutation in 
the alpha-TTP gene revealed differences from Friedreich ataxia: cardiomyopathy 
was found in only 19% of cases, whereas head titubation was found in 28% of 
cases and dystonia in an additional 13%. This study represents the largest group 
of patients and mutations reported for this often misdiagnosed disease and 
points to the need for an early differential diagnosis with Friedreich ataxia, 
in order to initiate therapeutic and prophylactic vitamin E supplementation 
before irreversible damage develops.

DOI: 10.1086/301699
PMCID: PMC1376876
PMID: 9463307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]