---
reference_id: "PMID:34882271"
title: Evaluation of diagnostic factors used to refer children with constipation for rectal biopsies.
authors:
- Jaroy EG
- Emblem R
- Reims HM
- Mai TT
- Risa GT
- Ougland R
journal: Int J Colorectal Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s00384-021-04069-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of diagnostic factors used to refer children with constipation for rectal biopsies.
**Authors:** Jaroy EG, Emblem R, Reims HM, Mai TT, Risa GT, Ougland R
**Journal:** Int J Colorectal Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00384-021-04069-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00384-021-04069-4)

## Content

1. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2022 Mar;37(3):597-605. doi: 10.1007/s00384-021-04069-4.
 Epub 2021 Dec 9.

Evaluation of diagnostic factors used to refer children with constipation for 
rectal biopsies.

Jaroy EG(1)(2), Emblem R(3)(4), Reims HM(5), Mai TT(6), Risa GT(7), Ougland 
R(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Oslo University Hospital, 0424, 
Rikshospitalet, Norway. emiliejar@live.no.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Oslo University Hospital, 0372, Rikshospitalet, 
Norway. emiliejar@live.no.
(3)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Oslo University Hospital, 0424, 
Rikshospitalet, Norway.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oslo, 
0372, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Department of Pathology, Oslo University Hospital, 0424, Rikshospitalet, 
Norway.
(6)Oslo Centre for Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Department of Biostatistics, 
University of Oslo, 0372, Oslo, Norway.
(7)MRC-Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology, University College London (UCL), 
London, UK.
(8)Department of Microbiology, Oslo University Hospital, 0372, Rikshospitalet, 
Norway. Rune.Ougland@rr-research.no.

PURPOSE: Children with constipation and suspected Hirschsprung's disease are 
referred for rectal biopsy. Since this is an invasive procedure, appropriate 
indications should be applied to minimize the number of "unnecessary" biopsies.
METHODS: We reviewed all constipated children who underwent a rectal biopsy to 
diagnose a possible Hirschsprung's disease at a tertiary referral hospital over 
a 6-year period (2013-2018). We registered clinical and demographic factors in 
these children and conducted correlation and multivariate regression analysis to 
evaluate the relation between these factors and a diagnosis of Hirschsprung's 
disease.
RESULTS: We identified 225 children, aged 0-17 years. In total, Hirschsprung's 
disease was diagnosed in only 49/225 (22%). Among the 49 children with 
Hirschsprung's disease, 29 (59%) were diagnosed in the neonatal period. Among 
girls, HD was confirmed in only 10/101 (10%) children, and only 1 of these 10 
girls was older than 6 months at the time of the biopsy. The following factors 
correlated significantly with Hirschsprung's disease diagnosis in children older 
than 1 month: "male sex", "failure to thrive", "gross abdominal distention plus 
vomiting" and "fulfils the Rome 4 criteria for functional constipation".
CONCLUSION: In children referred for rectal biopsy, the factors most indicative 
of Hirschsprung's disease were "male sex", "failure to thrive", "gross abdominal 
distention plus vomiting" and "fulfils the Rome 4 criteria for functional 
constipation". Notably, the prevalence of Hirschsprung's disease decreased with 
the increasing age of the children. Girls referred for a biopsy rarely had 
Hirschsprung's disease, especially those older than 1 month.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00384-021-04069-4
PMCID: PMC8885502
PMID: 34882271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.