---
reference_id: "PMID:19596009"
title: Biology and treatment of eosinophilic esophagitis.
authors:
- Rothenberg ME
journal: Gastroenterology
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2009.07.007
keywords:
- Allergens
- Animals
- "Anti-Inflammatory Agents/administration & dosage"
- Diet Therapy
- "Eosinophilia/diagnosis, epidemiology, immunology, therapy"
- Eosinophils/immunology
- "Esophagitis/diagnosis, epidemiology, immunology, therapy"
- "Food Hypersensitivity/complications, immunology"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Glucocorticoids/administration & dosage"
- Humans
- Leukocyte Count
- Pedigree
- Risk Factors
- T-Lymphocytes/immunology
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biology and treatment of eosinophilic esophagitis.
**Authors:** Rothenberg ME
**Journal:** Gastroenterology (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.gastro.2009.07.007](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2009.07.007)

## Content

1. Gastroenterology. 2009 Oct;137(4):1238-49. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2009.07.007.
Epub 2009 Aug 15.

Biology and treatment of eosinophilic esophagitis.

Rothenberg ME(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA. rothenberg@cchmc.org

Eosinophilic esophagitis is a recently recognized but expanding disorder
characterized by antigen-driven eosinophil accumulation in the esophagus.
Symptoms frequently mimic those of gastroesophageal reflux disease, but the
diseases are distinct in their histopathology, gene expression signature,
response to therapy, hereditary risk, and association with allergies. The
pathogenesis of eosinophilic esophagitis involves environmental and genetic
factors, particularly food antigens and expression level of the eosinophil
chemoattractant eotaxin-3, respectively. Analyses of gene expression signatures
and animal models have indicated the importance of adaptive T-cell immunity that
involves interleukin-5 and interleukin-13-induced esophageal epithelial cell
responses. Symptoms, dysregulation of esophageal gene expression, and pathology
are largely reversible following reduced exposure to specific food antigens as
well as anti-inflammatory therapy, but chronic treatment is necessary to prevent
relapse. Therefore, eosinophilic esophagitis is a disease with unique features
that include chronic esophagitis, atopy, immune sensitization to oral antigens,
reversibility, and familial association.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2009.07.007
PMCID: PMC4104422
PMID: 19596009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
