---
reference_id: "PMID:37958362"
title: "Antiangiogenics in Malignant Granular Cell Tumors: Review of the Literature."
authors:
- Torrado C
- Camaño M
- Hindi N
- Ortega J
- Sevillano AR
- Civantos G
- Moura DS
- Dimino A
- Martín-Broto J
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cancers15215187
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antiangiogenics in Malignant Granular Cell Tumors: Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Torrado C, Camaño M, Hindi N, Ortega J, Sevillano AR, Civantos G, Moura DS, Dimino A, Martín-Broto J
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers15215187](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers15215187)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2023 Oct 28;15(21):5187. doi: 10.3390/cancers15215187.

Antiangiogenics in Malignant Granular Cell Tumors: Review of the Literature.

Torrado C(1), Camaño M(2), Hindi N(3)(4)(5), Ortega J(3)(4)(5), Sevillano 
AR(3)(4)(5), Civantos G(6), Moura DS(3), Dimino A(7), Martín-Broto J(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Medical Oncology Department, University Hospital Virgen del Rocío, 41013 
Sevilla, Spain.
(2)Medical Oncology Department, National Cancer Institute, 11600 Montevideo, 
Uruguay.
(3)Instituto de Investigacion Sanitaria Fundacion Jimenez Diaz (IIS/FJD), 28015 
Madrid, Spain.
(4)Medical Oncology Department, Fundación Jimenez Diaz University Hospital, 
28040 Madrid, Spain.
(5)General de Villalba University Hospital, 28400 Madrid, Spain.
(6)Pathology Department, Hospital Virgen del Rocío, 41013 Sevilla, Spain.
(7)Department of Surgical, Oncological and Oral Sciences, Section of Medical 
Oncology, University of Palermo, 90127 Palermo, Italy.

Granular cell tumors (GCT) represent 0.5% of all soft tissue sarcomas (STS), and 
when metastatic, they exhibit aggressive behavior and determine limited 
survival. Metastatic GCTs are relatively chemo-resistant; however, there is 
growing evidence of the benefit of using pazopanib and other targeted therapies 
in this histology. This is a review of the role of pazopanib and other targeted 
therapies in the treatment of GCTs, along with some insights on pathology and 
molecular biology described in GCTs. From 256 articles found in our search, 10 
case-report articles met the inclusion criteria. Pazopanib was the most employed 
systemic therapy. The median reported time on therapy with pazopanib was seven 
months. Eight out of ten patients (80%) experienced disease control with 
pazopanib, while four out of ten (40%) patients achieved an objective RECIST 
response. Molecular studies suggested that antitumoral effects of pazopanib in 
GCT might be due to a loss-of-function of ATP6AP1/2 genes which consequently 
enhance signaling through several molecular pathways, such as SFKs, STAT5a/b, 
and PDGFR-β. Other reported targeted therapies for malignant GCTs included 
pazopanib in combination with crizotinib, which showed disease control for four 
months in one patient, and a PI3K inhibitor which achieved disease control for 
nine months in another patient. Dasatinib and megestrol were ineffective in two 
other different patients. Pazopanib has been demonstrated to be active in 
advanced GCTs and may be considered as a preferable treatment option.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers15215187
PMCID: PMC10650106
PMID: 37958362

Conflict of interest statement: N.H. reports grants, personal fees, and 
non-financial support from PharmaMar, research grants from Eisai, Immix 
BioPharma and Novartis outside the submitted work and research funding for 
clinical studies (institutional) from PharmaMar, Eli Lilly and Company, AROG, 
Bayer, Eisai, Lixte, Karyopharm, Deciphera, GSK, Novartis, Blueprint, Nektar, 
Forma, Amgen and Daichii-Sankyo. D.S.M. reports institutional research grants 
from PharmaMar, Eisai, Immix BioPharma and Novartis outside the submitted work; 
travel support from PharmaMar, Eisai, Celgene, Bayer and Pfizer. J.M.-B. reports 
research grants from PharmaMar, Eisai, Immix BioPharma and Novartis outside the 
submitted work; honoraria for advisory board participation and expert testimony 
from PharmaMar, honoraria for advisory board participation from Eli Lilly and 
Company, Bayer and Eisai; and research funding for clinical studies 
(institutional) from PharmaMar, Eli Lilly and Company, AROG, Bayer, Eisai, 
Lixte, Karyopharm, Deciphera, GSK, Novartis, Blue-print, Nektar, Forma, Amgen 
and Daichii-Sankyo.