---
reference_id: "PMID:9438470"
title: Geographical and seasonal association between linamarin and cyanide exposure from cassava and the upper motor neurone disease konzo in former Zaire.
authors:
- Banea-Mayambu JP
- Tylleskär T
- Gitebo N
- Matadi N
- Gebre-Medhin M
- Rosling H
journal: Trop Med Int Health
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-3156.1997.d01-215.x
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Cyanides/poisoning, urine"
- Democratic Republic of the Congo/epidemiology
- Diet
- Disease Outbreaks
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Manihot/adverse effects
- "Motor Neuron Disease/epidemiology, etiology, urine"
- "Nitriles/metabolism, poisoning"
- Seasons
- Sulfates/urine
- Thiocyanates/urine
- Weather
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Geographical and seasonal association between linamarin and cyanide exposure from cassava and the upper motor neurone disease konzo in former Zaire.
**Authors:** Banea-Mayambu JP, Tylleskär T, Gitebo N, Matadi N, Gebre-Medhin M, Rosling H
**Journal:** Trop Med Int Health (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1365-3156.1997.d01-215.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-3156.1997.d01-215.x)

## Content

1. Trop Med Int Health. 1997 Dec;2(12):1143-51. doi: 
10.1046/j.1365-3156.1997.d01-215.x.

Geographical and seasonal association between linamarin and cyanide exposure 
from cassava and the upper motor neurone disease konzo in former Zaire.

Banea-Mayambu JP(1), Tylleskär T, Gitebo N, Matadi N, Gebre-Medhin M, Rosling H.

Author information:
(1)Centre National de Planification de Nutrition Humaine, Kinshasa, Democratic 
Republic of Congo.

High cyanide intake from consumption of insufficiently processed cassava has 
been advanced as a possible aetiology of the upper motor neurone disease konzo. 
However, similar neurodamage has not been associated with cyanide exposure from 
any other source. With an ecological study design, we compared 22 cases of 
konzo, 57 unaffected household members and 116 members from unaffected 
households, a total of 195 subjects, in konzo-affected savanna villages with 103 
subjects in adjacent non-affected forest villages in the Paykongila area in the 
Bandundu Region, Zaire. In the dry season, the mean value (+/- SEM) of urinary 
thiocyanate, the main cyanide metabolite, was higher in the three groups in 
konzo-affected villages (563 +/- 105, 587 +/- 44 and 629 +/- 47 micromol/l) than 
in unaffected villages (241 +/- 17 micromol/l). In affected villages in the dry 
season when konzo incidence was high, mean urinary thiocyanate was also higher 
than the levels found in the wet season when incidence was low. The wet season 
values (mean +/- SEM) were 344 +/- 60, 381 +/- 35 and 351 +/- 27 micromol/l. 
Urinary levels of inorganic sulphate were low in all groups, indicating low 
intake of the sulphur amino-acids which provide a substrate for cyanide 
detoxification. These findings support an aetiological role for cyanide in 
konzo. However, urinary linamarin, the cyanogenic glucoside and source of 
cyanide in cassava, was more closely associated with the occurrence of konzo. 
The mean value (+/- SEM) of urinary linamarin in the konzo cases was 632 +/- 105 
micromol/l and in their household members 657 +/- 52 micromol/l, which was 
significantly higher than in members of control households in the same village 
(351 +/- 28 micromol/l) and in unaffected villages (147 +/- 18 micromol/l). This 
suggests that a specific neurotoxic effect of linamarin, rather than the 
associated general cyanide exposure resulting from glucoside breakdown in the 
gut, may be the cause of konzo.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-3156.1997.d01-215.x
PMID: 9438470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]