---
reference_id: "PMID:22934314"
title: Adenine Phosphoribosyltransferase Deficiency.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Edvardsson VO
- Sahota A
- Palsson R
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adenine Phosphoribosyltransferase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Edvardsson VO, Sahota A, Palsson R

## Content

1. Adenine Phosphoribosyltransferase Deficiency.

Edvardsson VO(1), Sahota A(2), Palsson R(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2012 Aug 30 [updated 2019 Sep 26].

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Nephrology Children's Medical Center Landspítali –The
National University Hospital of Iceland Reykjavik, Iceland
(2)Department of Genetics Rutgers University Piscataway, New Jersey
(3)Division of Nephrology Landspítali –The National University Hospital of
Iceland University of Iceland Reykjavik, Iceland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Adenine phosphoribosyltransferase (APRT) deficiency is
characterized by excessive production and renal excretion of
2,8-dihydroxyadenine (DHA), which leads to kidney stone formation and
crystal-induced kidney damage (i.e., DHA crystal nephropathy) causing acute
kidney injury episodes and progressive chronic kidney disease (CKD). Kidney
stones, the most common clinical manifestation of APRT deficiency, can occur at
any age; in at least 50% of affected persons symptoms do not occur until
adulthood. If adequate treatment is not provided, approximately 20%-25% of
affected individuals develop end-stage renal disease (ESRD), usually in adult
life.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of APRT deficiency is established in a proband
by absence of APRT enzyme activity in red cell lysates or identification of
biallelic pathogenic variants in APRT. The detection of the characteristic
round, brown DHA crystals by urine microscopy is highly suggestive of the
disorder.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment with the xanthine
oxidoreductase inhibitors (XOR; xanthine dehydrogenase/oxidase) allopurinol or
febuxostat can improve kidney function, even in individuals with advanced CKD.
The prescribed dose of allopurinol and febuxostat should not routinely be
reduced in affected individuals who have impaired kidney function. Ample fluid
intake is advised. Surgical management of DHA nephrolithiasis is the same as for
other types of kidney stones. ESRD is treated with dialysis and kidney
transplantation. Even after kidney transplantation, treatment with an XOR is
recommended. Surveillance: Measurement of eGFR and urinary DHA excretion (or
urine microscopy for assessment of DHA crystalluria) every 6-12 months; routine
follow up to facilitate adherence to pharmacologic treatment at least annually;
periodic renal ultrasound examination should be considered to evaluate for new
asymptomatic kidney stones. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Azathioprine and
mercaptopurine should not be given to individuals taking either allopurinol or
febuxostat. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is recommended that sibs of an
affected individual undergo APRT enzyme activity measurement or molecular
genetic testing (if the pathogenic variants in a family have been identified) to
allow early diagnosis and treatment and improve long-term outcome. Pregnancy
management: The safety of allopurinol and febuxostat in human pregnancy has not
been systematically studied. Some post-transplantation immunosuppressive
therapies can have adverse effects on the developing fetus. Ideally a thorough
discussion of the risks and benefits of maternal medication use during pregnancy
should take place with an appropriate health care provider prior to conception.
GENETIC COUNSELING: APRT deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner. At conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of
being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance
of being normal. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal testing for
a pregnancy at increased risk are possible if the pathogenic variants in the
family have been identified.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 22934314
