---
reference_id: "PMID:19933292"
title: Familial transposition of the great arteries caused by multiple mutations in laterality genes.
authors:
- De Luca A
- Sarkozy A
- Consoli F
- Ferese R
- Guida V
- Dentici ML
- Mingarelli R
- Bellacchio E
- Tuo G
- Limongelli G
- Digilio MC
- Marino B
- Dallapiccola B
journal: Heart
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1136/hrt.2009.181685
keywords:
- Amino Acid Substitution/genetics
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- Transposition of Great Vessels/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial transposition of the great arteries caused by multiple mutations in laterality genes.
**Authors:** De Luca A, Sarkozy A, Consoli F, Ferese R, Guida V, Dentici ML, Mingarelli R, Bellacchio E, Tuo G, Limongelli G, Digilio MC, Marino B, Dallapiccola B
**Journal:** Heart (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1136/hrt.2009.181685](https://doi.org/10.1136/hrt.2009.181685)

## Content

1. Heart. 2010 May;96(9):673-7. doi: 10.1136/hrt.2009.181685. Epub 2009 Nov 20.

Familial transposition of the great arteries caused by multiple mutations in 
laterality genes.

De Luca A(1), Sarkozy A, Consoli F, Ferese R, Guida V, Dentici ML, Mingarelli R, 
Bellacchio E, Tuo G, Limongelli G, Digilio MC, Marino B, Dallapiccola B.

Author information:
(1)Mendel Laboratory, Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, IRCCS, San 
Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. a.deluca@css-mendel.it

BACKGROUND: The pathogenesis of transposition of the great arteries (TGA) is 
still largely unknown. In general, TGA is not associated with the more common 
genetic disorders nor with extracardiac anomalies, whereas it can be found in 
individuals with lateralisation defects, heterotaxy and asplenia syndrome (right 
isomerism).
OBJECTIVE: To analyse genes previously associated with heterotaxy in order to 
assess mutations in familial TGA unassociated with other features of laterality 
defects.
METHODS: Probands of seven families with isolated TGA and a family history of 
concordant or discordant congenital heart disease were screened for mutations in 
the ZIC3, ACVR2B, LEFTYA, CFC1, NODAL, FOXH1, GDF1, CRELD1, GATA4 and NKX2.5 
genes.
RESULTS: Mutation analysis allowed the identification of three sequence 
variations in two out of seven TGA probands. A FOXH1 (Pro21Ser) missense variant 
was found in a proband who was also heterozogous for an amino acid substitution 
(Gly17Cys) in the ZIC3 gene. This ZIC3 variant was also found in another family 
member with a second sequence variation (Val150Ile) in the NKX2.5 gene 
homeodomain who was affected by multiple ventricular septal defects. A second 
proband was found to harbour a splice site variant (IVS2-1G-->C) in the NODAL 
gene.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study provides evidence that some cases of familial TGA 
are caused by mutations in laterality genes and therefore are part of the same 
disease spectrum of heterotaxy syndrome, and argues for an oligogenic or complex 
mode of inheritance in these pedigrees.

DOI: 10.1136/hrt.2009.181685
PMID: 19933292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]