---
reference_id: "PMID:29436285"
title: "Ménière's Disease Pathophysiology: Endolymphatic Sac Immunohistochemical Study of Aquaporin-2, V2R Vasopressin Receptor, NKCC2, and TRPV4."
authors:
- Asmar MH
- Gaboury L
- Saliba I
journal: Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1177/0194599818756829
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ménière's Disease Pathophysiology: Endolymphatic Sac Immunohistochemical Study of Aquaporin-2, V2R Vasopressin Receptor, NKCC2, and TRPV4.
**Authors:** Asmar MH, Gaboury L, Saliba I
**Journal:** Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0194599818756829](https://doi.org/10.1177/0194599818756829)

## Content

1. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2018 Apr;158(4):721-728. doi: 
10.1177/0194599818756829. Epub 2018 Feb 13.

Ménière's Disease Pathophysiology: Endolymphatic Sac Immunohistochemical Study 
of Aquaporin-2, V2R Vasopressin Receptor, NKCC2, and TRPV4.

Asmar MH(1), Gaboury L(1)(2), Saliba I(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)1 University of Montreal Hospital Centre Research Centre (CRCHUM), Montreal, 
QC, Canada.
(2)3 Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, University of Montreal Hospital 
Centre (CHUM), Montreal, QC, Canada.
(3)2 Division of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, University of Montreal 
Hospital Centre (CHUM), Montreal, QC, Canada.

Objectives Endolymphatic sac (ELS) pathophysiology in Ménière's disease (MD) 
remains poorly understood. We identified from the literature a group of proteins 
expressed on the ELS and involved in endolymph volume regulation: aquaporin-2 
(AQP2), vasopressin receptor V2R, sodium potassium chloride cotransporter 2 
(NKCC2), and transient receptor potential cation channel V4 (TRPV4). Our 
objective was to determine whether their ELS expression was altered in MD, to 
better understand the pathophysiology of endolymphatic hydrops. Study Design 
Prospective case-control study. Setting Tertiary care center. Subjects 
Twenty-four patients with definite MD undergoing endolymphatic duct blockage 
surgery were recruited, as well as 23 controls with no history of MD undergoing 
surgery for vestibular schwannoma (VS). Methods ELS biopsies and blood samples 
for plasma arginine vasopressin (AVP) were obtained. Immunohistochemistry for 
AQP2, V2R, NKCC2, and TRPV4 was performed. Slides were scanned digitally for 
highly sensitive pixel density analysis by specialized software (VIS; 
Visiopharm). Results Global scores generated by the software represent total and 
relative protein expression density of 3 staining intensity levels, exclusively 
on ELS epithelium. AQP2 expression density was significantly elevated in MD 
compared to VS ( P = .003). There was no significant difference in plasma AVP, 
V2R, NKCC2, and TRPV4 expression. Conclusion This original study evaluates 
simultaneous in situ expression of AQP2, V2R, NKCC2, and TRPV4 on the human ELS 
in MD, with a control group. Our results show only AQP2 upregulation on the ELS 
of patients with MD. We suggest a constitutively increased expression of AQP2 in 
MD, independent of its regulatory axis (AVP-V2R). Acquired regulator sequence 
mutations could support this model.

DOI: 10.1177/0194599818756829
PMID: 29436285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]