---
reference_id: "PMID:37352476"
title: "FOLFOXIRI Plus Cetuximab or Bevacizumab as First-Line Treatment of BRAF(V600E)-Mutant Metastatic Colorectal Cancer: The Randomized Phase II FIRE-4.5 (AIO KRK0116) Study."
authors:
- Stintzing S
- Heinrich K
- Tougeron D
- Modest DP
- Schwaner I
- Eucker J
- Pihusch R
- Stauch M
- Kaiser F
- Kahl C
- Karthaus M
- Müller C
- Burkart C
- Reinacher-Schick A
- Kasper-Virchow S
- Fischer von Weikersthal L
- Krammer-Steiner B
- Prager GW
- Taieb J
- Heinemann V
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.22.01420
keywords:
- Colonic Neoplasms/drug therapy
- "Colorectal Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Adenosine Triphosphate/therapeutic use
- Prospective Studies
- Humans
- Rectal Neoplasms/drug therapy
- Cetuximab
- Fluorouracil
- "Camptothecin/analogs & derivatives"
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/adverse effects
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Bevacizumab
- Leucovorin
- Organoplatinum Compounds
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FOLFOXIRI Plus Cetuximab or Bevacizumab as First-Line Treatment of BRAF(V600E)-Mutant Metastatic Colorectal Cancer: The Randomized Phase II FIRE-4.5 (AIO KRK0116) Study.
**Authors:** Stintzing S, Heinrich K, Tougeron D, Modest DP, Schwaner I, Eucker J, Pihusch R, Stauch M, Kaiser F, Kahl C, Karthaus M, Müller C, Burkart C, Reinacher-Schick A, Kasper-Virchow S, Fischer von Weikersthal L, Krammer-Steiner B, Prager GW, Taieb J, Heinemann V
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.22.01420](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.22.01420)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2023 Sep 1;41(25):4143-4153. doi: 10.1200/JCO.22.01420. Epub
2023  Jun 23.

FOLFOXIRI Plus Cetuximab or Bevacizumab as First-Line Treatment of
BRAF(V600E)-Mutant Metastatic Colorectal Cancer: The Randomized Phase II
FIRE-4.5 (AIO KRK0116) Study.

Stintzing S(1)(2), Heinrich K(3), Tougeron D(4), Modest DP(1), Schwaner I(5),
Eucker J(6), Pihusch R(7), Stauch M(8), Kaiser F(9), Kahl C(10)(11), Karthaus
M(12), Müller C(13), Burkart C(14), Reinacher-Schick A(15), Kasper-Virchow
S(16), Fischer von Weikersthal L(17), Krammer-Steiner B(18), Prager GW(19),
Taieb J(4)(20), Heinemann V(3)(20).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology, and Cancer Immunology (CCM),
Charité-Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, Germany.
(2)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), partner site Berlin, German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Department of Oncology, LMU University Hospital, Munich, Germany.
(4)Department of Hepato-Gastroenterology, Poitiers University Hospital and
University of Poitiers, Poitiers, France.
(5)Onkologische Schwerpunktpraxis Kurfürstendamm, Berlin, Germany.
(6)Department of Hematology, Oncology, and Cancer Immunology (CBF),
Charité-Universitaetsmedizin Berlin, Germany.
(7)MVZ Praxis Pihusch, Rosenheim, Germany.
(8)Hematology, Oncology/Hemostaseology Kronach, Kronach, Germany.
(9)VK&K Oncology GmbH, Landshut, Germany.
(10)Klinikum Magdeburg gGmbH, Department of Hematology, Oncology and Palliative
Care Magdeburg, Germany.
(11)Department of Internal Medicine, Clinic III-Hematology, Oncology and
Palliative Care, Rostock University Medical Center, Rostock, Germany.
(12)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Palliative Care, München Klinik
Harlaching and Neuperlach, Munich, Germany.
(13)Evang. Kliniken Essen-Mitte, Essen, Germany.
(14)Schwarzwald-Baar Klinikum Villingen-Schwenningen, Germany.
(15)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Palliative Care, St Josef-Hospital,
Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
(16)West German Cancer Center, Department of Medical Oncology, University
Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany.
(17)Gesundheitszentrum St Marien, Amberg, Germany.
(18)Department of Hematology and Oncology; Klinikum Rostock Südstadt, Rostock,
Germany.
(19)Department of Medicine I, Clinical Division of Oncology, Medical University
of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(20)Department of Gastroenterology and GI Oncology, University Paris-Cité,
(Paris Descartes), SIRC CARPEM, Hopital Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris,
France.

Erratum in
    J Clin Oncol. 2023 Oct 20;41(30):4825-4826. doi: 10.1200/JCO.23.01858.

PURPOSE: BRAFV600E mutation is associated with a poor outcome in metastatic
colorectal cancer (mCRC). This clinical trial investigated the efficacy of
triplet chemotherapy (fluorouracil, folinic acid, oxaliplatin, and irinotecan)
combined with either cetuximab or bevacizumab in patients with previously
untreated BRAFV600E-mutant mCRC.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In this controlled, randomized, open-label phase II trial,
109 patients were randomly assigned, 107 of whom were included into the full
analysis set (FAS). Patients were randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to receive
either FOLFOXIRI plus cetuximab in the experimental arm (n = 72) or FOLFOXIRI
plus bevacizumab in the control arm (n = 35). The primary end point was
objective response rate (ORR) according to RECIST 1.1., evaluated in patients
treated according to protocol (ATP population). Progression-free survival (PFS),
overall survival (OS), toxicity, and feasibility were analyzed as secondary end
points.
RESULTS: Eighteen patients discontinued study treatment before the first tumor
assessment, thus resulting in the ATP population of 89 patients. In these
patients, ORR was 51% (30/59) in the cetuximab-based experimental arm and 67%
(20/30) in the bevacizumab-based control arm (odds ratio, 1.93; 80% CI, 1.06 to
3.52; P = .92 [one-sided]). In the full analysis set, median PFS was
significantly inferior in the experimental arm (6.7 months v 10.7 months; hazard
ratio [HR], 1.89; P = .006). Median OS analyzed at an event rate of 64.5% showed
a trend toward shorter survival in cetuximab-treated patients (12.9 months v
17.1 months; HR, 1.4; P = .20).
CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, FIRE-4.5 is the first prospective and randomized
study investigating first-line treatment of BRAFV600E-mutant mCRC. FOLFOXIRI
plus cetuximab does not induce a higher ORR when compared with FOLFOXIRI plus
bevacizumab in first-line treatment of BRAFV600E-mutant mCRC. Bevacizumab-based
chemotherapy remains the preferable first-line treatment of patients with
BRAFV600E-mutant mCRC.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.22.01420
PMID: 37352476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
