---
reference_id: "PMID:14761782"
title: Structural and molecular pathology of the heart in Carvajal syndrome.
authors:
- Kaplan SR
- Gard JJ
- Carvajal-Huerta L
- Ruiz-Cabezas JC
- Thiene G
- Saffitz JE
journal: Cardiovasc Pathol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1016/S1054-8807(03)00107-8
keywords:
- Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Dysplasia/pathology
- Cardiomegaly/pathology
- Child
- "Cytoskeletal Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Desmoplakins
- Female
- Fibrosis/pathology
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Mutation
- gamma Catenin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Structural and molecular pathology of the heart in Carvajal syndrome.
**Authors:** Kaplan SR, Gard JJ, Carvajal-Huerta L, Ruiz-Cabezas JC, Thiene G, Saffitz JE
**Journal:** Cardiovasc Pathol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1054-8807(03)00107-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1054-8807(03)00107-8)

## Content

1. Cardiovasc Pathol. 2004 Jan-Feb;13(1):26-32. doi:
10.1016/S1054-8807(03)00107-8.

Structural and molecular pathology of the heart in Carvajal syndrome.

Kaplan SR(1), Gard JJ, Carvajal-Huerta L, Ruiz-Cabezas JC, Thiene G, Saffitz JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and the Center for Cardiovascular Research,
Washington University School of Medicine, Box 8118, 660 South Euclid Avenue, St.
Louis, MO 63110, USA.

BACKGROUND: Carvajal syndrome is a familial cardiocutaneous syndrome consisting
of woolly hair, palmoplantar keratoderma, and heart disease. It is caused by a
recessive deletion mutation in desmoplakin, an intracellular protein that links
desmosomal adhesion molecules to intermediate filaments of the cytoskeleton. The
pathology of Carvajal syndrome has not been described.
METHODS: Here, we report the first description of the structural and molecular
pathology of the heart in Carvajal syndrome. We characterized gross and
microscopic pathology and identified changes in expression and distribution of
intercalated disk and intermediate filament proteins in ventricular myocardium.
RESULTS: We identified a unique cardiomyopathy characterized by ventricular
hypertrophy and dilatation, focal ventricular aneurysms, and distinct
ultrastructural abnormalities of intercalated disks, but no evidence of
fibrofatty infiltration or replacement of myocardium. We also observed markedly
decreased amounts of specific immunoreactive signal for desmoplakin,
plakoglobin, and the gap junction protein, connexin43, at intercalated disks.
The intermediate filament protein, desmin, which is known to bind desmoplakin,
showed a normal intracellular pattern of distribution but failed to localize at
intercalated disks.
CONCLUSIONS: The desmoplakin mutation in Carvajal syndrome produces a
cardiomyopathy with unique pathologic features. Altered protein-protein
interactions at intercalated disks likely cause both contractile and electrical
dysfunction in Carvajal syndrome.

DOI: 10.1016/S1054-8807(03)00107-8
PMID: 14761782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
