---
reference_id: "PMID:31813995"
title: Bim contributes to the progression of Huntington's disease-associated phenotypes.
authors:
- Roberts SL
- Evans T
- Yang Y
- Fu Y
- Button RW
- Sipthorpe RJ
- Cowan K
- Valionyte E
- Anichtchik O
- Li H
- Lu B
- Luo S
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddz275
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bim contributes to the progression of Huntington's disease-associated phenotypes.
**Authors:** Roberts SL, Evans T, Yang Y, Fu Y, Button RW, Sipthorpe RJ, Cowan K, Valionyte E, Anichtchik O, Li H, Lu B, Luo S
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddz275](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddz275)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2020 Jan 15;29(2):216-227. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddz275.

Bim contributes to the progression of Huntington's disease-associated 
phenotypes.

Roberts SL(1), Evans T(1), Yang Y(1), Fu Y(2), Button RW(1), Sipthorpe RJ(1), 
Cowan K(1), Valionyte E(1), Anichtchik O(1), Li H(3), Lu B(2), Luo S(1).

Author information:
(1)Peninsula Schools of Medicine and Dentistry, Institute of Translational and 
Stratified Medicine, University of Plymouth, Plymouth PL6 8BU, UK.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, School of Life Sciences, Fudan 
University, Shanghai 200438, China.
(3)Wolfson Institute for Biomedical Research, University College London, London 
WC1E 6BT, UK.

Huntington's disease (HD) is a neurodegenerative disorder caused by an expanded 
polyglutamine tract in the huntingtin (HTT) protein. Mutant HTT (mHTT) toxicity 
is caused by its aggregation/oligomerization. The striatum is the most 
vulnerable region, although all brain regions undergo neuronal degeneration in 
the disease. Here we show that the levels of Bim, a BH3-only protein, are 
significantly increased in HD human post-mortem and HD mouse striata, 
correlating with neuronal death. Bim reduction ameliorates mHTT neurotoxicity in 
HD cells. In the HD mouse model, heterozygous Bim knockout significantly 
mitigates mHTT accumulation and neuronal death, ameliorating disease-associated 
phenotypes and lifespan. Therefore, Bim could contribute to the progression of 
HD.

© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddz275
PMID: 31813995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]