---
reference_id: "PMID:37416498"
title: Lane-Hamilton syndrome.
authors:
- Grech AK
- Yu C
journal: Respirol Case Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/rcr2.1188
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lane-Hamilton syndrome.
**Authors:** Grech AK, Yu C
**Journal:** Respirol Case Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/rcr2.1188](https://doi.org/10.1002/rcr2.1188)

## Content

1. Respirol Case Rep. 2023 Jul 4;11(8):e01188. doi: 10.1002/rcr2.1188.
eCollection  2023 Aug.

Lane-Hamilton syndrome.

Grech AK(1), Yu C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine Alfred Health Melbourne Victoria 
Australia.
(2)Central Clinical School Monash University Melbourne Victoria Australia.

The co-existence of idiopathic hemosiderosis and celiac disease is Lane-Hamilton 
Syndrome. This is a rare condition with only a few dozen cases reported to date. 
Its clinical presentation typically involves hemoptysis that can be 
life-threatening in the acute phase. We report the uncommon case of the 
development of idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis almost a decade after the 
diagnosis of celiac disease. Delayed diagnosis led to recurrent episodes of 
large volume hemoptysis despite immunosuppressive therapy due to ongoing 
ingestion of gluten. High doses of glucocorticoids accompanied by a cell cycle 
inhibitor mycophenolate mofetil were required for treatment. A strict gluten 
free diet is vital to control the disease. We highlight the importance of 
identifying this syndrome and definitive treatment, including avoidance of 
dietary triggers in addition to conventional immunosuppressive therapy.

© 2023 The Authors. Respirology Case Reports published by John Wiley & Sons 
Australia, Ltd on behalf of The Asian Pacific Society of Respirology.

DOI: 10.1002/rcr2.1188
PMCID: PMC10319957
PMID: 37416498

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.