---
reference_id: "PMID:24705274"
title: "Characterization of a novel CYP19A1 (aromatase) R192H mutation causing virilization of a 46,XX newborn, undervirilization of the 46,XY brother, but no virilization of the mother during pregnancies."
authors:
- Bouchoucha N
- Samara-Boustani D
- Pandey AV
- Bony-Trifunovic H
- Hofer G
- Aigrain Y
- Polak M
- Flück CE
journal: Mol Cell Endocrinol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2014.03.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of a novel CYP19A1 (aromatase) R192H mutation causing virilization of a 46,XX newborn, undervirilization of the 46,XY brother, but no virilization of the mother during pregnancies.
**Authors:** Bouchoucha N, Samara-Boustani D, Pandey AV, Bony-Trifunovic H, Hofer G, Aigrain Y, Polak M, Flück CE
**Journal:** Mol Cell Endocrinol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mce.2014.03.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mce.2014.03.008)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2014 Jun 5;390(1-2):8-17. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2014.03.008.
 Epub 2014 Apr 4.

Characterization of a novel CYP19A1 (aromatase) R192H mutation causing 
virilization of a 46,XX newborn, undervirilization of the 46,XY brother, but no 
virilization of the mother during pregnancies.

Bouchoucha N(1), Samara-Boustani D(2), Pandey AV(1), Bony-Trifunovic H(3), Hofer 
G(1), Aigrain Y(4), Polak M(2), Flück CE(5).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetology, University Children's Hospital, 
Bern, Switzerland; Department of Clinical Research, University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland.
(2)Pediatric Endocrinology, Gynecology and Diabetology, Hôpital Universitaire 
Necker Enfants Malades, Centre des maladies endocriniennes rares de la 
croissance et des pathologies gynecologiques rares, IMAGINE affiliate, 
Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France.
(3)Pediatrie Department, CHU Amiens, Centre de compétences des maladies 
endocriniennes rares de la croissance, Amiens, France.
(4)Pediatric Surgery, Hôpital Universitaire Necker Enfants Malades, Centre des 
pathologies gynecologiques rares, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France.
(5)Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetology, University Children's Hospital, 
Bern, Switzerland; Department of Clinical Research, University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland. Electronic address: christa.flueck@dkf.unibe.ch.

BACKGROUND: P450 aromatase (CYP19A1) is essential for the biosynthesis of 
estrogens from androgen precursors. Mutations in the coding region of CYP19A1 
lead to autosomal recessive aromatase deficiency. To date over 20 subjects have 
been reported with aromatase deficiency which may manifest during fetal life 
with maternal virilization and virilization of the external genitalia of a 
female fetus due to low aromatase activity in the steroid metabolizing 
fetal-placental unit and thus high androgen levels. During infancy, girls often 
have ovarian cysts and thereafter fail to enter puberty showing signs of 
variable degree of androgen excess. Moreover, impact on growth, skeletal 
maturation and other metabolic parameters is seen in both sexes.
OBJECTIVE AND HYPOTHESIS: We found a novel homozygous CYP19A1 mutation in a 
46,XX girl who was born at term to consanguineous parents. Although the mother 
did not virilize during pregnancy, the baby was found to have a complex genital 
anomaly at birth (enlarged genital tubercle, fusion of labioscrotal folds) with 
elevated androgens at birth, normalizing thereafter. Presence of 46,XX karyotype 
and female internal genital organs (uterus, vagina) together with biochemical 
findings and follow-up showing regression of clitoral hypertrophy, as well as 
elevated FSH suggested aromatase deficiency. Interestingly, her older brother 
presented with mild hypospadias and bilateral cryptorchidism and was found to 
carry the same homozygous CYP19A1 mutation. To confirm the clinical diagnosis, 
genetic, functional and computational studies were performed.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Genetic analysis revealed a homozygous R192H mutation in 
the CYP19A1 gene. This novel mutation was characterized for its enzymatic 
activity (Km, Vmax) in a cell model and found to have markedly reduced catalytic 
activity when compared to wild-type aromatase; thus explaining the phenotype. 
Computational studies suggest that R192H disrupts the substrate access channel 
in CYP19A1 that may affect binding of substrates and exit of catalytic products.
CONCLUSION: R192H is a novel CYP19A1 mutation which causes a severe phenotype of 
aromatase deficiency in a 46,XX newborn and maybe hypospadias and cryptorchidism 
in a 46,XY, but no maternal androgen excess during pregnancy.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mce.2014.03.008
PMID: 24705274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]