---
reference_id: "PMID:26604198"
title: Microbial and mineral evolution in zero valent iron-based permeable reactive barriers during long-term operations.
authors:
- Kumar N
- Millot R
- Battaglia-Brunet F
- Omoregie E
- Chaurand P
- Borschneck D
- Bastiaens L
- Rose J
journal: Environ Sci Pollut Res Int
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s11356-015-5712-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Microbial and mineral evolution in zero valent iron-based permeable reactive barriers during long-term operations.
**Authors:** Kumar N, Millot R, Battaglia-Brunet F, Omoregie E, Chaurand P, Borschneck D, Bastiaens L, Rose J
**Journal:** Environ Sci Pollut Res Int (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11356-015-5712-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-015-5712-z)

## Content

1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2016 Mar;23(6):5960-8. doi: 
10.1007/s11356-015-5712-z. Epub 2015 Nov 25.

Microbial and mineral evolution in zero valent iron-based permeable reactive 
barriers during long-term operations.

Kumar N(1)(2)(3), Millot R(4), Battaglia-Brunet F(5), Omoregie E(6), Chaurand 
P(7)(8), Borschneck D(7)(8), Bastiaens L(9), Rose J(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)BRGM, Laboratory Division, Orléans, France. kumar@cerege.fr.
(2)CEREGE, UMR-7330, CNRS-Aix Marseille University, Aix-en Provence, France. 
kumar@cerege.fr.
(3)GDRi-iCEINT, International Consortium for the Environmental Implication of 
NanoTechnology, Aix-en Provence, France. kumar@cerege.fr.
(4)BRGM, Laboratory Division, Orléans, France.
(5)BRGM, Environment and Process Division, Orléans, France.
(6)School of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences, University of Manchester, 
Manchester, UK.
(7)CEREGE, UMR-7330, CNRS-Aix Marseille University, Aix-en Provence, France.
(8)GDRi-iCEINT, International Consortium for the Environmental Implication of 
NanoTechnology, Aix-en Provence, France.
(9)Flemish Institute of Technological Research (VITO), Mol, Belgium.

Impacts of subsurface biogeochemical processes over time have always been a 
concern for the long-term performance of zero valent iron (Fe(0))-based 
permeable reactive barriers (PRBs). To evaluate the biogeochemical impacts, 
laboratory experiments were performed using flow-through glass columns for 210 
days at controlled temperature (20 °C). Two different particle sizes of Fe(0) 
were used in the columns, and to simulate indigenous microbial activity, extra 
carbon source was provided in the two columns (biotic columns) and the remaining 
two columns were kept abiotic using gamma radiations. Heavy metals (Zn, As) were 
removed efficiently in all the columns, and no exhaustion of treatment 
capability or clogging was observed during our experimental duration. Newly 
formed Fe mineral phases and precipitates were characterized using X-ray 
diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy with energy dispersive X-ray 
spectroscopy (SEM-EDX), and micro-XRF techniques in solid phase at the end of 
the experiment. In addition, 16S rRNA gene extraction was used for microbial 
community identification in biotic columns. During the incubation, microbial 
population shifted in favor of Desulfosporosinus species (sulfate-reducing 
bacteria) from initial dominance of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans in sediments. 
Dominant mineral phases detected in biotic columns were mackinawite (FeS) and 
sulfate green rust, while in abiotic columns, magnetite/maghemite phases were 
more prevalent.

DOI: 10.1007/s11356-015-5712-z
PMID: 26604198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]