---
reference_id: "PMID:35746982"
title: "Dieulafoy Lesion of the Colon: A Rare Finding During Colonoscopy."
authors:
- Khan S
- Niaz S
- Singh R
- Lucas S
- Calcagno C
journal: Cureus
year: '2022'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.25188
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dieulafoy Lesion of the Colon: A Rare Finding During Colonoscopy.
**Authors:** Khan S, Niaz S, Singh R, Lucas S, Calcagno C
**Journal:** Cureus (2022)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.25188](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.25188)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2022 May 21;14(5):e25188. doi: 10.7759/cureus.25188. eCollection 2022 
May.

Dieulafoy Lesion of the Colon: A Rare Finding During Colonoscopy.

Khan S(1), Niaz S(2), Singh R(3), Lucas S(1), Calcagno C(3).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Parkview Medical Center, Pueblo, USA.
(2)Medicine, Nawaz Sharif Medical College, Gujrat, PAK.
(3)Gastroenterology, Parkview Medical Center, Pueblo, USA.

Dieulafoy lesions are common dilated submucosal vessels that can present with 
gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding. These lesions are usually found in the stomach 
or esophagus and colonic Dieulafoy lesions are very rare. Clinical presentation 
can vary from mild non-threatening GI bleeding to massive and recurrent 
hemorrhage. Here, we discuss a case of a 71-year-old female patient who 
presented with a bright red bleed per rectum. Colonoscopy was performed, which 
revealed a bleeding Dieulafoy lesion in the descending colon with clotted blood 
in the transverse and descending colon. In this article, we will also review the 
literature related to the epidemiology, clinical presentation, diagnosis, and 
management of Dieulafoy lesions.

Copyright © 2022, Khan et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.25188
PMCID: PMC9209336
PMID: 35746982

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.