---
reference_id: "PMID:38600684"
title: Clinical and Structural Characteristics of NEU1 Variants Causing Sialidosis Type 1.
authors:
- Li Y
- Liu Y
- Wang R
- Ao R
- Xiang F
- Zhang X
- Wang X
- Yu S
journal: J Mov Disord
year: '2024'
doi: 10.14802/jmd.23145
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and Structural Characteristics of NEU1 Variants Causing Sialidosis Type 1.
**Authors:** Li Y, Liu Y, Wang R, Ao R, Xiang F, Zhang X, Wang X, Yu S
**Journal:** J Mov Disord (2024)
**DOI:** [10.14802/jmd.23145](https://doi.org/10.14802/jmd.23145)

## Content

1. J Mov Disord. 2024 Jul;17(3):282-293. doi: 10.14802/jmd.23145. Epub 2024 Apr
11.

Clinical and Structural Characteristics of NEU1 Variants Causing Sialidosis Type
1.

Li Y(1), Liu Y(1), Wang R(1), Ao R(1), Xiang F(1), Zhang X(1), Wang X(1), Yu
S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Medical Center of Chinese PLA General
Hospital, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: Sialidosis type 2 has variants that are both catalytically inactive
(severe), while sialidosis type 1 has at least one catalytically active (mild)
variant. This study aimed to discuss the structural changes associated with
these variants in a newly reported family carrying N-acetyl-α-neuraminidase-1
(NEU1) variants and explore the clinical characteristics of different
combinations of variants in sialidosis type 1.
METHODS: First, whole-exome sequencing and detailed clinical examinations were
performed on the family. Second, structural analyses, including assessments of
energy, flexibility and polar contacts, were conducted for several NEU1
variants, and a sialidase activity assay was performed. Third, previous NEU1
variants were systematically reviewed, and the clinical characteristics of
patients in the severe-mild and mild-mild groups with sialidosis type 1 were
analyzed.
RESULTS: We report a novel family with sialidosis type 1 and the compound
heterozygous variants S182G and V143E. The newly identified V143E variant was
predicted to be a mild variant through structural analysis and was confirmed by
a sialidase activity assay. Cherry-red spots were more prevalent in the
severe-mild group, and ataxia was more common in the mild-mild group. Impaired
cognition was found only in the severe-mild group. Moreover, patients with
cherry-red spots and abnormal electroencephalographies and visual evoked
potentials had a relatively early age of onset, whereas patients with myoclonus
had a late onset.
CONCLUSION: Changes in flexibility and local polar contacts may be indicators of
NEU1 pathogenicity. Sialidosis type 1 can be divided into two subgroups
according to the variant combinations, and patients with these two subtypes have
different clinical characteristics.

DOI: 10.14802/jmd.23145
PMCID: PMC11300387
PMID: 38600684

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest The authors have no
financial conflicts of interest.
