---
reference_id: "PMID:17970989"
title: "Serotonin and migraine: biology and clinical implications."
authors:
- Hamel E
journal: Cephalalgia
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1111/j.1468-2982.2007.01476.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serotonin and migraine: biology and clinical implications.
**Authors:** Hamel E
**Journal:** Cephalalgia (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1468-2982.2007.01476.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2982.2007.01476.x)

## Content

1. Cephalalgia. 2007 Nov;27(11):1293-300. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-2982.2007.01476.x.

Serotonin and migraine: biology and clinical implications.

Hamel E(1).

Author information:
(1)Montreal Neurological Institute, Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, 
McGill University, 3801 University Street, Montréal, Québec, Canada, H3A 2B4. 
edit.hamel@mcgill.ca

Migraine is the most frequent neurological disorder in the adult population 
worldwide, affecting up to 12% of the general population and more frequent in 
women ( approximately 25%). It has a high impact on our society due to its 
disabling nature and, therein, reduced quality of life and increased absenteeism 
from work. Headache is the primary clinical manifestation and it has been 
associated with 'a hereditary or predisposed sensitivity of neurovascular 
reactions to certain stimuli or to cyclic changes in the central nervous system' 
(1). Amongst the many neurotransmitters in the brain, the serotonergic 
(serotonin, 5-HT) system from the brainstem raphe nucleus has been most 
convincingly implicated in migraine pathophysiology. The documented changes in 
5-HT metabolism and in the processing of central 5-HT-mediated responses during 
and in between migraine attacks have led to the suggestion that migraine is a 
consequence of a central neurochemical imbalance that involves a low 
serotonergic disposition. Although the exact cascade of events that link 
abnormal serotonergic neurotransmission to the manifestation of head pain and 
the accompanying symptoms has yet to be fully understood, recent evidence 
suggests that a low 5-HT state facilitates activation of the trigeminovascular 
nociceptive pathway, as induced by cortical spreading depression. In this short 
review, we present and discuss the original and most recent findings that 
support a role for altered serotonergic neurotransmission in the manifestation 
of migraine headache.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-2982.2007.01476.x
PMID: 17970989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]