---
reference_id: "PMID:38097330"
title: Genetic Spectrum of Polycystic Kidney and Liver Diseases and the Resulting Phenotypes.
authors:
- Yang H
- Sieben CJ
- Schauer RS
- Harris PC
journal: Adv Kidney Dis Health
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1053/j.akdh.2023.04.004
keywords:
- Cysts
- Humans
- Liver Diseases/genetics
- "Polycystic Kidney, Autosomal Recessive/genetics"
- Phenotype
- Mutation
- Ciliopathies
- "Polycystic Kidney, Autosomal Dominant/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic Spectrum of Polycystic Kidney and Liver Diseases and the Resulting Phenotypes.
**Authors:** Yang H, Sieben CJ, Schauer RS, Harris PC
**Journal:** Adv Kidney Dis Health (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.akdh.2023.04.004](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.akdh.2023.04.004)

## Content

1. Adv Kidney Dis Health. 2023 Sep;30(5):397-406. doi:
10.1053/j.akdh.2023.04.004.

Genetic Spectrum of Polycystic Kidney and Liver Diseases and the Resulting
Phenotypes.

Yang H(1), Sieben CJ(1), Schauer RS(1), Harris PC(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Mayo Clinic, Rochester MN.
(2)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Mayo Clinic, Rochester MN.
Electronic address: harris.peter@mayo.edu.

Polycystic kidney diseases are a group of monogenically inherited disorders
characterized by cyst development in the kidney with defects in primary cilia
function central to pathogenesis. Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease
(ADPKD) has progressive cystogenesis and accounts for 5-10% of kidney failure
(KF) patients. There are two major ADPKD genes, PKD1 and PKD2, and seven minor
loci. PKD1 accounts for ∼80% of patients and is associated with the most severe
disease (KF is typically at 55-65 years); PKD2 accounts for ∼15% of families,
with KF typically in the mid-70s. The minor genes are generally associated with
milder kidney disease, but for DNAJB11 and ALG5, the age at KF is similar to
PKD2. PKD1 and PKD2 have a high level of allelic heterogeneity, with no single
pathogenic variant accounting for >2% of patients. Additional genetic complexity
includes biallelic disease, sometimes causing very early-onset ADPKD, and
mosaicism. Autosomal dominant polycystic liver disease is characterized by
severe PLD but limited PKD. The two major genes are PRKCSH and SEC63, while
GANAB, ALG8, and PKHD1 can present as ADPKD or autosomal dominant polycystic
liver disease. Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease typically has an
infantile onset, with PKHD1 being the major locus and DZIP1L and CYS1 being
minor genes. In addition, there are a range of mainly recessive syndromic
ciliopathies with PKD as part of the phenotype. Because of the phenotypic and
genic overlap between the diseases, employing a next-generation sequencing panel
containing all known PKD and ciliopathy genes is recommended for clinical
testing.

Copyright © 2023 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.akdh.2023.04.004
PMCID: PMC10746289
PMID: 38097330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: P. Harris reports the following: Consultancy:
Vertex, Mitobridge, Regulus, Otsuka, Janssen, Maze Therapeutics, CorrectorBio
