---
reference_id: "PMID:38814201"
title: A novel gain-of-function mutation in transient receptor potential C6 that causes podocytes injury.
authors:
- Yu M
- Hu J
- Ju T
- Wang R
- Wang M
- Gao C
- Xia Z
journal: Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.14715/cmb/2024.70.5.42
keywords:
- "Podocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- Animals
- "TRPC6 Cation Channel/genetics, metabolism"
- Apoptosis/genetics
- Mice
- Gain of Function Mutation/genetics
- Calcium/metabolism
- "Glomerulosclerosis, Focal Segmental/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Desmin/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Proliferation/genetics
- "Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "TRPC Cation Channels/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel gain-of-function mutation in transient receptor potential C6 that causes podocytes injury.
**Authors:** Yu M, Hu J, Ju T, Wang R, Wang M, Gao C, Xia Z
**Journal:** Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.14715/cmb/2024.70.5.42](https://doi.org/10.14715/cmb/2024.70.5.42)

## Content

1. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 2024 May 27;70(5):284-288. doi: 
10.14715/cmb/2024.70.5.42.

A novel gain-of-function mutation in transient receptor potential C6 that causes 
podocytes injury.

Yu M(1), Hu J(2), Ju T(3), Wang R(4), Wang M(5), Gao C(6), Xia Z(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neonatology, Taizhou People's Hospital, Nanjing Medical 
University, Taizhou, Jiangsu 225300, China. 569646022@qq.com.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, The Affiliated Huai'an No.1 People's Hospital of 
Nanjing Medical University, Huai'an, Jiangsu 223300, China. 13852398989@163.com.
(3)Department of Neonatology, Taizhou People's Hospital, Nanjing Medical 
University, Taizhou, Jiangsu 225300, China. 1285259522@qq.com.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210002, China. 
1547132442@qq.com.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Affiliated Jinling Hospital, Medical School of 
Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210002, China. 1481700382@qq.com.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210002, China. 
njxzk@126.com.

Podocyte injury plays a vital role in focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS), 
and apoptosis is one of its mechanisms. The transient receptor potential channel 
6 (TRPC6) is highly expressed in podocytes and mutations mediate podocyte 
injury. We found TRPC6 gene mutation (N110S) was a new mutation and pathogenic 
in the preliminary clinical work. The purpose of this study was to investigate 
the potential mechanism of mutation in TRPC6 (TRPC6-N110S) in the knock-in gene 
mouse model and in immortalized mouse podocytes (MPC5). Transmission electron 
microscopy was used to evaluate renal injury morphology. We measured 24-hour 
urinary albumin-to-creatinine ratios and major biochemical parameters such as 
serum albumin, urea nitrogen, and total cholesterol. The results of CCK-8 assay 
and apoptosis experiments showed that the TRPC6-N110S overexpression group had 
slower proliferative activity and increased apoptosis than the control group. 
FluO-3 assay revealed increased calcium influx in the TRPC6-N110S overexpression 
group. Podocin level was decreased in TRPC6-N110S group, while TRPC6 and desmin 
levels were increased in TRPC6-N110S group. The 24 h uACR at 6 weeks was 
significantly higher in the pure-zygotes group than in the WT and heterozygotes 
groups, and this difference was found at 8 and 10 weeks.TRPC6 levels showed no 
significant difference between homozygote and WT mice. Compared to homozygote 
group, expression of podocin and nephrin were increased in WT, but levels of 
desmin was decreased in WT. Our results suggest that this new mutation causes 
podocyte injury probably by enhancing calcium influx and podocyte apoptosis, 
accompanied by increased proteinuria and decreased expression of nephrin and 
podocin.

DOI: 10.14715/cmb/2024.70.5.42
PMID: 38814201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]