---
reference_id: "PMID:34345133"
title: Leishmaniasis.
authors:
- Daga MK
- Rohatgi I
- Mishra R
journal: Indian J Crit Care Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.5005/jp-journals-10071-23844
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Leishmaniasis.
**Authors:** Daga MK, Rohatgi I, Mishra R
**Journal:** Indian J Crit Care Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.5005/jp-journals-10071-23844](https://doi.org/10.5005/jp-journals-10071-23844)

## Content

1. Indian J Crit Care Med. 2021 May;25(Suppl 2):S166-S170. doi: 
10.5005/jp-journals-10071-23844.

Leishmaniasis.

Daga MK(1), Rohatgi I(1), Mishra R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi, India.

Leishmaniasis is one of the chronic debilitating vector-borne diseases caused by 
obligate intracellular protozoa. The global burden of disease although not 
increasing but potential risk of spread is there. At least 20 species of 
Leishmania are pathogenic to human beings. The transmission is from female 
sandfly through a blood meal. The disease pathogenesis is dependent on parasite 
and host mechanism-primarily cell-mediated immunity. The three common forms are 
visceral, cutaneous, and mucocutaneous. The diagnostic tests are mainly based on 
aspiration from the spleen or bone marrow. The use of K39 antibodies is the best 
serodiagnostic test. Antimonial, amphotericin B, miltefosine, and paromomycin 
are the drugs used to treat leishmaniasis. Amphotericin therapy shows the 
response within 7 to 10 days in most subjects, and 2 weeks of therapy is 
sufficient. However, those going into relapse need new treatment regimes. There 
is a definite benefit of combination therapy. However, there is still no 
breakthrough on a vaccine for prophylaxis. How to cite this article: Daga MK, 
Rohatgi I, Mishra R. Leishmaniasis. Indian J Crit Care Med 2021;25(Suppl 
2):S166-S170.

Copyright © 2021; Jaypee Brothers Medical Publishers (P) Ltd.

DOI: 10.5005/jp-journals-10071-23844
PMCID: PMC8327790
PMID: 34345133

Conflict of interest statement: Source of support: Nil Conflict of interest: 
None