---
reference_id: "PMID:38548963"
title: Primary analysis of a prospective cohort study of Japanese patients with plasma cell neoplasms in the novel drug era (2016-2021).
authors:
- Shibayama H
- Itagaki M
- Handa H
- Yokoyama A
- Saito A
- Kosugi S
- Ota S
- Yoshimitsu M
- Tanaka Y
- Kurahashi S
- Fuchida SI
- Iino M
- Shimizu T
- Moriuchi Y
- Toyama K
- Mitani K
- Tsukune Y
- Kada A
- Tamura H
- Abe M
- Iwasaki H
- Kuroda J
- Takamatsu H
- Sunami K
- Kizaki M
- Ishida T
- Saito T
- Matsumura I
- Akashi K
- Iida S
journal: Int J Hematol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s12185-024-03754-8
keywords:
- Humans
- Prospective Studies
- Aged
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Male
- Japan
- "Neoplasms, Plasma Cell/therapy"
- "Transplantation, Autologous"
- Prognosis
- Survival Rate
- Adult
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Multiple Myeloma/therapy, mortality, drug therapy"
- East Asian People
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary analysis of a prospective cohort study of Japanese patients with plasma cell neoplasms in the novel drug era (2016-2021).
**Authors:** Shibayama H, Itagaki M, Handa H, Yokoyama A, Saito A, Kosugi S, Ota S, Yoshimitsu M, Tanaka Y, Kurahashi S, Fuchida SI, Iino M, Shimizu T, Moriuchi Y, Toyama K, Mitani K, Tsukune Y, Kada A, Tamura H, Abe M, Iwasaki H, Kuroda J, Takamatsu H, Sunami K, Kizaki M, Ishida T, Saito T, Matsumura I, Akashi K, Iida S
**Journal:** Int J Hematol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12185-024-03754-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12185-024-03754-8)

## Content

1. Int J Hematol. 2024 Jun;119(6):707-721. doi: 10.1007/s12185-024-03754-8. Epub 
2024 Mar 29.

Primary analysis of a prospective cohort study of Japanese patients with plasma 
cell neoplasms in the novel drug era (2016-2021).

Shibayama H(1)(2), Itagaki M(3), Handa H(4), Yokoyama A(5), Saito A(6), Kosugi 
S(7), Ota S(8), Yoshimitsu M(9), Tanaka Y(10), Kurahashi S(11), Fuchida SI(12), 
Iino M(13), Shimizu T(14), Moriuchi Y(15), Toyama K(16), Mitani K(17), Tsukune 
Y(18), Kada A(19), Tamura H(20), Abe M(21), Iwasaki H(22), Kuroda J(23), 
Takamatsu H(24), Sunami K(25), Kizaki M(26), Ishida T(27), Saito T(19), 
Matsumura I(28), Akashi K(29), Iida S(30).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, NHO Osaka National Hospital, 2-1-14 Hoenzaka 
Chuo-ku, Osaka City, Osaka, 540-0006, Japan. 
shibayama.hirohiko.ec@mail.hosp.go.jp.
(2)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Osaka University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Suita, Japan. shibayama.hirohiko.ec@mail.hosp.go.jp.
(3)Department of Hematology, Hiroshima Red Cross Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan.
(4)Department of Hematology, Gunma University, Gunma, Japan.
(5)Department of Hematology, NHO Tokyo Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Hematology, NHO Shibukawa Medical Center, Gunma, Japan.
(7)Department of Hematology, Toyonaka Municipal Hospital, Osaka, Japan.
(8)Department of Hematology, Sapporo Hokuyu Hospital, Hokkaido, Japan.
(9)Department of Hematology and Rheumatology, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, 
Japan.
(10)Department of Hematology, Shinko Hospital, Hyogo, Japan.
(11)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Toyohashi Municipal Hospital, Aichi, 
Japan.
(12)Department of Hematology, JCHO Kyoto Kuramaguchi Medical Center, Kyoto, 
Japan.
(13)Department of Hematology, Yamanashi Prefectural Central Hospital, Yamanashi, 
Japan.
(14)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Keio University School of 
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(15)Department of Hematology, Sasebo City General Hospital, Nagasaki, Japan.
(16)Department of Hematology, Fujioka General Hospital, Gunma, Japan.
(17)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Dokkyo Medical University, Tochigi, 
Japan.
(18)Department of Hematology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(19)Clinical Research Center, NHO Nagoya Medical Center, Aichi, Japan.
(20)Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Hematology, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Dokkyo Medical University Saitama Medical Center, Saitama, Japan.
(21)Department of Hematology, Kawashima Hospital, Tokushima, Japan.
(22)Department of Hematology, NHO Kyushu Medical Center, Fukuoka, Japan.
(23)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Kyoto 
Prefecture University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
(24)Department of Hematology, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Japan.
(25)Department of Hematology, NHO Okayama Medical Center, Okayama, Japan.
(26)Department of Hematology, Saitama Medical Center, Saitama Medical 
University, Saitama, Japan.
(27)Department of Hematology, Japanese Red Cross Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan.
(28)Department of Hematology and Rheumatology, Kindai University, Osaka, Japan.
(29)Department of Medicine and Biosystemic Science, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, 
Japan.
(30)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Nagoya City University Institute of 
Medical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 1 Kawasumi, Mizuho-Cho, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya 
City, Aichi, 467-8601, Japan. iida@med.nagoya-cu.ac.jp.

The emergence of novel drugs has significantly improved outcomes of patients 
with plasma cell neoplasms (PCN). The Japanese Society of Hematology conducted a 
prospective observational study in newly diagnosed PCN patients between 2016 and 
2021. The analysis focused on 1385 patients diagnosed with symptomatic PCN 
between 2016 and 2018. The primary endpoint was the 3-year overall survival (OS) 
rate among patients requiring treatment (n = 1284), which was 70.0% (95%CI 
67.4-72.6%). Approximately 94% of these patients received novel drugs as 
frontline therapy. The 3-year OS rate was 90.3% (95%CI 86.6-93.1%) in the 25% of 
patients who received upfront autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT), 
versus just 61.4% (95%CI 58.0-64.6%) in those who did not receive upfront ASCT. 
The only unfavorable prognostic factor that affected OS in ASCT recipients was 
an age of 65 or higher. For patients who did not receive ASCT, independent 
unfavorable prognostic factors included frontline treatment with conventional 
chemotherapies, international staging system score of 2/3, extramedullary 
tumors, and Freiberg comorbidity index of 2/3. This study unequivocally 
demonstrates that use of novel drugs improved OS in Japanese myeloma patients, 
and underscores the continued importance of upfront ASCT as the standard of care 
in the era of novel drugs.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12185-024-03754-8
PMCID: PMC11136844
PMID: 38548963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: HS reports honoraria from Takeda, Ono, Fujimoto, 
Janssen, Chugai, Eisai, Sanofi, AstraZeneca, Meiji Seika Pharma, and AbbVie, 
research funding from Ono, Bristol Myers Squibb, and AbbVie. HH reports 
honoraria from Janssen, Bristol Myers Squibb, and Takeda, research funding from 
Bristol Myers Squibb and Takeda. AY reports honoraria from Kyowa Kirin, Chugai, 
Janssen, Sanofi, Bristol Myers Squibb, Eisai, Takeda, and Nippon-Shinyaku, 
research funding from Kyowa Kirin. SK reports honoraria from Eisai, Mundipharma, 
Chugai, Otsuka, Sanofi, Meiji Seika Pharma, AbbVie, Ono, Janssen, Takeda, Amgen, 
Novartis, and Nippon-Shinyaku. SO reports honoraria from Bristol Myers Squibb, 
Takeda, AstraZeneca, Janssen, and Sanofi. MY reports honoraria from Takeda, 
Sanofi, Novartis, Bristol Myers Squibb, Meiji Seika Pharma, and Daiichi Sankyo. 
SF reports honoraria from Takeda, Sanofi, Janssen, Ono, and Bristol Myers 
Squibb. TS reports honoraria from Ono, Otsuka, Eisai, SymBio, Takeda, Chugai, 
Sumitomo, Daiichi Sankyo, MSD, and PharmaEssentia. KM reports honoraria from 
Kyowa Kirin, Chugai, MSD, Teijin Pharma, Nippon-Shinyaku, Taiho, Takeda, Otsuka, 
Nippon Kayaku, Daiichi Sankyo, Sumitomo, Novartis, Pfizer, Celgene, Bristol 
Myers Squibb, Mochida, AbbVie, Alexion, Ono, Sanofi, Janssen, SymBio, 
AstraZeneca, CSL Bering, Amgen, Fujimoto, Eisai, Meiji Seika Pharma, Asahi 
Kasei, and Astellas, research funding from Kyowa Kirin, Chugai, MSD, Teijin 
Pharma, Nippon-Shinyaku, Taiho, Takeda, Otsuka, Nippon Kayaku, Daiichi Sankyo, 
and Sumitomo, advisory board fees from Bristol Myers Squibb, Novartis, and 
Otsuka, travel expense from Kyowa Kirin. HT reports honoraria from Sanofi, Ono, 
Janssen, Takeda, Bristol Myers Squibb, and Chugai, research funding from Asahi 
Kasei. MA reports honoraria from Takeda, Bristol Myers Squibb, Janssen, Sanofi, 
Ono, and Daiichi Sankyo. HI reports honoraria from Sanofi, SymBio, Janssen, 
Daiichi Sankyo, Chugai, Takeda, AstraZeneca, AbbVie, and Kyowa Kirin. JK reports 
honoraria from Janssen, Bristol Myers Squibb, Ono, Chugai, Takeda, Sanofi, and 
Kyowa Kirin, research funding from Kyowa Kirin, Mochida, Sanofi, Chugai, Bristol 
Myers Squibb, Takeda, and Ono, consulting fees from Janssen and Bristol Myers 
Squibb. HT reports honoraria from Janssen, Ono, Sanofi, and Bristol Myers 
Squibb, consulting fee from SRL, research funding from Bristol Myers Squibb. KS 
reports honoraria from Ono, Bristol Myers Squibb, Janssen, and Sanofi, research 
funding from Ono, Celgene, AbbVie, Takeda, Sanofi, Bristol Myers Squibb, GSK, 
Chugai, Otsuka, Janssen, MSD, Novartis, Pfizer, and Kyowa Kirin. MK reports 
honoraria from Bristol Myers Squibb, Novartis, Janssen, MSD, Nippon-Shinyaku, 
Ono, Takeda, and Sumitomo, research funding from Ono, Takeda, Kyowa Kirin, 
Chugai, and Daiichi Sankyo. TI reports honoraria from Takeda, Sanofi, Janssen, 
Bristol Myers Squibb, and Ono, research funding from Takeda, Pfizer, Sanofi, 
Janssen, and Bristol Myers Squibb. IM reports honoraria from Bristol Myers 
Squibb, Novartis, Otsuka, Pfizer, Janssen, Astellas, Takeda, Daiichi Sankyo, 
Ono, Chugai, AstraZeneca, SymBio, AbbVie, and Amgen, research funding from Ono, 
Janssen, Nippon-Shinyaku, Kyowa Kirin, Sumitomo, Shionogi, Teijin Pharma, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Sanofi, Chugai, Eisai, MSD, Asahi Kasei, Astellas, Takeda, 
Nihon Pharma, Daiichi Sankyo, AbbVie, Taiho, Mitsubishi Tanabe, Nippon Kayaku, 
CSL Behring, Mundipharma, Ayumi Pharma, Eli Lilly Japan, Actelion Pharma, and 
Amgen, consulting fee from Otsuka. KA reports honoraria from AbbVie, Eisai, Ono, 
Kyowa Kirin, Chugai, Pfizer, Bristol Myers Squibb, and Janssen, research funding 
from Otsuka, Kyowa Kirin, Asahi Kasei, AbbVie, Chugai, and Takeda. SI reports 
honoraria from Janssen, Bristol Myers Squibb, Takeda, Sanofi, Ono, and Pfizer, 
research funding from Chugai, Janssen, Bristol Myers Squibb, Sanofi, Daiichi 
Sankyo, Pfizer, Celgene, Novartis, Ono, Takeda, Amgen, Shionogi, AbbVie, Otsuka, 
Kyowa Kirin, and GSK, advisory board fees from Janssen, Bristol Myers Squibb, 
Pfizer, Sanofi, AbbVie, Otsuka, Novartis, and Takeda. All the other authors have 
no conflicts of interest to disclose.