---
reference_id: "PMID:26997609"
title: The management of pregnancy and delivery in 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA lyase deficiency.
authors:
- Pipitone A
- Raval DB
- Duis J
- Vernon H
- Martin R
- Hamosh A
- Valle D
- Gunay-Aygun M
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37620
keywords:
- Acetyl-CoA C-Acetyltransferase/deficiency
- Adult
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, therapy"
- Biomarkers
- "Delivery, Obstetric"
- Disease Management
- Female
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Perinatal Care
- Pregnancy
- Pregnancy Complications
- Pregnancy Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The management of pregnancy and delivery in 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA lyase deficiency.
**Authors:** Pipitone A, Raval DB, Duis J, Vernon H, Martin R, Hamosh A, Valle D, Gunay-Aygun M
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.37620](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.37620)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2016 Jun;170(6):1600-2. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37620. Epub 2016
 Mar 21.

The management of pregnancy and delivery in 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA lyase
deficiency.

Pipitone A(1), Raval DB(2), Duis J(1), Vernon H(1), Martin R(1), Hamosh A(1),
Valle D(1), Gunay-Aygun M(1).

Author information:
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(2)Genetics and Molecular Biology Branch, National Human Genome Research
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.

3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaric (HMG)-CoA lyase is required for ketogenesis and
leucine degradation. Patients with HMG-CoA lyase deficiency typically present
with hypoketotic hypoglycemia and metabolic acidosis, which can be fatal if
untreated. The patient is a 28-year-old female with HMG-CoA lyase deficiency who
presented at 4 weeks gestation for prenatal care. Protein intake as well as
carnitine supplementation were gradually increased to support maternal and fetal
demands up to 65 g per day for protein and 80 mg/kg/day for carnitine. Fetal
growth was appropriate. At 36 5/7 weeks, she presented with spontaneous rupture
of membranes. Twice maintenance 10% glucose-containing intravenous fluids were
initiated. During labor, vomiting and metabolic acidosis developed. Delivery was
by cesarean. Preeclampsia developed postpartum. The patient recovered well and
was discharged home on postpartum day 5. Stress of pregnancy and labor and
delivery can lead to metabolic decompensation in HMG-CoA lyase deficiency.
Patients should be monitored closely by a biochemical geneticist, dietitian, and
high-risk obstetrician at a tertiary care center during their pregnancy. Fasting
should be avoided. Intravenous 10% glucose-containing fluids should be provided
to prevent catabolism and metabolic decompensation during labor and delivery. ©
2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37620
PMCID: PMC5702463
PMID: 26997609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: Authors have no conflicts
of interest to disclose.
