---
reference_id: "PMID:33036647"
title: "Presentation and management of N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency: a review of the literature."
authors:
- Kenneson A
- Singh RH
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-020-01560-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Presentation and management of N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency: a review of the literature.
**Authors:** Kenneson A, Singh RH
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-020-01560-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-020-01560-z)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2020 Oct 9;15(1):279. doi: 10.1186/s13023-020-01560-z.

Presentation and management of N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency: a review 
of the literature.

Kenneson A(1), Singh RH(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA. 
akennes@emory.edu.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA. 
rsingh@emory.edu.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA. 
rsingh@emory.edu.

BACKGROUND: N-Acetylglutamate synthase (NAGS) deficiency is an extremely rare 
autosomal recessive metabolic disorder affecting the urea cycle, leading to 
episodes of hyperammonemia which can cause significant morbidity and mortality. 
Since its recognition in 1981, NAGS deficiency has been treated with 
carbamylglutamate with or without other measures (nutritional, ammonia 
scavengers, dialytic, etc.). We conducted a systematic literature review of NAGS 
deficiency to summarize current knowledge around presentation and management.
METHODS: Case reports and case series were identified using the Medline 
database, as well as references from other articles and a general internet 
search. Clinical data related to presentation and management were abstracted by 
two reviewers.
RESULTS: In total, 98 cases of NAGS deficiency from 79 families, in 48 articles 
or abstracts were identified. Of these, 1 was diagnosed prenatally, 57 were 
neonatal cases, 34 were post-neonatal, and 6 did not specify age at presentation 
or were asymptomatic at diagnosis. Twenty-one cases had relevant family history. 
We summarize triggers of hyperammonemic episodes, diagnosis, clinical signs and 
symptoms, and management strategies. DNA testing is the preferred method of 
diagnosis, although therapeutic trials to assess response of ammonia levels to 
carbamylglutamate may also be helpful. Management usually consists of treatment 
with carbamylglutamate, although the reported maintenance dose varied across 
case reports. Protein restriction was sometimes used in conjunction with 
carbamylglutamate. Supplementation with citrulline, arginine, and sodium 
benzoate also were reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Presentation of NAGS deficiency varies by age and symptoms. In 
addition, both diagnosis and management have evolved over time and vary across 
clinics. Prompt recognition and appropriate treatment of NAGS deficiency with 
carbamylglutamate may improve outcomes of affected individuals. Further research 
is needed to assess the roles of protein restriction and supplements in the 
treatment of NAGS deficiency, especially during times of illness or lack of 
access to carbamylglutamate.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-020-01560-z
PMCID: PMC7545900
PMID: 33036647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.