---
reference_id: "PMID:32453377"
title: "Safety, Tolerability, and Efficacy of Viltolarsen in Boys With Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy Amenable to Exon 53 Skipping: A Phase 2 Randomized Clinical Trial."
authors:
- Clemens PR
- Rao VK
- Connolly AM
- Harper AD
- Mah JK
- Smith EC
- McDonald CM
- Zaidman CM
- Morgenroth LP
- Osaki H
- Satou Y
- Yamashita T
- Hoffman EP
- CINRG DNHS Investigators
journal: JAMA Neurol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2020.1264
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Double-Blind Method
- Dystrophin/metabolism
- Exons
- Humans
- Male
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Duchenne/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- "Oligonucleotides/administration & dosage, adverse effects, pharmacology"
- "Oligonucleotides, Antisense/administration & dosage, adverse effects, pharmacology"
- "Outcome Assessment, Health Care"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Safety, Tolerability, and Efficacy of Viltolarsen in Boys With Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy Amenable to Exon 53 Skipping: A Phase 2 Randomized Clinical Trial.
**Authors:** Clemens PR, Rao VK, Connolly AM, Harper AD, Mah JK, Smith EC, McDonald CM, Zaidman CM, Morgenroth LP, Osaki H, Satou Y, Yamashita T, Hoffman EP, CINRG DNHS Investigators
**Journal:** JAMA Neurol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaneurol.2020.1264](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2020.1264)

## Content

1. JAMA Neurol. 2020 Aug 1;77(8):982-991. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2020.1264.

Safety, Tolerability, and Efficacy of Viltolarsen in Boys With Duchenne Muscular 
Dystrophy Amenable to Exon 53 Skipping: A Phase 2 Randomized Clinical Trial.

Clemens PR(1)(2), Rao VK(3), Connolly AM(4), Harper AD(5), Mah JK(6), Smith 
EC(7), McDonald CM(8), Zaidman CM(9), Morgenroth LP(10), Osaki H(11), Satou 
Y(11), Yamashita T(11), Hoffman EP(12)(13); CINRG DNHS Investigators.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(2)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(3)Division of Neurology, Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of 
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(4)Division of Neurology, Nationwide Children's Hospital, The Ohio State 
University College of Medicine, Columbus.
(5)Children's Hospital of Richmond at Virginia Commonwealth University, 
Richmond.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(7)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, 
North Carolina.
(8)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Department of Pediatrics, 
UC Davis Health, University of California, Davis, Sacramento.
(9)Department of Neurology, Washington University at St Louis, St Louis, 
Missouri.
(10)Graduate School of Public Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania.
(11)NS Pharma, Paramus, New Jersey.
(12)AGADA BioSciences, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
(13)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, State University of New York at 
Binghamton.

Erratum in
    JAMA Neurol. 2020 Aug 1;77(8):1040. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2020.2025.

IMPORTANCE: An unmet need remains for safe and efficacious treatments for 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD). To date, there are limited agents available 
that address the underlying cause of the disease.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the safety, tolerability, and efficacy of viltolarsen, a 
novel antisense oligonucleotide, in participants with DMD amenable to exon 53 
skipping.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This phase 2 study was a 4-week randomized 
clinical trial for safety followed by a 20-week open-label treatment period of 
patients aged 4 to 9 years with DMD amenable to exon 53 skipping. To enroll 16 
participants, with 8 participants in each of the 2 dose cohorts, 17 participants 
were screened. Study enrollment occurred between December 16, 2016, and August 
17, 2017, at sites in the US and Canada. Data were collected from December 2016 
to February 2018, and data were analyzed from April 2018 to May 2019.
INTERVENTIONS: Participants received 40 mg/kg (low dose) or 80 mg/kg (high dose) 
of viltolarsen administered by weekly intravenous infusion.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Primary outcomes of the trial included safety, 
tolerability, and de novo dystrophin protein production measured by Western blot 
in participants' biceps muscles. Secondary outcomes included additional 
assessments of dystrophin mRNA and protein production as well as clinical muscle 
strength and function.
RESULTS: Of the 16 included boys with DMD, 15 (94%) were white, and the mean 
(SD) age was 7.4 (1.8) years. After 20 to 24 weeks of treatment, significant 
drug-induced dystrophin production was seen in both viltolarsen dose cohorts (40 
mg/kg per week: mean [range] 5.7% [3.2-10.3] of normal; 80 mg/kg per week: mean 
[range] 5.9% [1.1-14.4] of normal). Viltolarsen was well tolerated; no 
treatment-emergent adverse events required dose reduction, interruption, or 
discontinuation of the study drug. No serious adverse events or deaths occurred 
during the study. Compared with 65 age-matched and treatment-matched natural 
history controls, all 16 participants treated with viltolarsen showed 
significant improvements in timed function tests from baseline, including time 
to stand from supine (viltolarsen: -0.19 s; control: 0.66 s), time to run/walk 
10 m (viltolarsen: 0.23 m/s; control: -0.04 m/s), and 6-minute walk test 
(viltolarsen: 28.9 m; control: -65.3 m) at the week 25 visit.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Systemic treatment of participants with DMD with 
viltolarsen induced de novo dystrophin production, and clinical improvement of 
timed function tests was observed.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier: NCT02740972.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2020.1264
PMCID: PMC7251505
PMID: 32453377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Clemens has 
received grants from NS Pharma during the conduct of the study as well as grants 
from Spark Therapeutics, Amicus Therapeutics, Sanofi Genzyme, ReveraGen 
BioPharma, and TRiNDS and personal fees from Spark Therapeutics, UCB, Pfizer, 
and Roche outside the submitted work. Dr Rao has received nonfinancial support 
from Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago during the conduct 
of the study as well as personal fees from PTC Therapeutics and Sarepta 
Therapeutics outside the submitted work. Dr Connelly has received grants from 
the Washington University School of Medicine and TRiNDS during the conduct of 
the study as well as grants from Sarepta Therapeutics and AveXis and personal 
fees from Sarepta Therapeutics, AveXis, Genentech-Roche, Acceleron Pharma, and 
Catabasis Pharmaceuticals outside the submitted work. Dr Harper has received 
grants from NS Pharma, Italfarmaco, ReveraGen BioPharma, Catabasis 
Pharmaceuticals, AveXis, CSL Behring, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries, National 
Institutes of Health, and US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Dr Mah 
has received grants from NS Pharma during the conduct of the study as well as 
grants from PTC Therapeutics, Pfizer, Roche, Sarepta Therapeutics, Italfarmaco, 
Novartis, Biogen, ReveraGen BioPharma, Catabasis Pharmaceuticals, 
Sanofi-Genzyme, and Bristol-Myers Squibb outside the submitted work. Dr Smith 
has received salary support from NS Pharma during the conduct of the study as 
well as personal fees from Pfizer and Sarepta Therapeutics and salary support 
from Pfizer and ReveraGen BioPharma outside the submitted work. Dr McDonald has 
received grants from NS Pharma during the conduct of the study as well as 
personal fees from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Astellas/Mitobridge, Cardero 
Therapeutics, Capricor Therapeutics, Catabasis Pharmaceuticals, Eli Lilly and 
Company, Epirium Bio, FibroGen, Halo Therapeutics, Italfarmaco, BioMarin 
Pharmaceutical, Novartis, Pfizer, Prosensa, PTC Therapeutics, Santhera 
Pharmaceuticals, and Sarepta Therapeutics outside the submitted work. Dr Zaidman 
has received nonfinancial support from Biogen outside the submitted work. Ms 
Morgenroth has received salary support from TRiNDS during the conduct of the 
study. Mr Osaki and Dr Yamashita are employed by NS Pharma. Mr Satou is employed 
by NS Pharma and has patent PCT/JP2011/070318 issued and licensed to Nippon 
Shinyaku and the National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry and has patent 
PCT/JP2019/026393 pending. Dr Hoffman has received grants from AGADA Biosciences 
and TRiNDS during the conduct of the study and grants from ReveraGen BioPharma 
outside the submitted work.