---
reference_id: "PMID:32601075"
title: "Randomized Phase II Trial of Carboplatin-Paclitaxel Compared with Carboplatin-Paclitaxel-Trastuzumab in Advanced (Stage III-IV) or Recurrent Uterine Serous Carcinomas that Overexpress Her2/Neu (NCT01367002): Updated Overall Survival Analysis."
authors:
- Fader AN
- Roque DM
- Siegel E
- Buza N
- Hui P
- Abdelghany O
- Chambers S
- Secord AA
- Havrilesky L
- "O'Malley DM"
- Backes FJ
- Nevadunsky N
- Edraki B
- Pikaart D
- Lowery W
- ElSahwi K
- Celano P
- Bellone S
- Azodi M
- Litkouhi B
- Ratner E
- Silasi DA
- Schwartz PE
- Santin AD
journal: Clin Cancer Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-20-0953
keywords:
- Aged
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Carboplatin/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Chemotherapy, Adjuvant/adverse effects, methods"
- "Cystadenocarcinoma, Serous/diagnosis, genetics, mortality, therapy"
- Cytoreduction Surgical Procedures
- Drug Administration Schedule
- "Endometrial Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics, mortality, therapy"
- "Endometrium/pathology, surgery"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/diagnosis, genetics, mortality, therapy"
- Neoplasm Staging
- "Paclitaxel/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Progression-Free Survival
- "Erb-b2 Receptor Tyrosine Kinases/analysis, metabolism"
- Survival Analysis
- "Trastuzumab/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Randomized Phase II Trial of Carboplatin-Paclitaxel Compared with Carboplatin-Paclitaxel-Trastuzumab in Advanced (Stage III-IV) or Recurrent Uterine Serous Carcinomas that Overexpress Her2/Neu (NCT01367002): Updated Overall Survival Analysis.
**Authors:** Fader AN, Roque DM, Siegel E, Buza N, Hui P, Abdelghany O, Chambers S, Secord AA, Havrilesky L, O'Malley DM, Backes FJ, Nevadunsky N, Edraki B, Pikaart D, Lowery W, ElSahwi K, Celano P, Bellone S, Azodi M, Litkouhi B, Ratner E, Silasi DA, Schwartz PE, Santin AD
**Journal:** Clin Cancer Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-20-0953](https://doi.org/10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-20-0953)

## Content

1. Clin Cancer Res. 2020 Aug 1;26(15):3928-3935. doi: 
10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-20-0953. Epub 2020 Jun 29.

Randomized Phase II Trial of Carboplatin-Paclitaxel Compared with 
Carboplatin-Paclitaxel-Trastuzumab in Advanced (Stage III-IV) or Recurrent 
Uterine Serous Carcinomas that Overexpress Her2/Neu (NCT01367002): Updated 
Overall Survival Analysis.

Fader AN(1), Roque DM(2), Siegel E(3), Buza N(4), Hui P(4), Abdelghany O(4), 
Chambers S(5), Secord AA(6), Havrilesky L(6), O'Malley DM(7), Backes FJ(7), 
Nevadunsky N(8), Edraki B(9), Pikaart D(10), Lowery W(11), ElSahwi K(12), Celano 
P(13), Bellone S(4), Azodi M(4), Litkouhi B(14), Ratner E(4), Silasi DA(4), 
Schwartz PE(4), Santin AD(15).

Author information:
(1)John Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(2)University of Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland.
(3)University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas.
(4)Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut.
(5)University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona.
(6)Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North Caroline.
(7)The Ohio State University School of Medicine, Columbus, Ohio.
(8)Albert Einstein College/Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, New York.
(9)John Muir Medical Center, Walnut Creek, California.
(10)Penrose Cancer Center-St. Francis, Colorado Springs, Colorado.
(11)Walter Reed Medical Center, Bethesda, Maryland.
(12)Hackensack Meridian Health, Neptune, New Jersey.
(13)Greater Baltimore Medical Center, Baltimore, Maryland.
(14)Stanford Women's Cancer Center, Palo Alto, California.
(15)Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut. alessandro.santin@yale.edu.

PURPOSE: Uterine-serous-carcinoma (USC) is an aggressive variant of endometrial 
cancer. On the basis of preliminary results of a multicenter, randomized phase 
II trial, trastuzumab (T), a humanized-mAb targeting Her2/Neu, in combination 
with carboplatin/paclitaxel (C/P), is recognized as an alternative in treating 
advanced/recurrent HER2/Neu-positive USC. We report the updated survival 
analysis of NCT01367002.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Eligible patients had stage III to IV or recurrent 
disease. Participants were randomized 1:1 to receive C/P for six cycles ± T 
followed by maintenance T until progression or toxicity. Progression-free 
survival (PFS) was the primary endpoint; overall survival (OS) and toxicity were 
secondary endpoints.
RESULTS: Sixty-one patients were randomized. After a median-follow-up of 25.9 
months, 43 progressions and 38 deaths occurred among 58 evaluable patients. 
Updated median-PFS continued to favor the T-arm, with medians of 8.0 months 
versus 12.9 months in the control and T-arms (HR = 0.46; 90% CI, 0.28-0.76; P = 
0.005). Median-PFS was 9.3 months versus 17.7 months among 41 patients with 
stage III to IV disease undergoing primary treatment (HR = 0.44; 90% CI, 
0.23-0.83; P = 0.015), and 7.0 months versus 9.2 months among 17 patients with 
recurrent disease (HR = 0.12; 90% CI, 0.03-0.48; P = 0.004). OS was higher in 
the T compared with the control arm, with medians of 29.6 months versus 24.4 
months (HR = 0.58; 90% CI, 0.34-0.99; P = 0.046). The benefit was most notable 
in those with stage III to IV disease, with survival median not reached in the 
T-arm versus 24.4 months in the control arm (HR = 0.49; 90% CI, 0.25-0.97; P = 
0.041). Toxicity was not different between arms.
CONCLUSIONS: Addition of T to C/P increased PFS and OS in women with 
advanced/recurrent HER2/Neu-positive USC, with the greatest benefit seen for the 
treatment of stage III to IV disease.

©2020 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-20-0953
PMCID: PMC8792803
PMID: 32601075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]