---
reference_id: "PMID:35891315"
title: "Trends in Varicella Burden of Disease Following Introduction of Routine Childhood Varicella Vaccination in Argentina: A 12-Year Time Series Analysis."
authors:
- Giglio N
- Lasalvia P
- Pawaskar M
- Parellada CI
- Rojas YG
- Micone P
- Babic VV
- Neyro SE
journal: Vaccines (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/vaccines10071151
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Trends in Varicella Burden of Disease Following Introduction of Routine Childhood Varicella Vaccination in Argentina: A 12-Year Time Series Analysis.
**Authors:** Giglio N, Lasalvia P, Pawaskar M, Parellada CI, Rojas YG, Micone P, Babic VV, Neyro SE
**Journal:** Vaccines (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/vaccines10071151](https://doi.org/10.3390/vaccines10071151)

## Content

1. Vaccines (Basel). 2022 Jul 20;10(7):1151. doi: 10.3390/vaccines10071151.

Trends in Varicella Burden of Disease Following Introduction of Routine 
Childhood Varicella Vaccination in Argentina: A 12-Year Time Series Analysis.

Giglio N(1), Lasalvia P(2), Pawaskar M(3), Parellada CI(4), Rojas YG(2), Micone 
P(5), Babic VV(6), Neyro SE(7).

Author information:
(1)Hospital de Niños Ricardo Gutiérrez, Buenos Aires C1425EFD, Argentina.
(2)NeuroEconomix, Bogotá D.C. 110831, Colombia.
(3)Merck & Co., Inc., Vaccines, Rahway, NJ 19454, USA.
(4)MSD Brazil, São Paulo 04583-110, Brazil.
(5)Hospital Carlos G Durand, Obstetrics, Buenos Aires C1405DCS, Argentina.
(6)MSD Argentina, Buenos Aires B1605AZE, Argentina.
(7)Ministerio de Salud de la Nación, Dirección de Control de Enfermedades 
Inmunoprevenibles (DiCEI), Buenos Aires C1073ABA, Argentina.

One-dose universal varicella vaccination (UVV) was introduced in the Argentinian 
National Immunization Program in July 2015. This study examined the impact of 
one-dose UVV on varicella incidence and mortality in Argentina. Incidence and 
mortality data were obtained from official databases for pre-UVV (January 
2008-June 2015) and post-UVV (July 2015-December 2019) periods. Time series 
analyses with autoregressive integrated moving average (ARIMA) modeling 
predicted varicella incidence and mortality in absence of UVV in the target 
(aged 1-4 years) and overall population. Predicted and observed values post-UVV 
were compared to estimate UVV impact. Mean annual incidence rates per 100,000 
reduced from 1999 (pre-UVV) to 1122 (post-UVV) in the target population and from 
178 to 154 in the overall population. Significant declines in incidence were 
observed, reaching reductions of 83.9% (95% prediction interval [PI]: 58.9, 
90.0) and 69.1% (95% PI: 23.6, 80.7) in the target and overall populations, 
respectively, during peak months (September-November) post-UVV. Decreasing 
trends in mortality rate from 0.4 to 0.2 per 1,000,000 population were observed. 
Over the last four years, one-dose UVV has significantly reduced varicella 
burden of disease in Argentina. Continuous efforts to improve vaccination 
coverage rates and long-term follow-up are needed to better understand the 
benefits of the UVV program.

DOI: 10.3390/vaccines10071151
PMCID: PMC9317722
PMID: 35891315

Conflict of interest statement: Norberto Giglio and Paula Micone are medical 
scientific consultants and received honoraria from Merck Sharp & Dohme LLC, a 
subsidiary of Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA; Manjiri Pawaskar, Virginia 
Verdaguer Babic, and Cintia Irene Parellada are employees of Merck Sharp & Dohme 
LLC, a subsidiary of Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA, who may own stock 
and/or hold stock options in Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA. Silvina Neyro 
is an employee of Dirección de Control de Enfermedades Inmunoprevenibles 
(DiCEI), Ministerio de Salud de la Nación, Argentina. Pieralessandro Lasalvia 
and Yaneth Gil Rojas are employees of Neuroeconomix who were contracted by MSD 
to conduct the study.