---
reference_id: "PMID:16899778"
title: Neonatal-onset multisystem inflammatory disease responsive to interleukin-1beta inhibition.
authors:
- Goldbach-Mansky R
- Dailey NJ
- Canna SW
- Gelabert A
- Jones J
- Rubin BI
- Kim HJ
- Brewer C
- Zalewski C
- Wiggs E
- Hill S
- Turner ML
- Karp BI
- Aksentijevich I
- Pucino F
- Penzak SR
- Haverkamp MH
- Stein L
- Adams BS
- Moore TL
- Fuhlbrigge RC
- Shaham B
- Jarvis JN
- "O'Neil K"
- Vehe RK
- Beitz LO
- Gardner G
- Hannan WP
- Warren RW
- Horn W
- Cole JL
- Paul SM
- Hawkins PN
- Pham TH
- Snyder C
- Wesley RA
- Hoffmann SC
- Holland SM
- Butman JA
- Kastner DL
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa055137
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neonatal-onset multisystem inflammatory disease responsive to interleukin-1beta inhibition.
**Authors:** Goldbach-Mansky R, Dailey NJ, Canna SW, Gelabert A, Jones J, Rubin BI, Kim HJ, Brewer C, Zalewski C, Wiggs E, Hill S, Turner ML, Karp BI, Aksentijevich I, Pucino F, Penzak SR, Haverkamp MH, Stein L, Adams BS, Moore TL, Fuhlbrigge RC, Shaham B, Jarvis JN, O'Neil K, Vehe RK, Beitz LO, Gardner G, Hannan WP, Warren RW, Horn W, Cole JL, Paul SM, Hawkins PN, Pham TH, Snyder C, Wesley RA, Hoffmann SC, Holland SM, Butman JA, Kastner DL
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa055137](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa055137)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2006 Aug 10;355(6):581-92. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa055137.

Neonatal-onset multisystem inflammatory disease responsive to interleukin-1beta 
inhibition.

Goldbach-Mansky R(1), Dailey NJ, Canna SW, Gelabert A, Jones J, Rubin BI, Kim 
HJ, Brewer C, Zalewski C, Wiggs E, Hill S, Turner ML, Karp BI, Aksentijevich I, 
Pucino F, Penzak SR, Haverkamp MH, Stein L, Adams BS, Moore TL, Fuhlbrigge RC, 
Shaham B, Jarvis JN, O'Neil K, Vehe RK, Beitz LO, Gardner G, Hannan WP, Warren 
RW, Horn W, Cole JL, Paul SM, Hawkins PN, Pham TH, Snyder C, Wesley RA, Hoffmann 
SC, Holland SM, Butman JA, Kastner DL.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Md 20892, USA. goldbacr@mail.nih.gov

Comment in
    Nat Clin Pract Rheumatol. 2006 Dec;2(12):646-7. doi: 10.1038/ncprheum0350.

BACKGROUND: Neonatal-onset multisystem inflammatory disease is characterized by 
fever, urticarial rash, aseptic meningitis, deforming arthropathy, hearing loss, 
and mental retardation. Many patients have mutations in the cold-induced 
autoinflammatory syndrome 1 (CIAS1) gene, encoding cryopyrin, a protein that 
regulates inflammation.
METHODS: We selected 18 patients with neonatal-onset multisystem inflammatory 
disease (12 with identifiable CIAS1 mutations) to receive anakinra, an 
interleukin-1-receptor antagonist (1 to 2 mg per kilogram of body weight per day 
subcutaneously). In 11 patients, anakinra was withdrawn at three months until a 
flare occurred. The primary end points included changes in scores in a daily 
diary of symptoms, serum levels of amyloid A and C-reactive protein, and the 
erythrocyte sedimentation rate from baseline to month 3 and from month 3 until a 
disease flare.
RESULTS: All 18 patients had a rapid response to anakinra, with disappearance of 
rash. Diary scores improved (P<0.001) and serum amyloid A (from a median of 174 
mg to 8 mg per liter), C-reactive protein (from a median of 5.29 mg to 0.34 mg 
per deciliter), and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate decreased at month 3 (all 
P<0.001), and remained low at month 6. Magnetic resonance imaging showed 
improvement in cochlear and leptomeningeal lesions as compared with baseline. 
Withdrawal of anakinra uniformly resulted in relapse within days; retreatment 
led to rapid improvement. There were no drug-related serious adverse events.
CONCLUSIONS: Daily injections of anakinra markedly improved clinical and 
laboratory manifestations in patients with neonatal-onset multisystem 
inflammatory disease, with or without CIAS1 mutations. (ClinicalTrials.gov 
number, NCT00069329 [ClinicalTrials.gov].).

Copyright 2006 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa055137
PMCID: PMC4178954
PMID: 16899778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Stein reports having received consulting and 
lectures fees from Amgen and Genentech and research support from Amgen and 
Abbott; Dr. Moore, lecture fees from Amgen; Dr. Vehe, lecture fees from Amgen 
and research support from Abbott; and Dr. Cole, consulting fees from Abbott and 
lecture fees from Amgen. Amgen produces and distributes the medication evaluated 
in this study. No other potential conflict of interest relevant to this article 
was reported.