---
reference_id: "PMID:29225147"
title: Host specificity in the Giardia duodenalis species complex.
authors:
- Cacciò SM
- Lalle M
- Svärd SG
journal: Infect Genet Evol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2017.12.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Host specificity in the Giardia duodenalis species complex.
**Authors:** Cacciò SM, Lalle M, Svärd SG
**Journal:** Infect Genet Evol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.meegid.2017.12.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.meegid.2017.12.001)

## Content

1. Infect Genet Evol. 2018 Dec;66:335-345. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2017.12.001.
Epub  2017 Dec 7.

Host specificity in the Giardia duodenalis species complex.

Cacciò SM(1), Lalle M(2), Svärd SG(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy. 
Electronic address: simone.caccio@iss.it.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden.

Giardia duodenalis is a unicellular flagellated parasite that infects the 
gastrointestinal tract of a wide range of mammalian species, including humans. 
Investigations of protein and DNA polymorphisms revealed that G. duodenalis 
should be considered as a species complex, whose members, despite being 
morphologically indistinguishable, can be classified into eight groups, or 
Assemblages, separated by large genetic distances. Assemblages display various 
degree of host specificity, with Assemblages A and B occurring in humans and 
many other hosts, Assemblage C and D in canids, Assemblage E in hoofed animals, 
Assemblage F in cats, Assemblage G in rodents, and Assemblage H in pinnipeds. 
The factors determining host specificity are only partially understood, and 
clearly involve both the host and the parasite. Here, we review the results of 
in vitro and in vivo experiments, and clinical observations to highlight 
relevant biological and genetic differences between Assemblages, with a focus on 
human infection.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meegid.2017.12.001
PMID: 29225147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]