---
reference_id: "PMID:41299767"
title: "CISD2 ensures adequate ER-mitochondrial coupling, critically supporting mitochondrial function in neurons."
authors:
- Loncke J
- de Ridder I
- La Rovere R
- Vaarmann A
- Fan G
- Ahuja K
- Serysheva I
- Verfaillie C
- Kerkhofs M
- Parys JB
- Kaasik A
- Bultynck G
- Vervliet T
journal: Acta Neuropathol Commun
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s40478-025-02132-7
keywords:
- Humans
- Mitochondria/metabolism
- Neurons/metabolism
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
- HeLa Cells
- Animals
- Calcium/metabolism
- Calcium Signaling/physiology
- Autophagy/physiology
- Mice
- Membrane Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CISD2 ensures adequate ER-mitochondrial coupling, critically supporting mitochondrial function in neurons.
**Authors:** Loncke J, de Ridder I, La Rovere R, Vaarmann A, Fan G, Ahuja K, Serysheva I, Verfaillie C, Kerkhofs M, Parys JB, Kaasik A, Bultynck G, Vervliet T
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol Commun (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40478-025-02132-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40478-025-02132-7)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2025 Nov 26;13(1):242. doi:
10.1186/s40478-025-02132-7.

CISD2 ensures adequate ER-mitochondrial coupling, critically supporting
mitochondrial function in neurons.

Loncke J(1), de Ridder I(1), La Rovere R(1), Vaarmann A(2), Fan G(3), Ahuja
K(4), Serysheva I(3), Verfaillie C(4), Kerkhofs M(1), Parys JB(1), Kaasik A(2),
Bultynck G(#)(5), Vervliet T(#)(6).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Molecular and Cellular Signaling, Department of Cellular and
Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven, Campus Gasthuisberg O/N-1 B-802, Herestraat 49,
3000, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Biomedicine and Translational
Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Structural Biology Imaging
Center, McGovern Medical School at UTHealth at Houston, 6431 Fannin Street,
Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Development and Regeneration, Stem Cell Institute, KU Leuven,
3000 Leuven, Belgium, Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Laboratory for Molecular and Cellular Signaling, Department of Cellular and
Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven, Campus Gasthuisberg O/N-1 B-802, Herestraat 49,
3000, Leuven, Belgium. geert.bultynck@kuleuven.be.
(6)Laboratory for Molecular and Cellular Signaling, Department of Cellular and
Molecular Medicine, KU Leuven, Campus Gasthuisberg O/N-1 B-802, Herestraat 49,
3000, Leuven, Belgium. tim.vervliet@kuleuven.be.
(#)Contributed equally

Loss of Cisd2, an iron-sulfur cluster transfer protein, results in type 2
Wolfram syndrome (WS2), a disorder associated with severe impacts on pancreatic
β cell and neuronal functions. Cisd2 has been implicated in regulating
intracellular Ca2+ signaling. However, the molecular basis and cellular
consequences remain poorly understood. In this work, we demonstrate that Cisd2
intersects with intracellular Ca2+ dynamics at different levels, by interacting
with the inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors and as a regulator of
ER-mitochondria tethering. As such, loss of Cisd2 in HeLa cells results in
reduced ER-mitochondrial Ca2+ transfer while only modestly impacting cytosolic
Ca2+ signaling. In HeLa cells, Cisd2 deficiency promotes autophagic flux, yet
has minimal impact on mitochondrial function. However, studying the impact of
Cisd2 deficiency in human induced pluripotent stem cell -derived cortical
neurons revealed a severe loss of glutamate-evoked Ca2+ responses in cytosol and
associated uptake in mitochondria due to loss of ER-mitochondria contact sites.
Correlating with the profound changes in cellular Ca2+ handling, mitochondrial
function (oxygen consumption rate, ATP production, mitochondrial potential
maintenance) declined severely, while autophagic flux was increased. Overall,
these deficiencies further impact the resilience of Cisd2-deficient cortical
neurons to cell stress as Cisd2-KO neurons were highly sensitive to
staurosporine, an inducer of apoptosis. Overall, this work is one of the first
to decipher the impact of Cisd2 on ER-mitochondria Ca2+ handling in a WS2
disease-relevant cell models, thereby revealing a unique dependence of neurons
on Cisd2 for their mitochondrial health and cell stress resilience.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-025-02132-7
PMCID: PMC12659354
PMID: 41299767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to
participate: All work done with human cell lines is approved by UZ Leuven
ethical committee via yearly updated umbrella protocol (S63808). Consent for
publication: Not applicable. Competing interests: The authors declare no
competing interests.
