---
reference_id: "PMID:35410271"
title: "Clinical and genetic analysis of pseudohypoparathyroidism complicated by hypokalemia: a case report and review of the literature."
authors:
- Huang S
- He Y
- Lin X
- Sun S
- Zheng F
journal: BMC Endocr Disord
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s12902-022-01011-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and genetic analysis of pseudohypoparathyroidism complicated by hypokalemia: a case report and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Huang S, He Y, Lin X, Sun S, Zheng F
**Journal:** BMC Endocr Disord (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12902-022-01011-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12902-022-01011-9)

## Content

1. BMC Endocr Disord. 2022 Apr 11;22(1):98. doi: 10.1186/s12902-022-01011-9.

Clinical and genetic analysis of pseudohypoparathyroidism complicated by 
hypokalemia: a case report and review of the literature.

Huang S(1), He Y(1), Lin X(1), Sun S(1), Zheng F(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of endocrinology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of endocrinology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China. 3407004@zju.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) encompasses a highly heterogenous 
group of disorders, characterized by parathyroid hormone (PTH) resistance caused 
by mutations in the GNAS gene or other upstream targets. Here, we investigate 
the characteristics of a female patient diagnosed with PHP complicated with 
hypokalemia, and her family members.
CASE PRESENTATION AND GENE ANALYSIS: A 27-year-old female patient occasionally 
exhibited asymptomatic hypocalcemia and hypokalemia during her pregnancy 1 year 
ago. Seven months after delivery, she experienced tetany and dysphonia with 
diarrhea. Tetany symptoms were relieved after intravenous calcium gluconate 
supplementation and she was then transferred to our Hospital. Laboratory 
assessments of the patient revealed hypokalemia, hypocalcemia and 
hyperphosphatemia despite elevated PTH levels. CT scanning of the brain revealed 
globus pallidus calcification. Possible mutations in GNAS and hypokalemia 
related genes were identified using WES, exon copies of STX16 were analized by 
MLPA and the methylation status of GNAS in three differential methylated regions 
(DMRs) was analyzed by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction, followed 
by confirmation with gene sequencing. The patient was clinically diagnosed with 
PHP-1b. Loss of methylation in the A/B region and hypermethylation in the NESP55 
region were detected. No other mutations in GNAS or hypokalemia related genes 
and no deletions of STX16 exons were detected. A negative family history and 
abnormal DMRs in GNAS led to a diagnosis of sporadic PHP-1b of the patient.
CONCLUSIONS: Hypokalemia is a rare disorder associated with PHP-1b. Analysis of 
genetic and epigenetic mutations can aid in the diagnosis and accurate subtyping 
of PHP.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12902-022-01011-9
PMCID: PMC9004107
PMID: 35410271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.