---
reference_id: "PMID:6549017"
title: L-carnitine therapy in isovaleric acidemia.
authors:
- Roe CR
- Millington DS
- Maltby DA
- Kahler SG
- Bohan TP
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1984'
doi: 10.1172/JCI111657
keywords:
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/drug therapy"
- "Carnitine/analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use, urine"
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromatography, Ion Exchange"
- Glycine/therapeutic use
- Hemiterpenes
- Humans
- Isovaleryl-CoA Dehydrogenase
- Male
- Mass Spectrometry
- Oxidoreductases/deficiency
- Oxidoreductases Acting on CH-CH Group Donors
- Pentanoic Acids/blood
- Valerates/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# L-carnitine therapy in isovaleric acidemia.
**Authors:** Roe CR, Millington DS, Maltby DA, Kahler SG, Bohan TP
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1984)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI111657](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI111657)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 1984 Dec;74(6):2290-5. doi: 10.1172/JCI111657.

L-carnitine therapy in isovaleric acidemia.

Roe CR, Millington DS, Maltby DA, Kahler SG, Bohan TP.

Isovaleric acidemia, resulting from isovaleryl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase
deficiency, is associated with marked reduction of free carnitine in both plasma
and urine. Fast atom bombardment-mass spectrometry, hydrolysis, and gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry have unequivocally identified the existence of
isovalerylcarnitine, a new metabolite specific for this disorder. Administration
of equimolar amounts of glycine or L-carnitine separately with leucine
demonstrated that isovaleryl-coenzyme A is removed by supplemental L-carnitine
in the form of isovalerylcarnitine as effectively as it is by glycine, in the
form of isovalerylglycine. When L-carnitine is given alone, excretion of
isovalerylglycine decreases in preference to enhanced excretion of
isovalerylcarnitine and hippurate. Treatment with L-carnitine alone has proven
effective in preventing further hospitalizations in a patient with this genetic
disorder.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI111657
PMCID: PMC425423
PMID: 6549017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
