---
reference_id: "PMID:24461540"
title: Polymyalgia rheumatica--diagnosis and classification.
authors:
- Nesher G
journal: J Autoimmun
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2014.01.016
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Polymyalgia rheumatica--diagnosis and classification.
**Authors:** Nesher G
**Journal:** J Autoimmun (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaut.2014.01.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaut.2014.01.016)

## Content

1. J Autoimmun. 2014 Feb-Mar;48-49:76-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2014.01.016. Epub
2014  Jan 22.

Polymyalgia rheumatica--diagnosis and classification.

Nesher G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine A and the Rheumatology Service, Shaare-Zedek 
Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel; The Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel; St. 
Louis University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA. Electronic address: 
nesher@inter.net.il.

Polymyalgia rheumatica is the most common inflammatory rheumatic disease of the 
elderly, and shares many pathogenetic and epidemiological features with giant 
cell arteritis. The typical symptoms are bilateral aching of the shoulder 
girdle, associated with morning stiffness. The neck and hip girdle may also be 
involved. The diagnosis of polymyalgia rheumatica is made primarily on clinical 
grounds. There is no single diagnostic test, but sets of diagnostic or 
classification criteria have been suggested by several groups of investigators, 
based on the typical clinical presentation and laboratory evidence of 
acute-phase reaction. Other conditions that may mimic polymyalgia rheumatic, 
such as elderly-onset rheumatoid arthritis, must be excluded by appropriate 
testing and close monitoring of the disease course. Glucocorticoids at low doses 
(15-20 mg prednisone per day initially) are the mainstay of treatment.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaut.2014.01.016
PMID: 24461540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]