---
reference_id: "PMID:20204475"
title: "Catch me if you can! Novel aspects of cadmium transport in mammalian cells."
authors:
- Thévenod F
journal: Biometals
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1007/s10534-010-9309-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Catch me if you can! Novel aspects of cadmium transport in mammalian cells.
**Authors:** Thévenod F
**Journal:** Biometals (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10534-010-9309-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10534-010-9309-1)

## Content

1. Biometals. 2010 Oct;23(5):857-75. doi: 10.1007/s10534-010-9309-1. Epub 2010
Mar  5.

Catch me if you can! Novel aspects of cadmium transport in mammalian cells.

Thévenod F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, University of Witten/Herdecke, 
Stockumer Str. 12, Witten, Germany. frank.thevenod@uni-wh.de

Cadmium (Cd(2+)) is a nonessential divalent metal ion that causes toxicity in 
multiple organs in humans. In order for toxicity to occur Cd(2+) must first 
enter cells by utilizing transport pathways for essential metals. This review 
focuses on studies in which Cd(2+) transport was directly demonstrated by 
electrophysiological, radiotracer or Cd(2+)-sensitive fluorescent dye 
techniques. The chemistry of Cd(2+) and metal ions in general is addressed in 
the context of properties relevant for transport through membrane proteins, such 
as hydration energy. Apart from transport by the ZIP transporters SLC39A8 and 
SLC39A14, which is not topic of the review, uptake of free Cd(2+) has been 
demonstrated for the Fe(2+)/H(+) cotransporter divalent metal transporter 1. 
Moreover, the multiligand endocytic receptors megalin and cubilin take up 
cadmium-metallothionein complexes via receptor-mediated endocytosis. The role of 
ATP binding cassette transporters in Cd(2+) efflux from cells is also discussed. 
Both the multidrug resistance-associated protein 1 and cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane conductance regulator are likely to transport cadmium-glutathione 
complexes out of cells, whereas transport of free Cd(2+) by the multidrug 
resistance P-glycoprotein remains controversial. Finally, arguments for and 
against Cd(2+) transport by Ca(2+) channels are presented. Most N- and L-type 
Ca(2+) channels are closed at resting membrane potential (with the exception of 
CaV1.3 channels) and therefore unlikely to allow significant Cd(2+) influx under 
physiological conditions. CaV3.1 and CaV3.2 T-type calcium channels are 
permeated by divalent metal ions, such as Fe(2+) and Mn(2+) because of 
considerable "window" currents close to resting membrane potential and could be 
responsible for tonic Cd(2+) entry. TRPM7 and the mitochondrial Ca(2+) uniporter 
are other likely candidates for Cd(2+) transporters, whereas the role of Orai 
proteins, the store-operated calcium channels carrying Ca(2+) release-activated 
Ca(2+) current, in Cd(2+) influx remains to be investigated.

DOI: 10.1007/s10534-010-9309-1
PMID: 20204475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]