---
reference_id: "PMID:6465173"
title: Hematologic abnormalities in the acquired immune deficiency syndrome.
authors:
- Spivak JL
- Bender BS
- Quinn TC
journal: Am J Med
year: '1984'
doi: 10.1016/0002-9343(84)90695-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hematologic abnormalities in the acquired immune deficiency syndrome.
**Authors:** Spivak JL, Bender BS, Quinn TC
**Journal:** Am J Med (1984)
**DOI:** [10.1016/0002-9343(84)90695-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/0002-9343(84)90695-8)

## Content

1. Am J Med. 1984 Aug;77(2):224-8. doi: 10.1016/0002-9343(84)90695-8.

Hematologic abnormalities in the acquired immune deficiency syndrome.

Spivak JL, Bender BS, Quinn TC.

Blood and marrow specimens were evaluated from 12 patients with the acquired 
immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS). Ten patients were anemic, eight leukopenic, 
and three thrombocytopenic. Pancytopenia was present in two patients and 
subsequently developed in two others. Reticulocyte counts were not increased in 
the anemic patients. The most common peripheral blood abnormalities were a left 
shift in the granulocyte series, lymphopenia, atypical lymphocytes, and 
vacuolated monocytes. Marrow cellularity was increased in five patients and 
reduced in three. Marrow reticulin was increased in 10 patients; in three of 
these, marrow could not be obtained by aspiration. Plasma cells were increased 
in number in every marrow aspirate, and there was a left shift in the myeloid 
series in most. Aggregates of atypical lymphocytes or a diffuse increase in 
marrow lymphocytes occurred in seven patients. An increase in histiocytes was 
observed in seven marrow aspirates; in five of these, the histiocytes were 
phagocytizing red cells, white cells, and platelets. Necrosis was present in 
four marrow specimens. These hematologic abnormalities reflect, in part, the 
presence of systemic infection, inflammation, and the inanition associated with 
them. However, the high incidence of myelofibrosis, alterations in marrow 
cellularity, pancytopenia, and hematophagic histiocytosis indicates that the 
bone marrow is a target organ in AIDS.

DOI: 10.1016/0002-9343(84)90695-8
PMID: 6465173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]