---
reference_id: "PMID:18554234"
title: "Cause and effect relationship of malnutrition with idiopathic chronic pancreatitis: prospective case-control study."
authors:
- Midha S
- Singh N
- Sachdev V
- Tandon RK
- Joshi YK
- Garg PK
journal: J Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1746.2008.05459.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cause and effect relationship of malnutrition with idiopathic chronic pancreatitis: prospective case-control study.
**Authors:** Midha S, Singh N, Sachdev V, Tandon RK, Joshi YK, Garg PK
**Journal:** J Gastroenterol Hepatol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1440-1746.2008.05459.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1440-1746.2008.05459.x)

## Content

1. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2008 Sep;23(9):1378-83. doi: 
10.1111/j.1440-1746.2008.05459.x. Epub 2008 Jun 28.

Cause and effect relationship of malnutrition with idiopathic chronic 
pancreatitis: prospective case-control study.

Midha S(1), Singh N, Sachdev V, Tandon RK, Joshi YK, Garg PK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Human Nutrition, All India Institute of 
Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.

Comment in
    J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2008 Sep;23(9):1312-4. doi: 
10.1111/j.1440-1746.2008.05542.x.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Patients with chronic pancreatitis are often malnourished. 
The role of malnutrition in the pathogenesis of chronic pancreatitis is unclear. 
The aim of the present article was to study prospectively the cause and effect 
relationship of malnutrition with idiopathic chronic pancreatitis in a 
case-control study.
METHODS: Consecutive patients with chronic pancreatitis underwent anthropometry, 
nutritional and dietary assessments. For dietary assessment, food frequency 
questionnaire and 24-hour dietary recall methods were used. Primary outcome 
measure was cause and effect relationship of malnutrition with idiopathic 
chronic pancreatitis.
RESULTS: Of 201 patients with chronic pancreatitis, 120 had idiopathic chronic 
pancreatitis (mean age 29.60 years, 74 males) who formed the study group. None 
of the patients consumed cassava. The nutritional status and dietary intake of 
the patients before the onset of chronic pancreatitis were comparable with those 
of controls with 20.6% of patients and 22.5% of controls being malnourished 
(body mass index [BMI] < 18.5). After the onset of chronic pancreatitis, 56.5% 
of patients lost weight and significantly more patients became malnourished 
compared with controls (45.8% vs 22.5%; P < 0.001). The causes of weight loss 
were diabetes, higher calories from proteins, and pseudocyst.
CONCLUSION: Malnutrition was not a cause of idiopathic chronic pancreatitis and 
weight loss occurred as an effect of chronic pancreatitis. Cassava was not found 
to be a cause of idiopathic chronic pancreatitis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1746.2008.05459.x
PMID: 18554234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]