---
reference_id: "PMID:35377395"
title: Association of Maintenance Intravenous Immunoglobulin With Prevention of Relapse in Adult Myelin Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein Antibody-Associated Disease.
authors:
- Chen JJ
- Huda S
- Hacohen Y
- Levy M
- Lotan I
- Wilf-Yarkoni A
- Stiebel-Kalish H
- Hellmann MA
- Sotirchos ES
- Henderson AD
- Pittock SJ
- Bhatti MT
- Eggenberger ER
- Di Nome M
- Kim HJ
- Kim SH
- Saiz A
- Paul F
- Dale RC
- Ramanathan S
- Palace J
- Camera V
- Leite MI
- Lam BL
- Bennett JL
- Mariotto S
- Hodge D
- Audoin B
- Maillart E
- Deschamps R
- Pique J
- Flanagan EP
- Marignier R
journal: JAMA Neurol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2022.0489
keywords:
- Autoantibodies
- Child
- Chronic Disease
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulins, Intravenous/therapeutic use"
- Immunologic Factors
- Male
- Myelin-Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein
- Recurrence
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of Maintenance Intravenous Immunoglobulin With Prevention of Relapse in Adult Myelin Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein Antibody-Associated Disease.
**Authors:** Chen JJ, Huda S, Hacohen Y, Levy M, Lotan I, Wilf-Yarkoni A, Stiebel-Kalish H, Hellmann MA, Sotirchos ES, Henderson AD, Pittock SJ, Bhatti MT, Eggenberger ER, Di Nome M, Kim HJ, Kim SH, Saiz A, Paul F, Dale RC, Ramanathan S, Palace J, Camera V, Leite MI, Lam BL, Bennett JL, Mariotto S, Hodge D, Audoin B, Maillart E, Deschamps R, Pique J, Flanagan EP, Marignier R
**Journal:** JAMA Neurol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaneurol.2022.0489](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2022.0489)

## Content

1. JAMA Neurol. 2022 May 1;79(5):518-525. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2022.0489.

Association of Maintenance Intravenous Immunoglobulin With Prevention of Relapse
in Adult Myelin Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein Antibody-Associated Disease.

Chen JJ(1)(2), Huda S(3), Hacohen Y(4)(5), Levy M(6)(7), Lotan I(7)(8),
Wilf-Yarkoni A(8), Stiebel-Kalish H(9)(10), Hellmann MA(8), Sotirchos ES(6),
Henderson AD(6)(11), Pittock SJ(2)(12)(13), Bhatti MT(1)(2), Eggenberger
ER(14)(15)(16), Di Nome M(17)(18), Kim HJ(19), Kim SH(19), Saiz A(20)(21), Paul
F(22)(23)(24)(25), Dale RC(26)(27), Ramanathan S(26)(28), Palace J(29), Camera
V(29), Leite MI(29), Lam BL(30), Bennett JL(31)(32), Mariotto S(33), Hodge
D(34), Audoin B(35)(36), Maillart E(37)(38), Deschamps R(39), Pique J(40),
Flanagan EP(2)(12)(13), Marignier R(40).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(2)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(3)Department of Neurology, The Walton Centre NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool,
United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Neurology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London,
United Kingdom.
(5)Queen Square Multiple Sclerosis Centre, UCL Institute of Neurology, Faculty
of Brain Sciences, University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland.
(7)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston.
(8)Department of Neurology, Rabin Medical Center, Sackler School of Medicine,
Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(9)Department of Ophthalmology, Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel.
(10)Felsenstein Research Center, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(11)Department of Ophthalmology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland.
(12)Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(13)Center for Multiple Sclerosis and Autoimmune Neurology, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota.
(14)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida.
(15)Department of Neurosurgery, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida.
(16)Department of Neuro-Ophthalmology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida.
(17)Department of Ophthalmology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, Arizona.
(18)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, Arizona.
(19)Department of Neurology, Research Institute and Hospital of National Cancer
Center, Goyang, South Korea.
(20)Service of Neurology, Hospital Clinic, University of Barcelona, Barcelona,
Spain.
(21)Neuroimmunology Program, Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica August Pi i
Sunyer, Barcelona, Spain.
(22)NeuroCure Clinical Research Center, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Freie Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(23)Berlin Institute of Health, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Freie
Universität Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(24)Experimental and Clinical Research Center, Charité Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(25)Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine, Charité Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(26)Translational Neuroimmunology Group, Kids Neuroscience Centre, Children's
Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia.
(27)Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney Medical
School and Brain and Mind Centre, Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of
Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(28)Department of Neurology, Concord Hospital, Sydney Medical School, Faculty of
Medicine and Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(29)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford,
United Kingdom.
(30)Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, University of Miami, Miami, Florida.
(31)Department of Neurology, Programs in Neuroscience and Immunology, University
of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora.
(32)Department of Ophthalmology, Programs in Neuroscience and Immunology,
University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora.
(33)Neurology Unit, Department of Neuroscience, Biomedicine and Movement
Sciences, University of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(34)Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville,
Florida.
(35)Department of Neurology, University Hospital of Marseille, Marseille,
France.
(36)Aix-Marseille University, Center for Magnetic Resonance in Biology and
Medicine, French National Centre for Scientific Research, Marseille, France.
(37)Department of Neurology, Pitie-Salpetriere Hospital, Assistance
Publique-Hȏpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(38)Centre de Référence des Maladies Inflammatoires Rares du Cerveau et de la
Moelle, Paris, France.
(39)Lyon Civil Hospices, Department of Neurology, Neurologic and Neurosurgical
Hospital Pierre Wertheimer, Bron, France.
(40)Centre de Référence des Maladies Inflammatoires Rares du Cerveau et de la
Moelle, Service de Neurologie, Sclérose en Plaques, Pathologies de la Myéline et
Neuro-inflammation, Hȏpital Neurologique Pierre Wertheimer, Hospices Civils de
Lyon, Lyon, France.

IMPORTANCE: Recent studies suggest that maintenance intravenous immunoglobulin
(IVIG) may be an effective treatment to prevent relapses in myelin
oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody-associated disease (MOGAD); however, most
of these studies had pediatric cohorts, and few studies have evaluated IVIG in
adult patients.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the association of maintenance IVIG with the prevention
of disease relapse in a large adult cohort of patients with MOGAD.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This was a retrospective cohort study
conducted from January 1, 2010, to October 31, 2021. Patients were recruited
from 14 hospitals in 9 countries and were included in the analysis if they (1)
had a history of 1 or more central nervous system demyelinating attacks
consistent with MOGAD, (2) had MOG-IgG seropositivity tested by cell-based
assay, and (3) were age 18 years or older when starting IVIG treatment. These
patients were retrospectively evaluated for a history of maintenance IVIG
treatment.
EXPOSURES: Maintenance IVIG.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Relapse rates while receiving maintenance IVIG
compared with before initiation of therapy.
RESULTS: Of the 876 adult patients initially identified with MOGAD, 59 (median
[range] age, 36 [18-69] years; 33 women [56%]) were treated with maintenance
IVIG. IVIG was initiated as first-line immunotherapy in 15 patients (25%) and as
second-line therapy in 37 patients (63%) owing to failure of prior immunotherapy
and in 7 patients (12%) owing to intolerance to prior immunotherapy. The median
(range) annualized relapse rate before IVIG treatment was 1.4 (0-6.1), compared
with a median (range) annualized relapse rate while receiving IVIG of 0 (0-3)
(t108 = 7.14; P < .001). Twenty patients (34%) had at least 1 relapse while
receiving IVIG with a median (range) time to first relapse of 1 (0.03-4.8)
years, and 17 patients (29%) were treated with concomitant maintenance
immunotherapy. Only 5 of 29 patients (17%) who received 1 g/kg of IVIG every 4
weeks or more experienced disease relapse compared with 15 of 30 patients (50%)
treated with lower or less frequent dosing (hazard ratio, 3.31; 95% CI,
1.19-9.09; P = .02). At final follow-up, 52 patients (88%) were still receiving
maintenance IVIG with a median (range) duration of 1.7 (0.5-9.9) years of
therapy. Seven of 59 patients (12%) discontinued IVIG therapy: 4 (57%) for
inefficacy, 2 (29%) for adverse effects, and 1 (14%) for a trial not receiving
therapy after a period of disease inactivity.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Results of this retrospective, multicenter, cohort
study of adult patients with MOGAD suggest that maintenance IVIG was associated
with a reduction in disease relapse. Less frequent and lower dosing of IVIG may
be associated with treatment failure. Future prospective randomized clinical
trials are warranted to confirm these findings.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2022.0489
PMCID: PMC8981066
PMID: 35377395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Chen
reported receiving consultant fees from UCB and Roche outside the submitted
work. Dr Levy reported receiving personal fees from Alexion, Horizon, Genentech,
UCB, and Mitsubishi Pharma and grants from Horizon, Alexion, Genentech, and UCB
outside the submitted work. Dr Sotirchos reported serving on the advisory boards
for Alexion, Viela Bio, and Genentech and receiving speaker fees from Viela Bio
and Biogen. Dr H. Kim reported receiving a grant from the National Research
Foundation of Korea and research support from Aprilbio and Eisai;
consultancy/speaker fees from Alexion, Aprilbio, Biogen, Celltrion, Daewoong,
Eisai, GC Pharma, HanAll BioPharma, Horizon Therapeutics (formerly Viela Bio),
MDimune, Merck Serono, Novartis, Roche, Sanofi Genzyme, Teva-Handok, and UCB;
and being a coeditor for the Multiple Sclerosis Journal and an associate editor
for the Journal of Clinical Neurology. Dr Saiz reported receiving grants from
Institut de Salud Carlos III Red Española de Esclerosis Múltiple during the
conduct of the study; and consultancy/speaker fees from Merck-Serono,
Biogen-Idec, Sanofi-Aventis, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd, Novartis,
Roche, Alexion, and Janssen. Dr Ramanathan reported receiving grants from the
National Health and Medical Research Council (Australia), the Petre Foundation
(Australia), the Brain Foundation (Australia), the Royal Australasian College of
Physicians, and the University of Sydney; being currently supported by a
National Health and Medical Research Council Early Career Fellowship; being a
consultant on an advisory board for UCB and Limbic Neurology; and receiving
honoraria from Biogen and Limbic Neurology as an invited speaker. Dr Palace
reported receiving support for scientific meetings and honoraria for advisory
work from Merck Serono, Novartis, Chugai, Alexion, Roche, MedImmune, Argenx,
UCB, Mitsubishi, Amplo, and Janssen; grants from Alexion, Chugai, MedImmune, and
Amplo outside the submitted work; and being on the National Health Service
England IVIG committee. Dr Bennett reported receiving consulting fees from
Alexion, Chugai, Clene Nanomedicine, EMD Serono, AbbVie, Reistone Bio,
Mitsubishi Tanabe, Genentech/Roche, and Viela Bio/Horizon; grants from Novartis,
Mallinckrodt, and the National Institutes of Health; and having a patent for
Aquaporumab issued. Dr Mariotto reported receiving speaker honoraria from Biogen
and Novartis and research fundings from Euroimmun outside the submitted work. Dr
Maillart reported receiving personal fees from Alexion, Biogen, Merck, Novartis,
Roche, Sanofi, and Teva and grants from Biogen outside the submitted work. Dr
Flanagan reported serving on advisory boards for Alexion, Genentech, and Horizon
Therapeutics; receiving speaker honoraria from Pharmacy Times; receiving
royalties from UpToDate; being a site primary investigator in a randomized
clinical trial on Medi551 in neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder run by
MedImmune; receiving funding from the National Institutes of Health; being a
member of the medical advisory board of the MOG project; and being an editorial
board member of the Journal of the Neurological Sciences and Neuroimmunology
Reports. Dr Pittock reported receiving grants and personal fees paid to Mayo
Clinic; nonfinancial support from Alexion Pharmaceuticals Inc and MedImmune
Inc/Viela Bio; personal fees from Genentech/Roche, UCB, and Astellas; holding
patent 8,889,102 (application 12-678350) issued and patent 9,891,219B2
(application 12-573942) issued; and serving as a director of the Neuroimmunology
Laboratory at Mayo Clinic. Dr Dale reported receiving research funding from the
Star Scientific Foundation, The Trish Multiple Sclerosis Research Foundation,
Multiple Sclerosis Research Australia, the Petre Foundation, and the National
Health Medical Research Council (Australia); and honoraria from Biogen Idec as
an invited speaker. Dr Leite reported receiving speaker honoraria or travel
grants from Biogen Idec and Novartis; and serving on scientific or educational
advisory boards for UCB, Argenx, and Viela Bio. Dr Deschamps reported receiving
consulting fees from Alexion. Dr Marignier reported being a consultant for
Alexion, UCB, Roche, and Viela Bio. No other disclosures were reported.
