---
reference_id: "PMID:14685678"
title: "[Matrix metalloproteinases and colorectal cancer]."
authors:
- Roeb E
- Matern S
journal: Med Klin (Munich)
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1007/s00063-003-1322-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Matrix metalloproteinases and colorectal cancer].
**Authors:** Roeb E, Matern S
**Journal:** Med Klin (Munich) (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00063-003-1322-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00063-003-1322-5)

## Content

1. Med Klin (Munich). 2003 Dec 15;98(12):763-70. doi: 10.1007/s00063-003-1322-5.

[Matrix metalloproteinases and colorectal cancer].

[Article in German]

Roeb E(1), Matern S.

Author information:
(1)Medizinische Klinik III, Universitätsklinikum der RWTH, Aachen. 
eroeb@ukaachen.de

Malignant tumors have the ability to invade normal tissue and to spread to 
distant sites giving rise to metastasis, which are major factors in the 
morbidity and mortality of colorectal cancer. Invasion and metastasis involve 
attachment of tumor cells to the basement membrane, degradation of the local 
connective tissue, and penetration and migration through proteolyzed stroma. The 
key enzymes responsible for ECM breakdown are matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). 
To date, 26 MMP genes have been identified in humans, and many are implicated in 
cancer. ECM degradation by MMPs not only enhances tumor invasion, but also 
affects tumor cell behavior and leads to cancer progression. This review 
highlights recent developments with regard to the cellular and molecular 
mechanisms of MMPs that influence colorectal tumor cell growth, invasion, and 
metastasis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00063-003-1322-5
PMID: 14685678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]