---
reference_id: "PMID:25107927"
title: "Alport syndrome: its effects on the glomerular filtration barrier and implications for future treatment."
authors:
- Savige J
journal: J Physiol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2014.274449
keywords:
- Animals
- Glomerular Filtration Barrier
- Humans
- "Kidney/metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alport syndrome: its effects on the glomerular filtration barrier and implications for future treatment.
**Authors:** Savige J
**Journal:** J Physiol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1113/jphysiol.2014.274449](https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2014.274449)

## Content

1. J Physiol. 2014 Sep 15;592(18):4013-23. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2014.274449.
Epub  2014 Aug 8.

Alport syndrome: its effects on the glomerular filtration barrier and
implications for future treatment.

Savige J(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Melbourne, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, 3050,
Australia jasavige@unimelb.edu.au.

The glomerular filtration barrier comprises a fenestrated capillary endothelium,
glomerular basement membrane and podocyte slit diaphragm. Over the past decade
we have come to realise that permselectivity depends on size and not necessarily
charge, that the molecular sieve depends on the podocyte contractile apparatus
and is highly dynamic, and that protein uptake by proximal tubular epithelial
cells stimulates signalling and the production of transcription factors and
inflammatory mediators. Alport syndrome is the second commonest monogenic cause
of renal failure after autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease. Eighty per
cent of patients have X-linked disease caused by mutations in the COL4A5 gene.
Most of these result in the replacement of the collagen IV α3α4α5 network with
the α1α1α2 heterotrimer. Affected membranes also have ectopic laminin and
increased matrix metalloproteinase levels, which makes them more susceptible to
proteolysis. Mechanical stress, due to the less elastic membrane and
hypertension, interferes with integrin-mediated podocyte-GBM adhesion.
Proteinuria occurs when urinary levels exceed tubular reabsorption rates, and
initiates tubulointerstitial fibrosis. The glomerular mesangial cells produce
increased TGFβ and CTGF which also contribute to glomerulosclerosis. Currently
there is no specific therapy for Alport syndrome. However treatment with
angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors delays renal failure progression
by reducing intraglomerular hypertension, proteinuria, and fibrosis. Our greater
understanding of the mechanisms underlying the GBM changes and their
consequences in Alport syndrome have provided us with further novel therapeutic
targets.

© 2014 The Authors. The Journal of Physiology © 2014 The Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1113/jphysiol.2014.274449
PMCID: PMC4198011
PMID: 25107927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
