---
reference_id: "PMID:26692010"
title: Correlation between remnant inferior turbinate volume and symptom severity of empty nose syndrome.
authors:
- Hong HR
- Jang YJ
journal: Laryngoscope
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/lary.25830
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Correlation between remnant inferior turbinate volume and symptom severity of empty nose syndrome.
**Authors:** Hong HR, Jang YJ
**Journal:** Laryngoscope (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/lary.25830](https://doi.org/10.1002/lary.25830)

## Content

1. Laryngoscope. 2016 Jun;126(6):1290-5. doi: 10.1002/lary.25830. Epub 2015 Dec
21.

Correlation between remnant inferior turbinate volume and symptom severity of 
empty nose syndrome.

Hong HR(1), Jang YJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Asan Medical Center, College of Medicine, 
University of Ulsan, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: Empty nose syndrome (ENS) is an iatrogenic disorder 
caused by turbinate reduction procedures, which results in considerable nasal 
dysfunction and severely impaired quality of life. However, there is a lack of 
data that explains the relationship between the degree of turbinate reduction 
and subjective symptoms. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of 
remnant inferior turbinate volume on symptom severity.
STUDY DESIGN: We retrospectively analyzed data from 34 patients who were 
diagnosed with ENS.
METHODS: All patients underwent computed tomography scanning and completed the 
SNOT-25 questionnaire. The control group consisted of 10 patients with pituitary 
adenoma who did not have any sinonasal symptoms or abnormalities. The inferior 
turbinate volumes were compared between groups, and the correlation between 
inferior turbinate volumes (ITVs) and Sino-Nasal Outcome Test-25 (SNOT-25) was 
also evaluated.
RESULTS: The ENS group presented with a significantly smaller inferior turbinate 
volume than the control group (P < 0.001). The overall SNOT-25 score 
demonstrated no statistically significant correlation with anterior, posterior, 
or total ITV (P > 0.05, respectively). Among the various items on SNOT-25, a 
high dryness score was significantly correlated with a smaller total inferior 
turbinate volume (P = 0.030). Facial pain was significantly correlated with 
smaller anterior ITV (P = 0.011). In addition, patients who had smaller 
posterior inferior turbinate volume demonstrated higher scores on specific 
SNOT-25 items.
CONCLUSION: A smaller inferior turbinate volume is significantly associated with 
specific SNOT-25 items in ENS patients.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 4. Laryngoscope, 126:1290-1295, 2016.

© 2015 The American Laryngological, Rhinological and Otological Society, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/lary.25830
PMID: 26692010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]