---
reference_id: PMID:42203421
title: Evolving Etiology of Community-Acquired Pneumonia.
authors:
- Cavallazzi R
- Ramirez JA
journal: Clin Chest Med
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1016/j.ccm.2025.12.012
keywords:
- Humans
- "Community-Acquired Pneumonia/microbiology, epidemiology, etiology"
- Streptococcus pneumoniae
- "Community-Acquired Infections/microbiology, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evolving Etiology of Community-Acquired Pneumonia.
**Authors:** Cavallazzi R, Ramirez JA
**Journal:** Clin Chest Med (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ccm.2025.12.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ccm.2025.12.012)

## Content

1. Clin Chest Med. 2026 Jun;47(2):307-319. doi: 10.1016/j.ccm.2025.12.012. Epub 
2026 Jan 27.

Evolving Etiology of Community-Acquired Pneumonia.

Cavallazzi R(1), Ramirez JA(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, and Sleep Disorders, University of 
Louisville, 550 South Jackson Street, ACB, A3R27, Louisville, KY 40202, USA. 
Electronic address: r0cava01@louisville.edu.
(2)Norton Infectious Diseases Institute, Norton Healthcare Louisville; Division 
of Infectious Diseases, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, USA.

The etiology of community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) has evolved over time. 
Although Streptococcus pneumoniae remains the most common bacterial cause of 
CAP, particularly among patients requiring hospitalization, its frequency has 
declined. Several factors likely contribute to the evolving etiology of CAP, 
including vaccination programs, pandemics, and changes in host immunity. Other 
factors may influence the detection of pathogens, without necessarily indicating 
a true change in the etiology of CAP over time. Understanding trends in the 
etiology of CAP in the overall population is crucial for guiding recommendations 
for empirical treatment and informing public health policy.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ccm.2025.12.012
PMID: 42203421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure None.