---
reference_id: "PMID:9160389"
title: "47,XXY (Klinefelter syndrome) and 47,XYY: estimated rates of and indication for postnatal diagnosis with implications for prenatal counselling."
authors:
- Abramsky L
- Chapple J
journal: Prenat Diagn
year: '1997'
doi: "10.1002/(sici)1097-0223(199704)17:4<363::aid-pd79>3.0.co;2-o"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 47,XXY (Klinefelter syndrome) and 47,XYY: estimated rates of and indication for postnatal diagnosis with implications for prenatal counselling.
**Authors:** Abramsky L, Chapple J
**Journal:** Prenat Diagn (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1002/(sici)1097-0223(199704)17:4<363::aid-pd79>3.0.co;2-o](https://doi.org/10.1002/(sici)1097-0223(199704)17:4<363::aid-pd79>3.0.co;2-o)

## Content

1. Prenat Diagn. 1997 Apr;17(4):363-8. doi: 
10.1002/(sici)1097-0223(199704)17:4<363::aid-pd79>3.0.co;2-o.

47,XXY (Klinefelter syndrome) and 47,XYY: estimated rates of and indication for 
postnatal diagnosis with implications for prenatal counselling.

Abramsky L(1), Chapple J.

Author information:
(1)North Thames (West) Congenital Malformation Register, Northwick Park, U.K.

Comment in
    Prenat Diagn. 1998 Mar;18(3):303-4.

Cytogenetic surveys of neonates have found that approximately one boy in 500 is 
born with an extra sex chromosome. Some of these boys are now being diagnosed 
when prenatal karyotyping is done for the detection of Down syndrome and other 
major aneuploidies. This study estimates what proportion of those not detected 
prenatally will be diagnosed postnatally and what the indications for 
karyotyping are likely to be. We ascertained all 47,XXY and 47,XYY males 
detected prenatally and postnatally (during the 4 years 1990-1993) in the three 
cytogenetic laboratories in the North Thames (West) region. The age at diagnosis 
and indication for karyotyping were noted for cases diagnosed postnatally. Less 
than 10 per cent of the estimated number of affected fetuses were detected 
prenatally. This study suggests that most males born with these chromosome 
patterns will go through life without being karyotyped, that the commonest 
indication for a 47,XYY male to be karyotyped will be developmental delay and/or 
behaviour problems, and that the commonest indication for a Klinefelter male to 
be karyotyped will be hypogonadism and/or infertility. It would appear that most 
undiagnosed 47,XXY and 47,XYY males do not look or behave in a manner which 
prompts testing for a chromosome abnormality.

DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1097-0223(199704)17:4<363::aid-pd79>3.0.co;2-o
PMID: 9160389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]