---
reference_id: "PMID:20301563"
title: "Progressive Myoclonus Epilepsy, Lafora Type."
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Minassian B
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Progressive Myoclonus Epilepsy, Lafora Type.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Minassian B

## Content

1. Progressive Myoclonus Epilepsy, Lafora Type.

Minassian B(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2007 Dec 28 [updated 2025 Jan 23].

Author information:
(1)University of Texas Southwestern, Dallas, Texas

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Progressive myoclonus epilepsy, Lafora type (also 
known as Lafora disease) is characterized by focal occipital seizures presenting 
as transient blindness or visual hallucinations and fragmentary, symmetric, or 
generalized myoclonus occurring in previously healthy individuals. Typical age 
of onset is eight to 19 years (peak: age14-16 years). Generalized tonic-clonic 
seizures, atypical absence seizures, atonic seizures, and focal seizures with 
impaired awareness may also occur. The course of the disease is characterized by 
increasing frequency and intractability of seizures. Status epilepticus with any 
of the seizure types is common. Cognitive decline becomes apparent at or soon 
after the onset of seizures. Dysarthria and ataxia appear early, while 
spasticity appears late. Emotional disturbances and confusion are common in the 
early stages of the disease and are followed by dementia. Most affected 
individuals die within ten years of onset, usually from status epilepticus or 
from complications related to neurologic degeneration.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of Lafora disease is established in a proband 
with characteristic neurologic findings and/or biallelic pathogenic variants in 
one of the two known causative genes, EPM2A or NHLRC1, identified by molecular 
genetic testing. On rare occasion, a skin biopsy to detect Lafora bodies is 
necessary to confirm the diagnosis.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Medical treatment in combination with 
physical therapy and psychosocial support. Regular evaluation and readjustment 
are required as the disease progresses. Anti-seizure medications are effective 
against generalized seizures but do not alter the progression of cognitive and 
behavioral manifestations. Overmedication in treating drug-resistant myoclonus 
is a risk. Gastrostomy feedings can decrease the risk of aspiration pneumonia 
when the disease is advanced. Surveillance: Clinical and psychosocial 
evaluations throughout the teenage years. Monitoring of developmental progress 
and educational needs, in conjunction with behavioral assessments. Continuous 
assessment of feeding, nutritional status, and airway protection (including 
aspiration risk). Agents/circumstances to avoid: Phenytoin as maintenance 
therapy; possibly lamotrigine, carbamazepine, and oxcarbazepine.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Lafora disease is inherited in an autosomal recessive 
manner. If both parents are known to be heterozygous for an EPM2A or NHLRC1 
pathogenic variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% 
chance of being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 
25% chance of being unaffected and not a carrier. Carrier testing for at-risk 
relatives, prenatal testing for at-risk pregnancies, and preimplantation genetic 
testing are possible if the pathogenic variants in the family are known.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301563