---
reference_id: "PMID:18363703"
title: "Taurodontism: a review of the condition and endodontic treatment challenges."
authors:
- Jafarzadeh H
- Azarpazhooh A
- Mayhall JT
journal: Int Endod J
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2591.2008.01388.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Taurodontism: a review of the condition and endodontic treatment challenges.
**Authors:** Jafarzadeh H, Azarpazhooh A, Mayhall JT
**Journal:** Int Endod J (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2591.2008.01388.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2591.2008.01388.x)

## Content

1. Int Endod J. 2008 May;41(5):375-88. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2591.2008.01388.x.
Epub  2008 Mar 21.

Taurodontism: a review of the condition and endodontic treatment challenges.

Jafarzadeh H(1), Azarpazhooh A, Mayhall JT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endodontics, Faculty of Dentistry and Dental Research Center, 
Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Iran. hamid_j365@yahoo.com

Taurodontism can be defined as a change in tooth shape caused by the failure of 
Hertwig's epithelial sheath diaphragm to invaginate at the proper horizontal 
level. An enlarged pulp chamber, apical displacement of the pulpal floor, and no 
constriction at the level of the cementoenamel junction are the characteristic 
features. Although permanent molar teeth are most commonly affected, this change 
can also be seen in both the permanent and deciduous dentition, unilaterally or 
bilaterally, and in any combination of teeth or quadrants. Whilst it appears 
most frequently as an isolated anomaly, its association with several syndromes 
and abnormalities has also been reported. The literature on taurodontism in the 
context of endodontics up to March 2007 was reviewed using PubMed, MEDLINE and 
Cumulative Index to Nursing & Allied Health Literature. Despite the clinical 
challenges in endodontic therapy, taurodontism has received little attention 
from clinicians. In performing root canal treatment on such teeth, one should 
appreciate the complexity of the root canal system, canal obliteration and 
configuration, and the potential for additional root canal systems. Careful 
exploration of the grooves between all orifices particularly with magnification, 
use of ultrasonic irrigation; and a modified filling technique are of particular 
use.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2591.2008.01388.x
PMID: 18363703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]