---
reference_id: "PMID:37744307"
title: "Real-World Treatment Patterns and Outcomes of First-Line Immunotherapy Among Patients With Advanced Nonsquamous NSCLC Harboring BRAF, MET, or HER2 Alterations."
authors:
- Garassino MC
- Oskar S
- Arunachalam A
- Zu K
- Kao YH
- Chen C
- Meng W
- Pietanza MC
- Zhao B
- Aggarwal H
journal: JTO Clin Res Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.jtocrr.2023.100568
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Real-World Treatment Patterns and Outcomes of First-Line Immunotherapy Among Patients With Advanced Nonsquamous NSCLC Harboring BRAF, MET, or HER2 Alterations.
**Authors:** Garassino MC, Oskar S, Arunachalam A, Zu K, Kao YH, Chen C, Meng W, Pietanza MC, Zhao B, Aggarwal H
**Journal:** JTO Clin Res Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jtocrr.2023.100568](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtocrr.2023.100568)

## Content

1. JTO Clin Res Rep. 2023 Aug 23;4(10):100568. doi: 10.1016/j.jtocrr.2023.100568.
 eCollection 2023 Oct.

Real-World Treatment Patterns and Outcomes of First-Line Immunotherapy Among
Patients With Advanced Nonsquamous NSCLC Harboring BRAF, MET, or HER2
Alterations.

Garassino MC(1), Oskar S(2), Arunachalam A(2), Zu K(3), Kao YH(2), Chen C(4),
Meng W(2), Pietanza MC(5), Zhao B(5), Aggarwal H(2).

Author information:
(1)Thoracic Oncology Program, Section of Hematology Oncology, Department of
Medicine, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(2)Center for Observational and Real-World Evidence (CORE), Merck & Co., Inc.,
Rahway, New Jersey.
(3)Epidemiology, Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, New Jersey.
(4)Data, AI and Genome Sciences (DAGS) Department, Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway,
New Jersey.
(5)Clinical Research, Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, New Jersey.

INTRODUCTION: Data on utilization and clinical outcomes of programmed cell death
protein or programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-[L]1) inhibitors in NSCLC with uncommon
oncogenic alterations is limited.
METHODS: This retrospective study used a deidentified U.S. nationwide
clinicogenomic database to select patients with advanced nonsquamous NSCLC
without EGFR, ALK, or ROS1 alterations, diagnosed from January 1, 2016 to
September 30, 2020, who initiated first-line therapy. Our objectives were to
summarize characteristics and treatment patterns for patients with four
little-studied genomic alterations or driver-negative NSCLC. We estimated
Kaplan-Meier real-world time on treatment (rwTOT) and time to next treatment for
patients receiving PD-(L)1 inhibitors. The data cutoff was September 30, 2021.
RESULTS: Of the 3971 eligible patients, 84 (2%) had NSCLC with BRAF V600E
mutation, 117 (3%) had MET exon 14 skipping mutation, 130 (3%) had MET
amplification, 91 (2%) had ERBB2 activation mutation, and 691 patients (17%) had
driver-negative NSCLC. Patient characteristics differed among cohorts as
expected. The most common first-line regimen in each cohort was a PD-(L)1
inhibitor as monotherapy or in combination with chemotherapy. The median rwTOT
with anti-PD-(L)1 monotherapy was 4.6 months in the driver-negative cohort and
ranged from 2.9 months (ERBB2 mutation) to 7.6 months (BRAF V600E mutation). The
median rwTOT with anti-PD-(L)1-chemotherapy combination was 5.2 months in the
driver-negative cohort and 6 months in all but the BRAF V600E cohort (17.5 mo).
The patterns of real-world time to next treatment results were similar.
CONCLUSIONS: Substantial use of anti-PD-(L)1 therapy and associated clinical
outcomes are consistent with previous real-world findings and suggest no
detriment from PD-(L)1 inhibitors for advanced nonsquamous NSCLC harboring one
of these four genomic alterations relative to driver-negative NSCLC.

© 2023 by the International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtocrr.2023.100568
PMCID: PMC10514206
PMID: 37744307
