---
reference_id: "PMID:22906940"
title: "Meningococcal vaccine: a new vaccine to combat meningococcal disease in India."
authors:
- Verma R
- Khanna P
journal: Hum Vaccin Immunother
year: '2012'
doi: 10.4161/hv.21666
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Meningococcal vaccine: a new vaccine to combat meningococcal disease in India.
**Authors:** Verma R, Khanna P
**Journal:** Hum Vaccin Immunother (2012)
**DOI:** [10.4161/hv.21666](https://doi.org/10.4161/hv.21666)

## Content

1. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2012 Dec 1;8(12):1904-6. doi: 10.4161/hv.21666. Epub
2012  Dec 1.

Meningococcal vaccine: a new vaccine to combat meningococcal disease in India.

Verma R(1), Khanna P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Community Medicine, Pt. B.D. Sharma-Postgraduate Institute of 
Medical Studies, Rohtak, India. dr.rameshverma@yahoo.co.in

Meningococcal meningitis is caused by Neisseria meningitidis, a gram-negative, 
aerobic, encapsulated diplococcus. Meningococci are divided into numerous 
serogroups based on the composition of their capsular polysaccharide (Ps) 
antigens. At least 13 serogroups have been described: A, B, C, D, 29E, H, I, K, 
L, W-135, X, Y and Z. Out of these 13, six (A, B, C, W135, X and Y) can cause 
epidemics. The incubation period averages 3-4 d (range 1-10 d), which is the 
period of communicability. Bacteria can be found for 2-4 d in the nose and 
pharynx, and for up to 24 h after starting antibiotics. N. meningitidis is a 
leading cause of meningitis worldwide and a significant public health problem 
and dreaded disease in most countries. Morbidity and mortality rates from the 
disease remain high. Apart from epidemics, at least 1.2 million cases of 
bacterial meningitis are estimated to occur every year, 135,000 of which are 
fatal--of these, ~500,000 and ~50,000 respectively are caused by meningococci. 
Many outbreaks of meningococcal meningitis have been documented, with major 
outbreaks mainly seen in large cities of northern, western and eastern India 
like New Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and northeastern states. In 2011, 245 people 
died in India, the vast majority (179) in West Bengal, while 467 and 341 people 
in 2009 and 2010 respectively died of this disease. The meningococcal conjugate 
vaccines (MCV) are preferred for reasons of immunogenicity and persistence of 
immunity but are unavailable in India. Only the quadrivalent and bivalent 
meningococcal Ps vaccines (MPV) are available in India. The quadrivalent MPV is 
preferred for Haj pilgrims, international travelers and students in that it 
provides protection against emerging W-135 and Y disease in these areas. A 
single-dose 0.5mL injection is recommended.

DOI: 10.4161/hv.21666
PMCID: PMC3656083
PMID: 22906940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]