---
reference_id: "PMID:38538713"
title: 17 variants interaction of Wnt/β-catenin pathway associated with development of osteonecrosis of femoral head in Chinese Han population.
authors:
- Shi C
- Li X
- Sun Y
- Du Z
- Zhang G
- Che Z
- Li Q
- Song S
- Guo J
- Sun H
- Song Y
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-57929-8
keywords:
- Humans
- Femur Head Necrosis/genetics
- Femur Head
- beta Catenin/genetics
- Glycogen Synthase Kinase 3 beta/genetics
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Osteonecrosis/genetics
- Lipids
- China
- Case-Control Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 17 variants interaction of Wnt/β-catenin pathway associated with development of osteonecrosis of femoral head in Chinese Han population.
**Authors:** Shi C, Li X, Sun Y, Du Z, Zhang G, Che Z, Li Q, Song S, Guo J, Sun H, Song Y
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-024-57929-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-024-57929-8)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2024 Mar 27;14(1):7301. doi: 10.1038/s41598-024-57929-8.

17 variants interaction of Wnt/β-catenin pathway associated with development of 
osteonecrosis of femoral head in Chinese Han population.

Shi C(#)(1), Li X(#)(1), Sun Y(1), Du Z(1), Zhang G(1)(2), Che Z(1), Li Q(1), 
Song S(1), Guo J(2), Sun H(1), Song Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Medical Centre of Orthopedics, The Second Hospital of Jilin University, 
Ziqiang Street No.218, Nanguan District, Changchun City, 130041, Jilin Province, 
China.
(2)Gene Testing Centre of Changchun Tumor Hospital, Changchun City, 130012, 
Jilin Province, China.
(3)Medical Centre of Orthopedics, The Second Hospital of Jilin University, 
Ziqiang Street No.218, Nanguan District, Changchun City, 130041, Jilin Province, 
China. songyangjlu@jlu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

The genes of Wnt/β-catenin pathway may have potential roles in fat accumulation 
of Non-traumatic osteonecrosis of the femoral head (ONFH), but the effects of 
their variants in the pathway on ONFH development have been remained unclear. To 
explore the potential roles of the variants in the development of ONFH, we 
completed the investigation of the paired interactions as well as their related 
biological functions of 17 variants of GSK3β, LRP5, and FRP4 genes etc. in the 
pathway. The genotyping of the 17 variants were finished by MASS ARRAY PLATFORM 
in a 560 ONFH case-control system. The association of variants interactions with 
ONFH risk and clinical traits was evaluated by logistic regression analysis etc. 
and bioinformatics technology. The results showed that the genotype, allele 
frequency, and genetic models of Gsk3β rs334558 (G/A), SFRP4 rs1052981 (A/G), 
and LRP5 rs312778 (T/C) were significantly associated with the increased and 
decreased ONFH risk and clinical traits, respectively (P < 0.001-0.0002). 
Particularly, the paired interactions of six variants as well as eight variants 
also showed statistically increased and decreased ONFH risk, bilateral hip 
lesions risk and stage IV risk of ONFH, respectively (P < 0.044-0.004). Our 
results not only at the first time simultaneously showed exact serum lipid 
disorder and abnormal platelet function of ONFH in the same study system with 
the 17 variants polymorphisms of Wnt/β-catenin pathway but also shed light on 
the variants closely intervening the lipid disorder and abnormal coagulation of 
ONFH.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-57929-8
PMCID: PMC10973331
PMID: 38538713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.