---
reference_id: "PMID:37732399"
title: "PNPLA6 disorders: what's in a name?"
authors:
- Liu J
- Hufnagel RB
journal: Ophthalmic Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1080/13816810.2023.2254830
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Choroideremia
- Eye
- Retinal Diseases/genetics
- Blepharoptosis
- Nervous System Diseases
- Acyltransferases
- Phospholipases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PNPLA6 disorders: what's in a name?
**Authors:** Liu J, Hufnagel RB
**Journal:** Ophthalmic Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1080/13816810.2023.2254830](https://doi.org/10.1080/13816810.2023.2254830)

## Content

1. Ophthalmic Genet. 2023 Dec;44(6):530-538. doi: 10.1080/13816810.2023.2254830. 
Epub 2023 Nov 20.

PNPLA6 disorders: what's in a name?

Liu J(1), Hufnagel RB(1).

Author information:
(1)Ophthalmic Genetics and Visual Function Branch, National Eye Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

BACKGROUND: Variants in the patatin-like phospholipase domain containing 6 
(PNPLA6) gene cause a broad spectrum of neurological disorders characterized by 
gait disturbance, visual impairment, anterior hypopituitarism, and hair 
anomalies. This review examines the clinical, cellular, and biochemical features 
found across the five PNPLA6-related diseases, with a focus on future questions 
to be addressed.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A literature review was performed on published clinical 
reports on patients with PNPLA6 variants. Additionally, in vitro and in vivo 
models used to study the encoded protein, Neuropathy Target Esterase (NTE), are 
summarized to lend mechanistic perspective to human diseases.
RESULTS: Biallelic pathogenic PNPLA6 variants cause five systemic neurological 
disorders: spastic paraplegia type 39, Gordon-Holmes, Boucher-Neuhäuser, 
Laurence-Moon, and Oliver-McFarlane syndromes. PNPLA6 encodes NTE, an enzyme 
involved in maintaining phospholipid homeostasis and trafficking in the nervous 
system. Retinal disease presents with a unique chorioretinal dystrophy that is 
phenotypically similar to choroideremia and Leber congenital amaurosis. Animal 
and cellular models support a loss-of-function mechanism.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinicians should be aware of choroideremia-like ocular 
presentation in patients who also experience growth defects, motor dysfunction, 
and/or hair anomalies. Although NTE biochemistry is well characterized, further 
research on the relationship between genotype and the presence or absence of 
retinopathy should be explored to improve diagnosis and prognosis.

DOI: 10.1080/13816810.2023.2254830
PMCID: PMC10840751
PMID: 37732399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of interest The authors report there 
are no competing interests to declare.