---
reference_id: "PMID:30358967"
title: Abetalipoproteinemia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Burnett JR
- Hooper AJ
- Hegele RA
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abetalipoproteinemia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Burnett JR, Hooper AJ, Hegele RA

## Content

1. Abetalipoproteinemia.

Burnett JR(1), Hooper AJ(1), Hegele RA(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2018 Oct 25 [updated 2022 May 19].

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Royal Perth Hospital & Fiona Stanley
Hospital Network, PathWest Laboratory Medicine WA;, School of Medicine, Faculty
of Health & Medical Sciences, University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia
(2)Departments of Medicine and Biochemistry, Schulich School of Medicine and
Robarts Research Institute, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Abetalipoproteinemia typically presents in infancy
with failure to thrive, diarrhea, vomiting, and malabsorption of fat.
Hematologic manifestations may include acanthocytosis (irregularly spiculated
erythrocytes), anemia, reticulocytosis, and hemolysis with resultant
hyperbilirubinemia. Malabsorption of fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, and K) can
result in an increased international normalized ratio (INR). Untreated
individuals may develop atypical pigmentation of the retina that may present
with progressive loss of night vision and/or color vision in adulthood.
Neuromuscular findings in untreated individuals including progressive loss of
deep tendon reflexes, vibratory sense, and proprioception; muscle weakness;
dysarthria; and ataxia typically manifest in the first or second decades of
life.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of abetalipoproteinemia is established in a
proband with absent or extremely low LDL-cholesterol, triglyceride, and
apolipoprotein (apo) B levels and biallelic pathogenic variants in MTTP
identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Adequate caloric intake to alleviate
growth deficiency; low-fat diet (10%-20% of total calories from fat); oral
essential fatty acid supplementation (up to 1 teaspoon per day of oils rich in
polyunsaturated fatty acids, as tolerated); supplementation with vitamin A
(100-400 IU/kg/day), vitamin D (800-1,200 IU/day), vitamin E (100-300
IU/kg/day), and vitamin K (5-35 mg/week). Mild anemia rarely requires treatment,
although occasionally vitamin B12 or iron therapy may be considered. Dysarthria,
ataxia, and hypothyroidism are treated in the standard fashion. Prevention of
primary manifestations: Most complications can be prevented through institution
of a low-fat diet with supplementation of fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, and K).
Surveillance: Assessment of growth parameters at each visit. Complete blood
count, INR, reticulocyte count, liver function tests (AST, ALT, GGT, total and
direct bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, and albumin), fat-soluble vitamin levels
(vitamin A [retinol], 25-OH vitamin D, and plasma or red blood cell vitamin E
concentrations), serum calcium, serum phosphate, serum uric acid, and TSH levels
annually. Lipid profile (total cholesterol, triglyceride concentration,
LDL-cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol, apo B, and apo A-I) every several years.
Ultrasound of the liver every three years. Ophthalmology and neurology
evaluations every six to 12 months. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Fatty foods,
particularly those rich in long-chain fatty acids. Evaluation of relatives at
risk: Sibs of a proband should undergo a full lipid profile and apolipoprotein
(apo) B determination to allow for early diagnosis and treatment of findings. If
the pathogenic MTTP variants in the family are known, molecular genetic testing
may also be used to determine the genetic status of at-risk sibs. In classic
abetalipoproteinemia, affected sibs will present shortly after birth with
failure to thrive, diarrhea, vomiting, and malabsorption of fat. Pregnancy
management: Vitamin A excess can be harmful to the developing fetus. Therefore,
women who are pregnant or who are planning to become pregnant should reduce
their vitamin A supplement dose by 50%. Additionally, close monitoring of serum
beta carotene levels throughout pregnancy is recommended. Because vitamin A is
an essential vitamin, vitamin A supplementation should not be discontinued
during pregnancy.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Abetalipoproteinemia is inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner. At conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of
being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance
of being unaffected and not a carrier. Carrier testing for at-risk relatives and
prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible if the pathogenic MTTP
variants in the family are known.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 30358967
