---
reference_id: "PMID:30552565"
title: Growth plate alterations in chronic kidney disease.
authors:
- Fernández-Iglesias Á
- López JM
- Santos F
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s00467-018-4160-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Growth plate alterations in chronic kidney disease.
**Authors:** Fernández-Iglesias Á, López JM, Santos F
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00467-018-4160-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00467-018-4160-7)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2020 Mar;35(3):367-374. doi: 10.1007/s00467-018-4160-7. Epub 
2018 Dec 14.

Growth plate alterations in chronic kidney disease.

Fernández-Iglesias Á(1), López JM(1)(2), Santos F(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatrics, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Oviedo, CP 33006, Oviedo, Asturias, Spain.
(2)Department of Morphology and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Oviedo, Oviedo, Asturias, Spain.
(3)Division of Pediatrics, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Oviedo, CP 33006, Oviedo, Asturias, Spain. fsantos@uniovi.es.
(4)Pediatric Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, Hospital Universitario 
Central de Asturias (HUCA), Oviedo, Asturias, Spain. fsantos@uniovi.es.

Growth retardation is a major feature of chronic kidney disease (CKD) of onset 
in infants or children and is associated with increased morbidity and mortality. 
Several factors have been shown to play a causal role in the growth impairment 
of CKD. All these factors interfere with growth by disturbing the normal 
physiology of the growth plate of long bones. To facilitate the understanding of 
the pathogenesis of growth impairment in CKD, this review discusses cellular and 
molecular alterations of the growth plate during uremia, including structural 
and dynamic changes of chondrocytes, alterations in their process of maturation 
and hypertrophy, and disturbances in the growth hormone signaling pathway.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-018-4160-7
PMID: 30552565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]