---
reference_id: "PMID:23107878"
title: Recommendations for the diagnosis and management of typical childhood spinal muscular atrophy.
authors:
- Cuisset JM
- Estournet B
- French Ministry of Health
journal: Rev Neurol (Paris)
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.neurol.2012.07.020
keywords:
- Airway Management
- Animals
- Case Management
- "Digestive System Diseases/etiology, therapy"
- Female
- Genetic Counseling
- Humans
- "Monitoring, Physiologic"
- Orthopedic Procedures
- Pain Management
- Physical Therapy Modalities
- Pregnancy
- Pregnancy Complications/therapy
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- "Spinal Muscular Atrophies of Childhood/classification, diagnosis, epidemiology, surgery, therapy"
- "Urologic Diseases/etiology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recommendations for the diagnosis and management of typical childhood spinal muscular atrophy.
**Authors:** Cuisset JM, Estournet B, French Ministry of Health
**Journal:** Rev Neurol (Paris) (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neurol.2012.07.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurol.2012.07.020)

## Content

1. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2012 Dec;168(12):902-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neurol.2012.07.020.
 Epub 2012 Oct 26.

Recommendations for the diagnosis and management of typical childhood spinal
muscular atrophy.

Cuisset JM(1), Estournet B; French Ministry of Health.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropediatrics, Neuromuscular Disease Reference Centre,
Roger-Salengro Hospital, Regional University Teaching Hospital (CHRU), rue
Emile-Lainé, Lille, France. jean-marie.cuisset@chru-lille.fr

Comment in
    Rev Neurol (Paris). 2012 Dec;168(12):901. doi: 10.1016/j.neurol.2012.10.002.

Typical childhood spinal muscular atrophy is a disease that affects the anterior
horn of the spinal cord related to SMN1 gene defects. Since no etiological
treatment is currently available, its management is necessarily symptomatic and
involves multidisciplinary care. The national plan on rare diseases for
2005-2008 developed by the French Ministry of Health resulted in the creation of
12 reference centres for neuromuscular diseases, mainly to improve their
diagnosis and management. During the first one-day clinical research meeting on
neuromuscular disorders, organized by the French Association to fight myopathies
(AFM) in May 2007, clinicians from the 12 national reference centers led
workshops for each of the main neuromuscular diseases. Concerning spinal
muscular atrophy, discussions involving specialists from medical and allied
professions were led by clinicians in charge of the workshop sessions. This
paper reports the final version of their recommendation regarding the diagnosis,
monitoring and management of typical infantile spinal muscular atrophy, which is
necessarily multidisciplinary, including orthopedic, pulmonary, gastroenterology
and nutrition care.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurol.2012.07.020
PMID: 23107878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
