---
reference_id: "PMID:25319082"
title: "The cn/cn dwarf mouse. Histomorphometric, ultrastructural, and radiographic study in mutants corresponding to human acromesomelic dysplasia Maroteaux type (AMDM)."
authors:
- Shapiro F
- Barone L
- Johnson A
- Flynn E
journal: BMC Musculoskelet Disord
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1186/1471-2474-15-347
keywords:
- Animals
- Body Weight
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Bone and Bones/diagnostic imaging, pathology, ultrastructure"
- Chondrocytes/ultrastructure
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Epiphyses/pathology, ultrastructure"
- "Femur/diagnostic imaging, pathology, ultrastructure"
- "Growth Plate/pathology, ultrastructure"
- Humans
- "Humerus/diagnostic imaging, pathology, ultrastructure"
- Mice
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- Radiography
- "Tibia/diagnostic imaging, pathology, ultrastructure"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The cn/cn dwarf mouse. Histomorphometric, ultrastructural, and radiographic study in mutants corresponding to human acromesomelic dysplasia Maroteaux type (AMDM).
**Authors:** Shapiro F, Barone L, Johnson A, Flynn E
**Journal:** BMC Musculoskelet Disord (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1471-2474-15-347](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2474-15-347)

## Content

1. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2014 Oct 15;15:347. doi: 10.1186/1471-2474-15-347.

The cn/cn dwarf mouse. Histomorphometric, ultrastructural, and radiographic 
study in mutants corresponding to human acromesomelic dysplasia Maroteaux type 
(AMDM).

Shapiro F(1), Barone L, Johnson A, Flynn E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Orthopaedic Research Laboratory, Boston 
Children's Hospital, 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 
Frederic.shapiro@childrens.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: The cn/cn dwarf mouse is caused by a loss-of-function mutation in 
the natriuretic peptide receptor 2 (NPR-2) gene which helps positively regulate 
endochondral longitudinal bone growth. The gene mutation corresponds to that in 
the human skeletal dysplasia Acromesomelic Dysplasia Maroteaux type (AMDM). This 
study assesses histomorphometric, ultrastructural and radiographic correlates of 
the growth abnormality.
METHODS: Ten litters of cn/cn and cn/+littermates at ages ranging from 2.5 to 
6.5 weeks were studied by skeletal radiographs, histomorphometry and physeal 
ultrastructure. Skeletal radiographs were done on 2 cn/cn and 2 cn/+littermates 
at 5 weeks of age. Humeral, femoral, and tibial lengths were measured from 34 
intact bones (17 cn/cn, 17 cn/+) at 2.5 to 6.5 weeks. Growth plate 
histomorphometry in 50 bones (26 cn/cn and 24 cn/+) determined the hypertrophic 
zone/entire physeal cartilage ratios in 204 sections (87 cn/+, 117 cn/cn) at 3 
time periods (2.5-3, 4-4.5, and 6-6.5 weeks). Electron microscopy assessed 6 
cn/cn and 6 cn/+age and site-matched physeal cartilage.
RESULTS: Cn/cn mice were two thirds the size of the cn/+. Cn/cn bones were 
normal in shape or only minimally deformed except for the radius with 
mid-diaphyseal bowing. Length ratios of cn/cn humeri, femurs, and tibias were a 
mean of 0.65 (± 0.03, n = 34, 17 ratios) compared to cn/+bones. The main physeal 
abnormality was a markedly shortened hypertrophic zone with the ratio of 
hypertrophic zone to entire physis 0.17 (± 0.063) in the cn/cn and 0.30 (± 
0.052) in the cn/+mice. Ratio assessments were similar comparing humeral, 
femoral, and tibial growth plates as were ratios from each of the 3 time 
periods. Ultrastructural assessments from the resting zone to the lower 
hypertrophic zone-metaphyseal junction showed no specific individual cell 
abnormalities in cn/cn compared to cn/+physes.
CONCLUSIONS: The disorder causes a shortened physeal hypertrophic zone but 
normal ultrastructure of cn/cn chondrocytes points to abnormality primarily 
affecting the hypertrophic zone rather than a structural cell or matrix 
synthesis problem.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2474-15-347
PMCID: PMC4219045
PMID: 25319082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]