---
reference_id: "PMID:27166610"
title: "Protective Role of HLA-DRB1*13:02 against Microscopic Polyangiitis and MPO-ANCA-Positive Vasculitides in a Japanese Population: A Case-Control Study."
authors:
- Kawasaki A
- Hasebe N
- Hidaka M
- Hirano F
- Sada KE
- Kobayashi S
- Yamada H
- Furukawa H
- Yamagata K
- Sumida T
- Miyasaka N
- Tohma S
- Ozaki S
- Matsuo S
- Hashimoto H
- Makino H
- Arimura Y
- Harigai M
- Tsuchiya N
journal: PLoS One
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0154393
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Alleles
- "Anti-Neutrophil Cytoplasmic Antibody-Associated Vasculitis/blood, genetics, immunology, pathology"
- "Antibodies, Antineutrophil Cytoplasmic/blood"
- Case-Control Studies
- Female
- Gene Expression
- Gene Frequency
- "HLA-DRB1 Chains/genetics, immunology"
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Japan
- Linkage Disequilibrium
- Male
- "Microscopic Polyangiitis/blood, genetics, immunology, pathology"
- Middle Aged
- Odds Ratio
- Peroxidase/blood
- Protective Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Protective Role of HLA-DRB1*13:02 against Microscopic Polyangiitis and MPO-ANCA-Positive Vasculitides in a Japanese Population: A Case-Control Study.
**Authors:** Kawasaki A, Hasebe N, Hidaka M, Hirano F, Sada KE, Kobayashi S, Yamada H, Furukawa H, Yamagata K, Sumida T, Miyasaka N, Tohma S, Ozaki S, Matsuo S, Hashimoto H, Makino H, Arimura Y, Harigai M, Tsuchiya N
**Journal:** PLoS One (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0154393](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0154393)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2016 May 11;11(5):e0154393. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0154393. 
eCollection 2016.

Protective Role of HLA-DRB1*13:02 against Microscopic Polyangiitis and 
MPO-ANCA-Positive Vasculitides in a Japanese Population: A Case-Control Study.

Kawasaki A(1)(2)(3), Hasebe N(1)(2), Hidaka M(1)(3), Hirano F(4)(5), Sada KE(6), 
Kobayashi S(7), Yamada H(8), Furukawa H(1)(2)(3)(9), Yamagata K(10), Sumida 
T(11), Miyasaka N(5), Tohma S(9), Ozaki S(8), Matsuo S(12), Hashimoto H(13), 
Makino H(14), Arimura Y(15), Harigai M(4)(16), Tsuchiya N(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Genetic Epidemiology Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.
(2)Doctoral Program in Biomedical Sciences, Graduate School of Comprehensive 
Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.
(3)Master's Program in Medical Sciences, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human 
Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.
(4)Department of Pharmacovigilance, Graduate School of Medical and Dental 
Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Rheumatology, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Nephrology, Rheumatology, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Okayama 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Okayama, Japan.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Juntendo University Koshigaya Hospital, 
Koshigaya, Japan.
(8)Department of Internal Medicine, St. Marianna University School of Medicine, 
Kawasaki, Japan.
(9)Clinical Research Center for Allergy and Rheumatology, Sagamihara Hospital, 
National Hospital Organization, Sagamihara, Japan.
(10)Department of Nephrology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 
Tsukuba, Japan.
(11)Department of Internal Medicine (Rheumatology), Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.
(12)Department of Nephrology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Nagoya, Japan.
(13)Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(14)Okayama University Hospital, Okayama, Japan.
(15)First Department of Internal Medicine, Kyorin University School of Medicine, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(16)Institute of Rheumatology, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.

Among antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitides (AAV), 
granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA) and proteinase 3-ANCA-positive AAV 
(PR3-AAV) are prevalent in European populations, while microscopic polyangiitis 
(MPA) and myeloperoxidase-ANCA-positive AAV (MPO-AAV) are predominant in the 
Japanese. We previously demonstrated association of DRB1*09:01-DQB1*03:03 
haplotype, a haplotype common in East Asians but rare in the European 
populations, with MPA/MPO-AAV, suggesting that a population difference in 
HLA-class II plays a role in the epidemiology of this disease. To gain further 
insights, we increased the sample size and performed an extended association 
study of DRB1 and DPB1 with AAV subsets in 468 Japanese patients with AAV 
classified according to the European Medicines Agency algorithm (MPA: 285, GPA: 
92, eosinophilic GPA [EGPA]: 56, unclassifiable: 35) and 596 healthy controls. 
Among these patients, 377 were positive for MPO-ANCA and 62 for PR3-ANCA. The 
significance level was set at α = 3.3x10-4 by applying Bonferroni correction. 
The association of DRB1*09:01 with MPO-AAV was confirmed (allele model, P = 
2.1x10-4, odds ratio [OR] = 1.57). Protective association of DRB1*13:02 was 
detected against MPO-AAV (allele model, P = 2.3x10-5, OR = 0.42) and MPA 
(dominant model, P = 2.7x10-4, OR = 0.43). A trend toward increased frequency of 
DPB1*04:01, the risk allele for GPA in European populations, was observed among 
Japanese patients with PR3-AAV when conditioned on DRB1*13:02 (Padjusted = 
0.0021, ORadjusted = 3.48). In contrast, the frequency of DPB1*04:01 was 
decreased among Japanese patients with MPO-AAV, and this effect lost 
significance when conditioned on DRB1*13:02 (Padjusted = 0.16), suggesting that 
DRB1*13:02 or other allele(s) in linkage disequilibrium may be responsible for 
the protection. The differential association of DPB1*04:01 with PR3-AAV and 
MPO-AAV and difference in DPB1*04:01 allele frequencies between populations 
supported the hypothesis that the HLA-class II population difference may account 
in part for these epidemiologic characteristics. Furthermore, taken together 
with our previous observations, the haplotype carrying DRB1*13:02 was suggested 
to be a shared protective factor against multiple autoimmune diseases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0154393
PMCID: PMC4868057
PMID: 27166610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors of this 
manuscript read the journal's policy and have the following competing interests: 
AK has received a research grant from SENSHIN Medical Research Foundation, 
supported by an endowment from Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma Corporation, a research 
grant from the Takeda Science Foundation, supported by an endowment from Takeda 
Pharmaceutical Company, and a research grant from Japan Rheumatism Foundation. 
M. Harigai has received research grants from Abbvie Japan Co., Ltd., Astellas 
Pharma Inc., Bristol Myers Squibb K.K., Chugai Pharmaceutical Co.,Ltd., Eisai 
Co., Ltd., Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma Co., Ono Pharmaceuticals, Pfizer Japan Inc., 
Sanofi-Aventis KK., Santen Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Takeda Pharmaceutical Co., 
Ltd., Teijin Pharma Limited, and UCB Japan. NT has received a research grant 
from SENSHIN Medical Research Foundation, supported by an endowment from 
Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma Corporation, research grants from Japan College of 
Rheumatology and Japan Allergy Foundation, received speaker’s honoraria from 
Eisai Co., Ltd., Daiichi Sankyo Co., Ltd. and Asahi Kasei Corporation, and 
payment for a manuscript from Torii Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. This does not alter 
the authors’ adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials. The 
other authors declare that they have no competing interests.