---
reference_id: "PMID:34597445"
title: Development of individuals with thanatophoric dysplasia surviving beyond infancy.
authors:
- Ushioda M
- Sawai H
- Numabe H
- Nishimura G
- Shibahara H
journal: Pediatr Int
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/ped.15007
keywords:
- Child
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Adult
- Humans
- Infant
- Adolescent
- "Child, Preschool"
- Young Adult
- Thanatophoric Dysplasia
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3/deficiency"
- Acanthosis Nigricans
- Surveys and Questionnaires
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Development of individuals with thanatophoric dysplasia surviving beyond infancy.
**Authors:** Ushioda M, Sawai H, Numabe H, Nishimura G, Shibahara H
**Journal:** Pediatr Int (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ped.15007](https://doi.org/10.1111/ped.15007)

## Content

1. Pediatr Int. 2022 Jan;64(1):e15007. doi: 10.1111/ped.15007.

Development of individuals with thanatophoric dysplasia surviving beyond 
infancy.

Ushioda M(1), Sawai H(1)(2), Numabe H(3), Nishimura G(4), Shibahara H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hyogo College of Medicine, 
Nishinomiya-shi, Japan.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya-shi, 
Japan.
(3)Clinical Genetics Center, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Intractable Disease Center, Saitama Medical University Hospital, Moroyama, 
Japan.

BACKGROUND: This study aimed to analyze the physical and psychosocial 
development of long-term survivors (age >1 year) of thanatophoric dysplasia 
(TD).
METHODS: The participants were 20 long-term survivors recruited from a cohort 
obtained through a nationwide survey for TD conducted across 147 pediatric 
departments in Japan between 2012 and 2016. Their guardians consented to 
participate in this study. Medical and psychosocial information was collected 
through questionnaires and interviews with primary physicians and guardians.
RESULTS: The participants were 1.2-27.8 years old, and all showed marked growth 
deficiency. The mean length at birth was 36 cm (-3.4 SD to -7.9 SD). The adult 
height (age >16 years) was <-15.2 SD. All individuals showed severely delayed 
psychomotor development. The highest level of psychosocial development was 
equivalent to that at 2 years of age. Skin disorders (acanthosis nigricans and 
seborrheic keratoses) were common. Eleven subjects had been hospitalized or 
institutionalized consistently after birth, and nine had been moved to home 
care, and four were exclusively orally fed. All individuals required assisted 
ventilation.
CONCLUSIONS: Long-term survival of TD individuals is common. Some individuals 
enjoy home-based lives; however, they are severely psychosocially and physically 
disabled and require meticulous respiratory and nutritional support.

© 2021 The Authors. Pediatrics International published by John Wiley & Sons 
Australia, Ltd on behalf of Japan Pediatric Society.

DOI: 10.1111/ped.15007
PMCID: PMC9305791
PMID: 34597445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]