---
reference_id: "PMID:36843728"
title: "From Temporal Cell Arteritis to Giant Cell Aortitis Presenting as a Constitutional Syndrome: A Case Report."
authors:
- Lopes M
- Rocha M
- Fonseca M
- Monteiro A
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.34181
content_type: abstract_only
---

# From Temporal Cell Arteritis to Giant Cell Aortitis Presenting as a Constitutional Syndrome: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Lopes M, Rocha M, Fonseca M, Monteiro A
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.34181](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.34181)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Jan 25;15(1):e34181. doi: 10.7759/cureus.34181. eCollection 2023 
Jan.

From Temporal Cell Arteritis to Giant Cell Aortitis Presenting as a 
Constitutional Syndrome: A Case Report.

Lopes M(1), Rocha M(1), Fonseca M(2), Monteiro A(1).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Hospital Professor Doutor Fernando Fonseca, Amadora, PRT.
(2)Internal Medicine, Hospital Professor Doutor Fernando Fonseca, Lisboa, PRT.

Giant cell arteritis (GCA) is the most common form of systemic vasculitis in 
adults, especially in patients over the age of 50. It manifests most commonly 
with an intense headache and visual symptoms. Although constitutional symptoms 
are also frequent in GCA, these can be dominant in 15% of patients at first 
presentation and 20% of patients when relapsing. Treatment with high-dose 
steroids should be initiated as soon as possible to rapidly control the 
inflammatory symptoms and prevent ischemic complications, the most feared being 
blindness from anterior ischemic optic neuropathy. We present a case of a 
72-year-old man who presented to the emergency department with a right temporal 
headache with retroocular radiation associated with scalp hyperesthesia, without 
any visual symptoms. The patient also reported low-grade fever, night sweats, 
anorexia, and weight loss over the last two months. The physical exam revealed a 
tortuous and indurated right superficial temporal artery, which was tender to 
palpation. The ophthalmological examination was normal. The erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) were elevated, and he also 
had inflammatory anemia with a hemoglobin of 11.7 g/L. Due to this clinical 
presentation as well as the elevation of inflammatory markers, the diagnosis of 
temporal arteritis was suspected, and the patient was started on prednisolone (1 
mg/kg). A right temporal artery biopsy was performed on the first week after the 
initiation of corticotherapy and was negative. After treatment initiation, there 
was a remission of symptoms accompanied by a decrease and normalization of 
inflammatory markers. However, after steroid tapering, there was a reappearance 
of constitutional symptoms but without any other organ-specific symptoms, such 
as headache, visual loss, arthralgia, or other. The corticosteroid dose was 
increased to the initial dosage, but there was no improvement in the symptoms 
this time. After the exclusion of other causes of the constitutional syndrome, a 
positron-emission tomography (PET) scan was performed, which showed a grade 2 
aortitis. The diagnosis of giant cell aortitis was assumed, and given the lack 
of clinical response to corticotherapy, tocilizumab was initiated with a 
resolution of constitutional symptoms as well as a normalization of inflammatory 
markers. In conclusion, we report a case of temporal cell arteritis that further 
progressed to aortitis manifesting solely with constitutional symptoms. 
Furthermore, there was no optimal response to corticotherapy and no improvement 
with tocilizumab, therefore making this a case with a unique and infrequent 
clinical course. GCA is characterized by a wide variety of symptoms and organ 
involvement, and although it most frequently affects temporal arteries, it can 
be associated with aortic involvement that can cause life-threatening structural 
complications, highlighting the need for a high suspicion index for this 
condition.

Copyright © 2023, Lopes et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.34181
PMCID: PMC9951122
PMID: 36843728

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.