---
reference_id: "PMID:37390946"
title: "Clinical, biochemical characteristics and genotype-phenotype analysis of congenital hypothyroidism diagnosed by newborn screening in China."
authors:
- Zhang T
- Shen Y
- Xu Y
- Wu D
- Chen C
- Yang R
journal: Clin Chim Acta
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2023.117459
keywords:
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Congenital Hypothyroidism/diagnosis, genetics"
- Neonatal Screening
- Dual Oxidases/genetics
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Genotype
- Thyrotropin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical, biochemical characteristics and genotype-phenotype analysis of congenital hypothyroidism diagnosed by newborn screening in China.
**Authors:** Zhang T, Shen Y, Xu Y, Wu D, Chen C, Yang R
**Journal:** Clin Chim Acta (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cca.2023.117459](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cca.2023.117459)

## Content

1. Clin Chim Acta. 2023 Jul 1;547:117459. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2023.117459. Epub
2023  Jun 28.

Clinical, biochemical characteristics and genotype-phenotype analysis of 
congenital hypothyroidism diagnosed by newborn screening in China.

Zhang T(1), Shen Y(1), Xu Y(1), Wu D(1), Chen C(1), Yang R(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Metabolism, Children's Hospital, Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Child 
Health, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Genetics and Metabolism, Children's Hospital, Zhejiang 
University School of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Child 
Health, Hangzhou, China. Electronic address: chsczx@zju.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Congenital hypothyroidism (CH) is the most common neonatal endocrine 
disorder worldwide. However, the underlying etiology remains unclear in most 
patients.
METHODS: The newborn screening was performed for TSH in dried blood spots. Serum 
TSH, T3, T4, free T3(FT3) and free T4 (FT4) were detected for the recalled 
children. High-throughput sequencing were applied to detect 29 known CH genes. 
The statistical analyses were performed to analyze the differences between 
biochemical data, thyroid volume, clinical prognosis and genetic results for 97 
patients who had one or more variants in CH related genes.
RESULTS: DUOX2 gene had the highest variant rate, followed by TG, TPO and TSHR 
gene. The "DUOX2 biallelic variants" group was associated with "Goiter", while 
"DUOX2 monoallelic variants" group was associated with "Agenesis". In addition, 
the TSH levels and initial L-T4 dose were significantly higher in "TPO biallelic 
variants" group than those in "DUOX2 and TSHR biallelic variants" groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study showed dyshormonogenesis (DH) might be the leading 
pathophysiology of CH in Chinese populations. DUOX2 gene mostly caused goiter, 
but also could be associated with hypoplasia. TPO might play a more 
irreplaceable role than DUOX2. The digenic variants combination indicated the 
complexity of genetic etiology in CH.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2023.117459
PMID: 37390946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.