---
reference_id: "PMID:17065456"
title: Alexander disease-associated glial fibrillary acidic protein mutations in mice induce Rosenthal fiber formation and a white matter stress response.
authors:
- Hagemann TL
- Connor JX
- Messing A
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3260-06.2006
keywords:
- "Alexander Disease/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Animals
- Female
- "Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Nerve Fibers, Myelinated/pathology, physiology"
- "Stress, Physiological/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "alpha-Crystallin B Chain/biosynthesis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alexander disease-associated glial fibrillary acidic protein mutations in mice induce Rosenthal fiber formation and a white matter stress response.
**Authors:** Hagemann TL, Connor JX, Messing A
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3260-06.2006](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3260-06.2006)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2006 Oct 25;26(43):11162-73. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3260-06.2006.

Alexander disease-associated glial fibrillary acidic protein mutations in mice 
induce Rosenthal fiber formation and a white matter stress response.

Hagemann TL(1), Connor JX, Messing A.

Author information:
(1)Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53705, USA. 
hagemann@waisman.wisc.edu

Mutations in the gene for the astrocyte specific intermediate filament, glial 
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), cause the rare leukodystrophy Alexander 
disease (AxD). To study the pathology of this primary astrocyte defect, we have 
generated knock-in mice with missense mutations homologous to those found in 
humans. In this report, we show that mice with GFAP-R76H and -R236H mutations 
develop Rosenthal fibers, the hallmark protein aggregates observed in astrocytes 
in AxD, in the hippocampus, corpus callosum, olfactory bulbs, subpial, and 
periventricular regions. Astrocytes in these areas appear reactive and total 
GFAP expression is elevated. Although general white matter architecture and 
myelination appear normal, when crossed with an antioxidant response element 
reporter line, the mutant mice show a distinct pattern of reporter-gene 
induction that is especially prominent in the corpus callosum, and histochemical 
staining reveals accumulation of iron in the same region. The mutant mice have a 
normal lifespan and show no overt behavioral defects, but are more susceptible 
to kainate-induced seizures. Although these mice demonstrate increased GFAP 
expression by themselves, further elevation of GFAP via crosses to GFAP 
transgenic animals leads to a shift in GFAP solubility, an increased stress 
response, and ultimately death. The mice do not display the full spectrum of 
pathology observed in human infantile AxD, but may more closely resemble the 
adult form of the disease. These studies provide formal proof linking GFAP 
mutations with Rosenthal fibers and oxidative stress, and correlate gliosis and 
GFAP protein levels to the severity of the disease.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3260-06.2006
PMCID: PMC6674663
PMID: 17065456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]