---
reference_id: PMID:16385447
title: Mutation of the LUNATIC FRINGE gene in humans causes spondylocostal dysostosis with a severe vertebral phenotype.
authors:
- Sparrow DB
- Chapman G
- Wouters MA
- Whittock NV
- Ellard S
- Fatkin D
- Turnpenny PD
- Kusumi K
- Sillence D
- Dunwoodie SL
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1086/498879
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- "Blotting, Western"
- Cell Line
- DNA Primers
- Dysostoses/genetics
- "Genes, Recessive"
- "Glycosyltransferases/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- "Models, Molecular"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- N-Acetylglucosaminyltransferases/metabolism
- Neural Tube Defects/genetics
- "Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length"
- "Receptors, Notch/metabolism"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Signal Transduction/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation of the LUNATIC FRINGE gene in humans causes spondylocostal dysostosis with a severe vertebral phenotype.
**Authors:** Sparrow DB, Chapman G, Wouters MA, Whittock NV, Ellard S, Fatkin D, Turnpenny PD, Kusumi K, Sillence D, Dunwoodie SL
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1086/498879](https://doi.org/10.1086/498879)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Jan;78(1):28-37. doi: 10.1086/498879. Epub 2005 Nov 16.

Mutation of the LUNATIC FRINGE gene in humans causes spondylocostal dysostosis 
with a severe vertebral phenotype.

Sparrow DB(1), Chapman G, Wouters MA, Whittock NV, Ellard S, Fatkin D, Turnpenny 
PD, Kusumi K, Sillence D, Dunwoodie SL.

Author information:
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, 
Sydney, NSW, Australia.

The spondylocostal dysostoses (SCDs) are a heterogeneous group of vertebral 
malsegmentation disorders that arise during embryonic development by a 
disruption of somitogenesis. Previously, we had identified two genes that cause 
a subset of autosomal recessive forms of this disease: DLL3 (SCD1) and MESP2 
(SCD2). These genes are important components of the Notch signaling pathway, 
which has multiple roles in development and disease. Here, we have used a 
candidate-gene approach to identify a mutation in a third Notch pathway gene, 
LUNATIC FRINGE (LFNG), in a family with autosomal recessive SCD. LFNG encodes a 
glycosyltransferase that modifies the Notch family of cell-surface receptors, a 
key step in the regulation of this signaling pathway. A missense mutation was 
identified in a highly conserved phenylalanine close to the active site of the 
enzyme. Functional analysis revealed that the mutant LFNG was not localized to 
the correct compartment of the cell, was unable to modulate Notch signaling in a 
cell-based assay, and was enzymatically inactive. This represents the first 
known mutation in the human LFNG gene and reinforces the hypothesis that proper 
regulation of the Notch signaling pathway is an absolute requirement for the 
correct patterning of the axial skeleton.

DOI: 10.1086/498879
PMCID: PMC1380221
PMID: 16385447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]