---
reference_id: "PMID:28235212"
title: "[Neuromyelitis optica]."
authors:
- Pache F
- Wildemann B
- Paul F
- Jarius S
journal: Fortschr Neurol Psychiatr
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1055/s-0042-124186
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- "Neuromyelitis Optica/diagnostic imaging, epidemiology, pathology, therapy"
- Steroids/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Neuromyelitis optica].
**Authors:** Pache F, Wildemann B, Paul F, Jarius S
**Journal:** Fortschr Neurol Psychiatr (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0042-124186](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0042-124186)

## Content

1. Fortschr Neurol Psychiatr. 2017 Feb;85(2):100-114. doi: 10.1055/s-0042-124186.
 Epub 2017 Feb 24.

[Neuromyelitis optica].

[Article in German]

Pache F(1), Wildemann B(2), Paul F(1), Jarius S(2).

Author information:
(1)NeuroCure Clinical Research Center und Klinisches und Experimentelles 
Forschungszentrum für Multiple Sklerose, Klinik für Neurologie, Charité - 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Deutschland.
(2)AG Molekulare Neuroimmunologie, Neurologische Klinik, Universitätsklinikum 
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Deutschland.

Neuromyelitis optica (NMO) is an autoimmune disorder of the central nervous 
system (CNS), that predominantly affects the spinal cord and optic nerves. The 
neuropathologic hallmarks comprise deposits of antibodies and complement as well 
as loss of astrocytes, secondary degeneration of oligodendrocytes and neurons, 
and necrotic lesions with infiltration of neutrophilic and eosinophilic 
granulocytes. Pathognomonic serum autoantibodies against aquaporin-4 (AQP4-IgG, 
also termed NMO-IgG) are detectable in around 80 % of NMO patients and help to 
distinguish this rare entity from multiple sclerosis. The target antigen of 
NMO-IgG, the water channel protein AQP4, is ubiquitously expressed within the 
CNS and, as a component of the blood-brain barrier, highly concentrated in the 
endfeet of astrocytes. New international consensus criteria for NMO spectrum 
disorders, published in 2015, allow earlier diagnosis. Besides the two index 
manifestations, optic neuritis and transverse myelitis, involvement of the 
brainstem and diencephalon is relatively common in NMO. Inflammatory lesions of 
the area postrema typically cause intractable nausea and vomiting and/or 
hiccups. NMO mostly follows a relapsing course, especially in AQP4-IgG-positive 
cases. The treatment of acute exacerbations comprises intravenous 
methylprednisolone pulses and/or plasma exchange, and prevention of attacks 
requires long-term therapy with immunosuppressants and/or B-cell-depleting 
monoclonal antibodies.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0042-124186
PMID: 28235212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]