---
reference_id: "PMID:29740699"
title: "De novo mutations in MED13, a component of the Mediator complex, are associated with a novel neurodevelopmental disorder."
authors:
- Snijders Blok L
- Hiatt SM
- Bowling KM
- Prokop JW
- Engel KL
- Cochran JN
- Bebin EM
- Bijlsma EK
- Ruivenkamp CAL
- Terhal P
- Simon MEH
- Smith R
- Hurst JA
- DDD study
- McLaughlin H
- Person R
- Crunk A
- Wangler MF
- Streff H
- Symonds JD
- Zuberi SM
- Elliott KS
- Sanders VR
- Masunga A
- Hopkin RJ
- Dubbs HA
- Ortiz-Gonzalez XR
- Pfundt R
- Brunner HG
- Fisher SE
- Kleefstra T
- Cooper GM
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-018-1887-y
keywords:
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Cyclin-Dependent Kinase 8/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Mediator Complex/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Neurodevelopmental Disorders/genetics, metabolism"
- Sequence Deletion
- "Transcription Initiation, Genetic"
- Ubiquitination/genetics
- United Kingdom
content_type: abstract_only
---

# De novo mutations in MED13, a component of the Mediator complex, are associated with a novel neurodevelopmental disorder.
**Authors:** Snijders Blok L, Hiatt SM, Bowling KM, Prokop JW, Engel KL, Cochran JN, Bebin EM, Bijlsma EK, Ruivenkamp CAL, Terhal P, Simon MEH, Smith R, Hurst JA, DDD study, McLaughlin H, Person R, Crunk A, Wangler MF, Streff H, Symonds JD, Zuberi SM, Elliott KS, Sanders VR, Masunga A, Hopkin RJ, Dubbs HA, Ortiz-Gonzalez XR, Pfundt R, Brunner HG, Fisher SE, Kleefstra T, Cooper GM
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-018-1887-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-018-1887-y)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2018 May;137(5):375-388. doi: 10.1007/s00439-018-1887-y. Epub 2018 
May 8.

De novo mutations in MED13, a component of the Mediator complex, are associated 
with a novel neurodevelopmental disorder.

Snijders Blok L(1)(2)(3), Hiatt SM(4), Bowling KM(4), Prokop JW(4), Engel KL(4), 
Cochran JN(4), Bebin EM(5), Bijlsma EK(6), Ruivenkamp CAL(6), Terhal P(7), Simon 
MEH(7), Smith R(8), Hurst JA(9); DDD study; McLaughlin H(10), Person R(10), 
Crunk A(10), Wangler MF(11), Streff H(11), Symonds JD(12), Zuberi SM(12), 
Elliott KS(13), Sanders VR(14), Masunga A(15), Hopkin RJ(15)(16), Dubbs HA(17), 
Ortiz-Gonzalez XR(17), Pfundt R(1), Brunner HG(1)(3)(18), Fisher SE(2)(3), 
Kleefstra T(19)(20), Cooper GM(21).

Author information:
(1)Human Genetics Department, Radboud University Medical Center, PO Box 9101, 
6500 HB, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.
(4)HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, 601 Genome Way, Huntsville, AL, 
35806, USA.
(5)University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA.
(6)Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(8)Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Maine Medical Center, 
Portland, ME, USA.
(9)Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London, UK.
(10)GeneDx, 207 Perry Parkway, Gaithersburg, MD, 20877, USA.
(11)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(12)Paediatric Neurosciences Research Group, University of Glasgow and Royal 
Hospital for Children, Glasgow, G51 4TF, UK.
(13)Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(14)Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(15)Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, University of Cincinnati, 
Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(17)Division of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA.
(18)Department of Clinical Genetics, GROW School for Oncology and Developmental 
Biology, Maastricht UMC, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(19)Human Genetics Department, Radboud University Medical Center, PO Box 9101, 
6500 HB, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. tjitske.kleefstra@radboudumc.nl.
(20)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands. tjitske.kleefstra@radboudumc.nl.
(21)HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, 601 Genome Way, Huntsville, AL, 
35806, USA. gcooper@hudsonalpha.org.

Many genetic causes of developmental delay and/or intellectual disability 
(DD/ID) are extremely rare, and robust discovery of these requires both 
large-scale DNA sequencing and data sharing. Here we describe a GeneMatcher 
collaboration which led to a cohort of 13 affected individuals harboring 
protein-altering variants, 11 of which are de novo, in MED13; the only inherited 
variant was transmitted to an affected child from an affected mother. All 
patients had intellectual disability and/or developmental delays, including 
speech delays or disorders. Other features that were reported in two or more 
patients include autism spectrum disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity 
disorder, optic nerve abnormalities, Duane anomaly, hypotonia, mild congenital 
heart abnormalities, and dysmorphisms. Six affected individuals had mutations 
that are predicted to truncate the MED13 protein, six had missense mutations, 
and one had an in-frame-deletion of one amino acid. Out of the seven 
non-truncating mutations, six clustered in two specific locations of the MED13 
protein: an N-terminal and C-terminal region. The four N-terminal clustering 
mutations affect two adjacent amino acids that are known to be involved in MED13 
ubiquitination and degradation, p.Thr326 and p.Pro327. MED13 is a component of 
the CDK8-kinase module that can reversibly bind Mediator, a multi-protein 
complex that is required for Polymerase II transcription initiation. Mutations 
in several other genes encoding subunits of Mediator have been previously shown 
to associate with DD/ID, including MED13L, a paralog of MED13. Thus, our 
findings add MED13 to the group of CDK8-kinase module-associated disease genes.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-018-1887-y
PMCID: PMC5973976
PMID: 29740699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: H.M., R.P. and A.C. are 
employees of GeneDx, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of OPKO Health, Inc. The 
other authors declare no conflict of interest. RESEARCH INVOLVING HUMAN 
PARTICIPANTS: All procedures performed in studies involving human participants 
were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institutional and/or 
national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki Declaration and its later 
amendments or comparable ethical standards. INFORMED CONSENT: Informed consent 
was obtained from all individual participants included in the study. Additional 
informed consent was obtained from all individual participants for whom 
identifying information is included in this article.