---
reference_id: "PMID:11197043"
title: Chronic hepatitis B virus infection in Asian countries.
authors:
- Merican I
- Guan R
- Amarapuka D
- Alexander MJ
- Chutaputti A
- Chien RN
- Hasnian SS
- Leung N
- Lesmana L
- Phiet PH
- Sjalfoellah Noer HM
- Sollano J
- Sun HS
- Xu DZ
journal: J Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1046/j.1440-1746.2000.0150121356.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic hepatitis B virus infection in Asian countries.
**Authors:** Merican I, Guan R, Amarapuka D, Alexander MJ, Chutaputti A, Chien RN, Hasnian SS, Leung N, Lesmana L, Phiet PH, Sjalfoellah Noer HM, Sollano J, Sun HS, Xu DZ
**Journal:** J Gastroenterol Hepatol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1440-1746.2000.0150121356.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1440-1746.2000.0150121356.x)

## Content

1. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2000 Dec;15(12):1356-61. doi: 
10.1046/j.1440-1746.2000.0150121356.x.

Chronic hepatitis B virus infection in Asian countries.

Merican I(1), Guan R, Amarapuka D, Alexander MJ, Chutaputti A, Chien RN, Hasnian 
SS, Leung N, Lesmana L, Phiet PH, Sjalfoellah Noer HM, Sollano J, Sun HS, Xu DZ.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Research, Jalan Pahang, 50588, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

Of the estimated 50 million new cases of hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection 
diagnosed annually, 5-10% of adults and up to 90% of infants will become 
chronically infected, 75% of these in Asia where hepatitis B is the leading 
cause of chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In 
Indonesia, 4.6% of the population was positive for HBsAg in 1994 and of these, 
21% were positive for HBeAg and 73% for anti-HBe; 44% and 45% of Indonesian 
patients with cirrhosis and HCC, respectively, were HBsAg positive. In the 
Philippines, there appear to be two types of age-specific HBsAg prevalence, 
suggesting different modes of transmission. In Thailand, 8-10% of males and 6-8% 
of females are HBsAg positive, with HBsAg also found in 30% of patients with 
cirrhosis and 50-75% of those with HCC. In Taiwan, 75-80% of patients with 
chronic liver disease are HBsAg positive, and HBsAg is found in 34% and 72% of 
patients with cirrhosis and HCC, respectively. In China, 73% of patients with 
chronic hepatitis and 78% and 71% of those with cirrhosis and HCC, respectively, 
are HBsAg positive. In Singapore, the prevalence of HBsAg has dropped since the 
introduction of HBV vaccination and the HBsAg seroprevalence of unvaccinated 
individuals over 5 years of age is 4.5%. In Malaysia, 5.24% of healthy 
volunteers, with a mean age of 34 years, were positive for HBsAg in 1997. In the 
highly endemic countries in Asia, the majority of infections are contracted 
postnatally or perinatally. Three phases of chronic HBV infection are 
recognized: phase 1 patients are HBeAg positive with high levels of virus in the 
serum and minimal hepatic inflammation; phase 2 patients have intermittent or 
continuous hepatitis of varying degrees of severity; phase 3 is the inactive 
phase during which viral concentrations are low and there is minimal 
inflammatory activity in the liver. In general, patients who clear HBeAg have a 
better prognosis than patients who remain HBeAg-positive for prolonged periods 
of time. The outcome after anti-HBe seroconversion depends on the degree of 
pre-existing liver damage and any subsequent HBV reactivation. Without 
pre-existing cirrhosis, there may be only slight fibrosis or mild chronic 
hepatitis, but with pre-existing cirrhosis, further complications may ensue. 
HBsAg-negative chronic hepatitis B is a phase of chronic HBV infection during 
which a mutation arises resulting in the inability of the virus to produce 
HBeAg. Such patients tend to have more severe liver disease and run a more 
rapidly progressive course. The annual probability of developing cirrhosis 
varies from 0.1 to 1.0% depending on the duration of HBV replication, the 
severity of disease and the presence of concomitant infections or drugs. The 
annual incidence of hepatic decompensation in HBV-related cirrhosis varies from 
2 to 10% and in these patients the 5-year survival rate drops dramatically to 
14-35%. The annual risk of developing HCC in patients with cirrhosis varies 
between 1 and 6%; the overall reported annual detection rate of HCC in 
surveillance studies, which included individuals with chronic hepatitis B and 
cirrhosis, is 0.8-4.1%. Chronic hepatitis B is not a static disease and the 
natural history of the disease is affected by both viral and host factors. The 
prognosis is poor with decompensated cirrhosis and effective treatment options 
are limited. Prevention of HBV infection thorough vaccination is still, 
therefore, the best strategy for decreasing the incidence of hepatitis 
B-associated cirrhosis and HCC.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1440-1746.2000.0150121356.x
PMID: 11197043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]