---
reference_id: "PMID:38723935"
title: The modern management of uterine fibroids-related abnormal uterine bleeding.
authors:
- Vannuccini S
- Petraglia F
- Carmona F
- Calaf J
- Chapron C
journal: Fertil Steril
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2024.04.041
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Leiomyoma/therapy, complications, diagnosis"
- "Uterine Neoplasms/therapy, complications, diagnosis"
- "Uterine Hemorrhage/therapy, etiology, diagnosis"
- Treatment Outcome
- Uterine Myomectomy
- Uterine Artery Embolization
- Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The modern management of uterine fibroids-related abnormal uterine bleeding.
**Authors:** Vannuccini S, Petraglia F, Carmona F, Calaf J, Chapron C
**Journal:** Fertil Steril (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.fertnstert.2024.04.041](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fertnstert.2024.04.041)

## Content

1. Fertil Steril. 2024 Jul;122(1):20-30. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2024.04.041. 
Epub 2024 May 8.

The modern management of uterine fibroids-related abnormal uterine bleeding.

Vannuccini S(1), Petraglia F(2), Carmona F(3), Calaf J(4), Chapron C(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Department of Experimental, Clinical, 
and Biomedical Sciences, University of Florence, Careggi University Hospital, 
Florence, Italy. Electronic address: silvia.vannuccini@unifi.it.
(2)Division of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Department of Experimental, Clinical, 
and Biomedical Sciences, University of Florence, Careggi University Hospital, 
Florence, Italy.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hospital Clínic of Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Hospital Sant Pau, Autonomous University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Département de Gynécologie, Obstétrique et Médecine de la Reproduction, 
Faculté de Santé, Faculté de Médicine Paris Centre, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire (CHU), Université Paris-Cité, Paris, France.

Uterine fibroids (UFs) are the most common female benign pelvic tumors, 
affecting >60% of patients aged 30-44 years. Uterine fibroids are asymptomatic 
in a large percentage of cases and may be identified incidentally using a 
transvaginal ultrasound or a magnetic resonance imaging scan. However, in 
approximately 30% of cases, UFs affect the quality of life and women's health, 
with abnormal uterine bleeding and heavy menstrual bleeding being the most 
common complaints, along with iron deficiency (ID) and ID anemia. Medical 
treatments used for UFs-related abnormal uterine bleeding include symptomatic 
agents, such as nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and tranexamic acid, and 
hormonal therapies, including combined oral contraceptives, 
gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists or antagonists, levonorgestrel 
intrauterine systems, selective progesterone receptor modulators, and aromatase 
inhibitors. Nevertheless, few drugs are approved specifically for UF treatment, 
and most of them manage the symptoms. Surgical options include fertility-sparing 
treatments, such as myomectomy, or nonconservative options, such as 
hysterectomy, especially in perimenopausal women who are not responding to any 
treatment. Radiologic interventions are also available: uterine artery 
embolization, high-intensity focused ultrasound or magnetic resonance-guided 
focused ultrasound, and radiofrequency ablation. Furthermore, the management of 
ID and ID anemia, as a consequence of acute and chronic bleeding, should be 
taken into account with the use of iron replacement therapy both during medical 
treatment and before and after a surgical procedure. In the case of symptomatic 
UFs, the location, size, multiple UFs, or coexistent adenomyosis should guide 
the choice with a shared decision-making process, considering long- and 
short-term treatment goals expected by the patient, including pregnancy desire 
or wish to preserve the uterus independently of reproductive goals.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2024.04.041
PMID: 38723935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests S.V. reports honoraria 
for lectures from Gedeon Richter, unrelated to the present manuscript. F.P. has 
nothing to disclose. F.C. has nothing to disclose. J.C. has nothing to disclose. 
C.C. has nothing to disclose.