---
reference_id: "PMID:25433843"
title: Evidence for the existence of Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS) with and without abdominal discomfort (irritable bowel) syndrome.
authors:
- Maes M
- Leunis JC
- Geffard M
- Berk M
journal: Neuro Endocrinol Lett
year: '2014'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evidence for the existence of Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS) with and without abdominal discomfort (irritable bowel) syndrome.
**Authors:** Maes M, Leunis JC, Geffard M, Berk M
**Journal:** Neuro Endocrinol Lett (2014)

## Content

1. Neuro Endocrinol Lett. 2014;35(6):445-53.

Evidence for the existence of Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome 
(ME/CFS) with and without abdominal discomfort (irritable bowel) syndrome.

Maes M(1), Leunis JC(2), Geffard M(3), Berk M(4).

Author information:
(1)Maes Clinics @ TRIA, Bangkok, Thailand, Thailand.
(2)Laboratory Ategis, Wavre, Belgium.
(3)Association Institute for Research and Development in Human Pathology and 
Therapy, Talence, France.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia.

BACKGROUND: There is evidence that Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue 
Syndrome (ME/CFS) is accompanied by gastro-intestinal symptoms; and IgA and IgM 
responses directed against lipopolysaccharides (LPS) of commensal bacteria, 
indicating bacterial translocation.
METHODS: This study was carried out to examine gastro-intestinal symptoms in 
subjects with ME/CFS versus those with chronic fatigue (CF). The two groups were 
dissected by dichotomizing those fulfilling and not fulfilling Fukuda's critera. 
In these groups, we examined the association between gastro-intestinal symptoms 
and the IgA and IgM responses directed against commensal bacteria.
RESULTS: Using cluster analysis performed on gastro-intestinal symptoms we 
delineated that the cluster analysis-generated diagnosis of abdominal discomfort 
syndrome (ADS) was significantly higher in subjects with ME/CFS (59.6%) than in 
those with CF (17.7%). The diagnosis of ADS was strongly associated with the 
diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). There is evidence that ME/CFS 
consists of two subgroups, i.e. ME/CFS with and without ADS. Factor analysis 
showed four factors, i.e. 1) inflammation-hyperalgesia; 2) fatigue-malaise; 3) 
gastro-intestinal symptoms/ADS; and 4) neurocognitive symptoms. The IgA and IgM 
responses to LPS of commensal bacteria were significantly higher in ME/CFS 
patients with ADS than in those without ADS.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings show that ADS is a characteristic of a subset of 
patients with ME/CFS and that increased bacterial translocation (leaky gut) is 
associated with ADS symptoms. This study has defined a pathway phenotype, i.e 
bacterial translocation, that is related to ME/CFS and ADS/IBS and that may 
drive systemic inflammatory processes.

PMID: 25433843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]