---
reference_id: "PMID:30829421"
title: "Optimizing treatment outcomes in adolescents with eating disorders: The potential role of cognitive behavioral therapy."
authors:
- Craig M
- Waine J
- Wilson S
- Waller G
journal: Int J Eat Disord
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/eat.23067
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Cognitive Behavioral Therapy/methods
- Feeding and Eating Disorders/therapy
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Optimizing treatment outcomes in adolescents with eating disorders: The potential role of cognitive behavioral therapy.
**Authors:** Craig M, Waine J, Wilson S, Waller G
**Journal:** Int J Eat Disord (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/eat.23067](https://doi.org/10.1002/eat.23067)

## Content

1. Int J Eat Disord. 2019 May;52(5):538-542. doi: 10.1002/eat.23067. Epub 2019
Mar  4.

Optimizing treatment outcomes in adolescents with eating disorders: The
potential role of cognitive behavioral therapy.

Craig M(1), Waine J(2), Wilson S(3), Waller G(4).

Author information:
(1)Connect Eating Disorders Team, CAMHS, Specialist Children's Services, NHS
Greater Glasgow and Clyde, Glasgow, Scotland.
(2)Tertiary Eating Disorders Service, NHS Lanarkshire, Glasgow, Scotland.
(3)Specialist Children's Services, NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde, Glasgow,
Scotland.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom.

OBJECTIVE: While family-based treatment (FBT) is the leading psychological
therapy for adolescents with eating disorders, it is not universally effective
or suitable. This study considered the effectiveness of cognitive-behavioral
therapy for eating disorders (CBT-ED) in adolescent cases where FBT was not
fully effective or where it was not applicable to the individual case.
METHOD: A transdiagnostic case series of 54 adolescents with eating disorders
(52% with anorexia nervosa; 31% with atypical anorexia nervosa) were offered
CBT-ED following previous treatment using FBT or following FBT being judged
inappropriate. Pre-post outcomes were assessed using standardized measures of
eating attitudes and clinical impairment, and weight change was measured for the
patients with anorexia nervosa.
RESULTS: The rate of attrition was similar to that found in other CBT-ED studies
(38.9% of patients who started CBT-ED; 59.3% of those offered CBT-ED). The
patients showed positive outcomes on all measures, regardless of whether they
had previously been treated with FBT. Effect sizes were moderate to large.
Severity and duration of the eating disorder were unrelated to outcomes.
DISCUSSION: CBT-ED merits consideration as a second-line approach for
adolescents with eating disorders when FBT has not been effective or could not
be applied. There is no evidence that previous failure to benefit from FBT
impairs outcome from subsequent CBT-ED, and severity and duration of the eating
disorder did not influence outcome. Treatment matching for adolescents with
eating disorders might consider the role of previous treatment outcomes and
family availability in determining optimum treatment strategies for individuals.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/eat.23067
PMID: 30829421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
