---
reference_id: "PMID:29936144"
title: Homozygosity for CREB3L1 premature stop codon in first case of recessive osteogenesis imperfecta associated with OASIS-deficiency to survive infancy.
authors:
- Lindahl K
- Åström E
- Dragomir A
- Symoens S
- Coucke P
- Larsson S
- Paschalis E
- Roschger P
- Gamsjaeger S
- Klaushofer K
- Fratzl-Zelman N
- Kindmark A
journal: Bone
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2018.06.019
keywords:
- Adult
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Child
- "Codon, Nonsense/genetics"
- Cyclic AMP Response Element-Binding Protein/genetics
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- "Osteoblasts/pathology, physiology, ultrastructure"
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Survivors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Homozygosity for CREB3L1 premature stop codon in first case of recessive osteogenesis imperfecta associated with OASIS-deficiency to survive infancy.
**Authors:** Lindahl K, Åström E, Dragomir A, Symoens S, Coucke P, Larsson S, Paschalis E, Roschger P, Gamsjaeger S, Klaushofer K, Fratzl-Zelman N, Kindmark A
**Journal:** Bone (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bone.2018.06.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2018.06.019)

## Content

1. Bone. 2018 Sep;114:268-277. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2018.06.019. Epub 2018 Jun 22.

Homozygosity for CREB3L1 premature stop codon in first case of recessive 
osteogenesis imperfecta associated with OASIS-deficiency to survive infancy.

Lindahl K(1), Åström E(2), Dragomir A(3), Symoens S(4), Coucke P(4), Larsson 
S(5), Paschalis E(6), Roschger P(6), Gamsjaeger S(6), Klaushofer K(6), 
Fratzl-Zelman N(6), Kindmark A(7).

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden. 
Electronic address: Katarina.lindahl@medsci.uu.se.
(2)Department of Woman and Child Health, Karolinska Institutet and Pediatric 
Neurology, Astrid Lindgren Children's Hospital at Karolinska University 
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Dept. of Surgical Pathology, Uppsala University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden.
(4)Dept. of Medical Genetics, The University Hospital in Ghent, Ghent, Belgium.
(5)Dept. of Surgical Sciences, Uppsala University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden.
(6)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Osteology at the Hanusch Hospital of WGKK and 
AUVA Trauma Center Meidling, 1st Medical Department Hanusch Hospital, Vienna, 
Austria.
(7)Dept. of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Mutations of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-stress transducer OASIS 
(encoded by CREB3L1), cause severe recessive osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) not 
compatible with surviving the neonatal period, as has been shown in two 
unrelated families through a whole gene deletion vs. a qualitative alteration of 
OASIS. Heterozygous carriers in the described families have exhibited a mild 
phenotype. OASIS is a transcription factor highly expressed in osteoblasts, and 
OASIS-/- mice exhibit severe osteopenia and spontaneous fractures. Here, we 
expand the clinical spectrum by a detailed phenotypic characterization of the 
first case of OASIS-associated OI surviving the neonatal period, with 
heterozygous family members being unaffected.
METHODS: All OI-associated genes were sequenced. Primary human osteoblast-like 
cell (hOB) and fibroblast (FB) cultures were obtained for qPCR, and steady-state 
collagen biochemistry. FB, hOB and skin biopsies were ultrastructurally 
analyzed. Bone was analyzed by μCT, histomorphometry, quantitative backscattered 
electron imaging (qBEI), and Raman microspectroscopy.
RESULTS: The proband, a boy with severe OI, had blue sclera and tooth agenesis. 
A homozygous CREB3L1 stop codon mutation was detected by sequencing, while 
several family members were heterozygotes. Markedly low levels of CREB3L1 mRNA 
were confirmed by qPCR in hOBs (16%) and FB (21%); however, collagen I levels 
were only reduced in hOBs (5-10%). Electron microscopy of hOBs showed pronounced 
alterations, with numerous myelin figures and diminished RER vs. normal 
ultrastructure of FB. Bone histomorphometry and qBEI were similar to collagen I 
OI, with low trabecular thickness and mineral apposition rate, and increased 
bone matrix mineralization. Raman microspectroscopy revealed low level of 
glycosaminoglycans. Clinical response to life-long bisphosphonate treatment was 
as expected in severe OI with steadily increasing bone mineral density, but 
despite this the boy suffered repeated childhood fractures.
CONCLUSIONS: Deficiency of OASIS can cause severe OI compatible with surviving 
the neonatal period. A marked decrease of collagen type I transcription was 
noted in bone tissue, but not in skin, and ultrastructure of hOBs was 
pathological. Results also suggested OASIS involvement in glycosaminoglycan 
secretion in bone.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2018.06.019
PMID: 29936144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]