---
reference_id: "PMID:31481313"
title: "Complex phenotypes in ALG12-congenital disorder of glycosylation (ALG12-CDG): Case series and review of the literature."
authors:
- Tahata S
- Gunderson L
- Lanpher B
- Morava E
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2019.08.007
keywords:
- Adult
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/diagnosis, genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genetic Testing
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin G/blood
- Male
- Mannosyltransferases/genetics
- Mutation
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Complex phenotypes in ALG12-congenital disorder of glycosylation (ALG12-CDG): Case series and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Tahata S, Gunderson L, Lanpher B, Morava E
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2019.08.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2019.08.007)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2019 Dec;128(4):409-414. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2019.08.007.
Epub  2019 Aug 26.

Complex phenotypes in ALG12-congenital disorder of glycosylation (ALG12-CDG): 
Case series and review of the literature.

Tahata S(1), Gunderson L(1), Lanpher B(1), Morava E(2).

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, United States.
(2)Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, United States. Electronic address: 
morava-kozicz.eva@mayo.edu.

ALG12-congenital disorder of glycosylation (ALG12-CDG) is a rare disorder caused 
by a deficiency of 
dolichol-P-mannose:Man7GlcNAc2-PP-dolichyl-α-6-mannosyltransferase which 
presents with intellectual disability, hypotonia, dysmorphic features, low IgG 
levels with recurrent infections, male genital hypoplasia, and coagulation 
abnormalities. We report a unique family with three affected individuals, 
including two older brothers with only cognitive and coagulation defects and a 
younger brother who died from a severe multisystem disease at age 18 months. The 
two living brothers are the oldest and mildest cases of ALG12-CDG described thus 
far. Whole exome sequencing of the older brothers revealed a previously 
described c.1001delA (p.N334TfsX15) pathogenic variant and a c.671C > T 
(p.T224 M) variant of uncertain significance in ALG12. Our cases broaden the 
recognized genetic and phenotypic spectrum of this disorder and suggest a role 
for other genetic and environmental factors in modulating disease phenotype.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2019.08.007
PMID: 31481313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]