---
reference_id: "PMID:39186393"
title: "A Case of Ludwig's Angina Following Influenza in a 16-Year-Old Male."
authors:
- Onuchukwu CE
- Muralidhar N
journal: R I Med J (2013)
year: '2024'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Case of Ludwig's Angina Following Influenza in a 16-Year-Old Male.
**Authors:** Onuchukwu CE, Muralidhar N
**Journal:** R I Med J (2013) (2024)

## Content

1. R I Med J (2013). 2024 Sep 1;107(9):7-9.

A Case of Ludwig's Angina Following Influenza in a 16-Year-Old Male.

Onuchukwu CE(1), Muralidhar N(2).

Author information:
(1)Fellow, Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Hasbro Children's Hospital/The Warren 
Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island.
(2)Attending Physician, Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Hasbro Children's 
Hospital; Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, The Warren Alpert Medical School of 
Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island.

This case report illuminates an instance of Ludwig's Angina in a 16-year-old 
male patient with concurrent Influenza A. Ludwig's Angina, a potentially fatal, 
rapidly spreading cellulitis, primarily affects the submandibular and sublingual 
spaces. This case emphasizes the importance of early detection, immediate 
intervention, and multidisciplinary management to prevent life-threatening 
complications. The patient presented with fever, sore throat, swelling under the 
tongue and submandibular region, and difficulty breathing following a family 
trip to Puerto Rico. Despite initial respiratory distress and severe soft tissue 
swelling, the patient responded positively to broad-spectrum antibiotics, with 
clinical improvement leading to discharge after five days. The report discusses 
the challenges in diagnosing and managing Ludwig's Angina, the potential role of 
the patient's environment in disease presentation, and the relevance of 
historical medical literature in contemporary clinical practice. This case 
underscores the need for vigilance in patients with influenza for potential 
secondary bacterial complications and the necessity of expedited airway 
management in patients with Ludwig's Angina.

PMID: 39186393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]