---
reference_id: "PMID:26529632"
title: Asfotase Alfa Treatment Improves Survival for Perinatal and Infantile Hypophosphatasia.
authors:
- Whyte MP
- Rockman-Greenberg C
- Ozono K
- Riese R
- Moseley S
- Melian A
- Thompson DD
- Bishop N
- Hofmann C
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2015-3462
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Asfotase Alfa Treatment Improves Survival for Perinatal and Infantile Hypophosphatasia.
**Authors:** Whyte MP, Rockman-Greenberg C, Ozono K, Riese R, Moseley S, Melian A, Thompson DD, Bishop N, Hofmann C
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2015-3462](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2015-3462)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2016 Jan;101(1):334-42. doi: 10.1210/jc.2015-3462.
Epub  2015 Nov 3.

Asfotase Alfa Treatment Improves Survival for Perinatal and Infantile 
Hypophosphatasia.

Whyte MP(1), Rockman-Greenberg C(1), Ozono K(1), Riese R(1), Moseley S(1), 
Melian A(1), Thompson DD(1), Bishop N(1), Hofmann C(1).

Author information:
(1)Shriners Hospital for Children (M.P.W.) and Division of Bone and Mineral 
Diseases at Washington University School of Medicine (M.P.W.), St Louis, 
Missouri 63110; University of Manitoba and Children's Hospital Research 
Institute of Manitoba (C.R.-G.), Winnipeg, MB R3T 2N2 Canada; Graduate School of 
Medicine (K.O.), Osaka University, Osaka, 565-0871 Japan; Alexion 
Pharmaceuticals, Inc. (R.R., S.M., A.M., D.D.T.), Cheshire, Connecticut 06410; 
Department of Human Metabolism (N.B.), University of Sheffield, Sheffield, S10 
2TN United Kingdom; Sheffield Children's Hospital (N.B.), Sheffield, S10 2TH 
United Kingdom; University Children's Hospital (C.H.), University of Würzburg, 
Würzburg, D-97080 Germany.

CONTEXT: Hypophosphatasia (HPP) is an inborn error of metabolism that, in its 
most severe perinatal and infantile forms, results in 50-100% mortality, 
typically from respiratory complications.
OBJECTIVES: Our objective was to better understand the effect of treatment with 
asfotase alfa, a first-in-class enzyme replacement therapy, on mortality in 
neonates and infants with severe HPP.
DESIGN/SETTING: Data from patients with the perinatal and infantile forms of HPP 
in two ongoing, multicenter, multinational, open-label, phase 2 interventional 
studies of asfotase alfa treatment were compared with data from similar patients 
from a retrospective natural history study.
PATIENTS: Thirty-seven treated patients (median treatment duration, 2.7 years) 
and 48 historical controls of similar chronological age and HPP characteristics.
INTERVENTIONS: Treated patients received asfotase alfa as sc injections either 1 
mg/kg six times per week or 2 mg/kg thrice weekly.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Survival, skeletal health quantified radiographically on 
treatment, and ventilatory status were the main outcome measures for this study.
RESULTS: Asfotase alfa was associated with improved survival in treated patients 
vs historical controls: 95% vs 42% at age 1 year and 84% vs 27% at age 5 years, 
respectively (P < .0001, Kaplan-Meier log-rank test). Whereas 5% (1/20) of the 
historical controls who required ventilatory assistance survived, 76% (16/21) of 
the ventilated and treated patients survived, among whom 75% (12/16) were weaned 
from ventilatory support. This better respiratory outcome accompanied 
radiographic improvements in skeletal mineralization and health.
CONCLUSIONS: Asfotase alfa mineralizes the HPP skeleton, including the ribs, and 
improves respiratory function and survival in life-threatening perinatal and 
infantile HPP.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2015-3462
PMCID: PMC4701846
PMID: 26529632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]