---
reference_id: "PMID:35057590"
title: Clinical and Laboratory Profile of Dengue in Kashmir Valley.
authors:
- Naik M
- Bhat T
- Wani AA
- Amin A
- Jalaalie U
journal: J Assoc Physicians India
year: '2022'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and Laboratory Profile of Dengue in Kashmir Valley.
**Authors:** Naik M, Bhat T, Wani AA, Amin A, Jalaalie U
**Journal:** J Assoc Physicians India (2022)

## Content

1. J Assoc Physicians India. 2022 Dec;69(12):11-12.

Clinical and Laboratory Profile of Dengue in Kashmir Valley.

Naik M(1), Bhat T(1), Wani AA(2), Amin A(3), Jalaalie U(3).

Author information:
(1)Associate Professor, SKIMS MCH, Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir.
(2)Assistant Professor, SKIMS MCH, Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir; Corresponding 
Author.
(3)Senior Resident, SKIMS MCH, Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir.

BACKGROUND: As majority of cases of dengue are associated with thrombocytopenia, 
it is indispensable to study clinical presentation, biochemical parameters and 
outcome of dengue fever in a population known with low platelet count.
METHODOLOGY: A prospective observational study was conducted from September 2016 
to August 2017that included forty NS-1 antigen (IgM) Dengue positive patients. 
Clinical features, laboratory parameters and outcome of dengue patients were 
noted.
RESULTS: All the patients had travel history outside the valley into the 
neighbouring state. Most patients (70%) had duration of stay between 21-30 days 
in dengue prevalent areas before catching the illness. Duration of symptoms was 
between 4-9 days in majority of patients (92.5%). Most patients (85%) presented 
in months of September to November. The three most common symptoms were fever 
(100%), chills (92.5%) and headache (80%). The most common laboratory features 
were thrombocytopenia (97.5%), leukopenia (87.5%), transaminitis (87.5%) and 
raised LDH (32.5%). One patient developed Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever (DHF). All 
patients recovered completely.
CONCLUSION: DF in Kashmir is seen exclusively in travellers to other states 
especially in the monsoon season.DF in Kashmiri patients has a favourable 
outcome despite low baseline platelet count. DHF is uncommon in Kashmiri 
population.

© Journal of the Association of Physicians of India 2011.

PMID: 35057590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]