---
reference_id: "PMID:30086862"
title: "Central precocious puberty: From genetics to treatment."
authors:
- Aguirre RS
- Eugster EA
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.beem.2018.05.008
keywords:
- Calcium-Binding Proteins
- Child
- Female
- "Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone/analogs & derivatives"
- Humans
- Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics
- Kisspeptins/genetics
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- "Puberty, Precocious/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
- Ribonucleoproteins/genetics
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Central precocious puberty: From genetics to treatment.
**Authors:** Aguirre RS, Eugster EA
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.beem.2018.05.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beem.2018.05.008)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2018 Aug;32(4):343-354. doi: 
10.1016/j.beem.2018.05.008. Epub 2018 May 26.

Central precocious puberty: From genetics to treatment.

Aguirre RS(1), Eugster EA(2).

Author information:
(1)Section of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetology, Riley Hospital for 
Children, Department of Pediatrics, USA; Division of Endocrinology and 
Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, IN, USA. Electronic address: rsaguirr@iupui.edu.
(2)Section of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetology, Riley Hospital for 
Children, Department of Pediatrics, USA.

Central precocious puberty (CPP) results from early activation of the 
hypothalamic - pituitary -gonadal (HPG) axis and follows the same sequence as 
normal puberty. While many factors involved in pubertal initiation remain poorly 
understood, the kisspeptin system is known to play a key role. Currently, 
mutations in the kisspeptin system, MKRN3, and DLK1 have been identified in 
sporadic and familial cases of CPP. The diagnosis is based on physical exam 
findings indicating advancing puberty and on laboratory tests confirming central 
HPG axis activation. GnRH analogs are the mainstay of treatment and are used 
with the goal of height preservation. Newer extended release formulations 
continue to be developed. Currently there is no evidence of long-term 
complications associated with treatment. However, many areas remain to be 
explored such as targeted therapies and aspects of clinical management. Further 
investigation into psychological effects and additional data regarding long-term 
outcomes, particularly in males, is needed.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.beem.2018.05.008
PMID: 30086862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]