---
reference_id: "PMID:30082419"
title: Adult Ube3a Gene Reinstatement Restores the Electrophysiological Deficits of Prefrontal Cortex Layer 5 Neurons in a Mouse Model of Angelman Syndrome.
authors:
- Rotaru DC
- van Woerden GM
- Wallaard I
- Elgersma Y
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0083-18.2018
keywords:
- Action Potentials/physiology
- "Angelman Syndrome/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Mice
- Neurons/physiology
- Patch-Clamp Techniques
- Prefrontal Cortex/physiopathology
- "Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adult Ube3a Gene Reinstatement Restores the Electrophysiological Deficits of Prefrontal Cortex Layer 5 Neurons in a Mouse Model of Angelman Syndrome.
**Authors:** Rotaru DC, van Woerden GM, Wallaard I, Elgersma Y
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0083-18.2018](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0083-18.2018)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2018 Sep 12;38(37):8011-8030. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0083-18.2018.
 Epub 2018 Aug 6.

Adult Ube3a Gene Reinstatement Restores the Electrophysiological Deficits of
Prefrontal Cortex Layer 5 Neurons in a Mouse Model of Angelman Syndrome.

Rotaru DC(1), van Woerden GM(1), Wallaard I(1), Elgersma Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience and ENCORE Center for Neurodevelopmental
Disorders, Erasmus University Medical Center, Wytemaweg 80, 3015 CN Rotterdam,
The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Neuroscience and ENCORE Center for Neurodevelopmental
Disorders, Erasmus University Medical Center, Wytemaweg 80, 3015 CN Rotterdam,
The Netherlands y.elgersma@erasmusmc.nl.

E3 ubiquitin ligase (UBE3A) levels in the brain need to be tightly regulated, as
loss of functional UBE3A protein is responsible for the severe
neurodevelopmental disorder Angelman syndrome (AS), whereas increased activity
of UBE3A is associated with nonsyndromic autism. Given the role of mPFC in
neurodevelopmental disorders including autism, we aimed to identify the
functional changes resulting from loss of UBE3A in infralimbic and prelimbic
mPFC areas in a mouse model of AS. Whole-cell recordings from layer 5 mPFC
pyramidal neurons obtained in brain slices from adult mice of both sexes
revealed that loss of UBE3A results in a strong decrease of spontaneous
inhibitory transmission and increase of spontaneous excitatory transmission
potentially leading to a marked excitation/inhibition imbalance. Additionally,
we found that loss of UBE3A led to decreased excitability and increased
threshold for action potential of layer 5 fast spiking interneurons without
significantly affecting the excitability of pyramidal neurons. Because we
previously showed that AS mouse behavioral phenotypes are reversible upon Ube3a
gene reactivation during a restricted period of early postnatal development, we
investigated whether Ube3a gene reactivation in a fully mature brain could
reverse any of the identified physiological deficits. In contrast to our
previously reported behavioral findings, restoring UBE3A levels in adult animals
fully rescued all the identified physiological deficits of mPFC neurons.
Moreover, the kinetics of reversing these synaptic deficits closely followed the
reinstatement of UBE3A protein level. Together, these findings show a striking
dissociation between the rescue of behavioral and physiological
deficits.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Here we describe significant physiological
deficits in the mPFC of an Angelman syndrome mouse model. We found a marked
change in excitatory/inhibitory balance, as well as decreased excitability of
fast spiking interneurons. A promising treatment strategy for Angelman syndrome
is aimed at restoring UBE3A expression by activating the paternal UBE3A gene.
Here we find that the physiological changes in the mPFC are fully reversible
upon gene reactivation, even when the brain is fully mature. This indicates that
there is no critical developmental window for reversing the identified
physiological deficits in mPFC.

Copyright © 2018 the authors 0270-6474/18/388011-20$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0083-18.2018
PMCID: PMC6596147
PMID: 30082419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
