---
reference_id: "PMID:26947331"
title: "Fulvestrant plus palbociclib versus fulvestrant plus placebo for treatment of hormone-receptor-positive, HER2-negative metastatic breast cancer that progressed on previous endocrine therapy (PALOMA-3): final analysis of the multicentre, double-blind, phase 3 randomised controlled trial."
authors:
- Cristofanilli M
- Turner NC
- Bondarenko I
- Ro J
- Im SA
- Masuda N
- Colleoni M
- DeMichele A
- Loi S
- Verma S
- Iwata H
- Harbeck N
- Zhang K
- Theall KP
- Jiang Y
- Bartlett CH
- Koehler M
- Slamon D
journal: Lancet Oncol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(15)00613-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fulvestrant plus palbociclib versus fulvestrant plus placebo for treatment of hormone-receptor-positive, HER2-negative metastatic breast cancer that progressed on previous endocrine therapy (PALOMA-3): final analysis of the multicentre, double-blind, phase 3 randomised controlled trial.
**Authors:** Cristofanilli M, Turner NC, Bondarenko I, Ro J, Im SA, Masuda N, Colleoni M, DeMichele A, Loi S, Verma S, Iwata H, Harbeck N, Zhang K, Theall KP, Jiang Y, Bartlett CH, Koehler M, Slamon D
**Journal:** Lancet Oncol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1470-2045(15)00613-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(15)00613-0)

## Content

1. Lancet Oncol. 2016 Apr;17(4):425-439. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(15)00613-0. Epub
 2016 Mar 3.

Fulvestrant plus palbociclib versus fulvestrant plus placebo for treatment of 
hormone-receptor-positive, HER2-negative metastatic breast cancer that 
progressed on previous endocrine therapy (PALOMA-3): final analysis of the 
multicentre, double-blind, phase 3 randomised controlled trial.

Cristofanilli M(1), Turner NC(2), Bondarenko I(3), Ro J(4), Im SA(5), Masuda 
N(6), Colleoni M(7), DeMichele A(8), Loi S(9), Verma S(10), Iwata H(11), Harbeck 
N(12), Zhang K(13), Theall KP(14), Jiang Y(13), Bartlett CH(15), Koehler M(16), 
Slamon D(17).

Author information:
(1)Robert H Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Chicago, IL, USA. Electronic address: massimo.cristofanilli@nm.org.
(2)Institute of Cancer Research and Royal Marsden Hospital, London, UK.
(3)Dnipropetrovsk Medical Academy, City Multiple-Discipline Clinical Hospital 
#4, Dnipropetrovsk, Ukraine.
(4)National Cancer Center, Goyang-si, South Korea.
(5)Seoul National University Hospital, Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(6)NHO Osaka National Hospital, Osaka, Japan.
(7)Istituto Europeo di Oncologia, Milan, Italy.
(8)Center for Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(9)Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
(10)Sunnybrook Odette Cancer Centre, Toronto, ON, Canada; Tom Baker Cancer 
Centre, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(11)Aichi Cancer Center Hospital, Nagoya, Japan.
(12)Brustzentrum der Universität München (LMU), Munich, Germany.
(13)Pfizer, San Diego, CA, USA.
(14)Pfizer, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(15)Pfizer, Collegeville, PA, USA.
(16)Pfizer, New York, NY, USA.
(17)University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Erratum in
    Lancet Oncol. 2016 Apr;17(4):e136. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(16)00155-8.
    Lancet Oncol. 2016 Jul;17(7):e270. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(16)30222-4.

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2016 Apr;17(4):402-403. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(16)00144-3.

BACKGROUND: In the PALOMA-3 study, the combination of the CDK4 and CDK6 
inhibitor palbociclib and fulvestrant was associated with significant 
improvements in progression-free survival compared with fulvestrant plus placebo 
in patients with metastatic breast cancer. Identification of patients most 
suitable for the addition of palbociclib to endocrine therapy after tumour 
recurrence is crucial for treatment optimisation in metastatic breast cancer. We 
aimed to confirm our earlier findings with this extended follow-up and show our 
results for subgroup and biomarker analyses.
METHODS: In this multicentre, double-blind, randomised phase 3 study, women aged 
18 years or older with hormone-receptor-positive, HER2-negative metastatic 
breast cancer that had progressed on previous endocrine therapy were stratified 
by sensitivity to previous hormonal therapy, menopausal status, and presence of 
visceral metastasis at 144 centres in 17 countries. Eligible patients-ie, any 
menopausal status, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status 0-1, 
measurable disease or bone disease only, and disease relapse or progression 
after previous endocrine therapy for advanced disease during treatment or within 
12 months of completion of adjuvant therapy-were randomly assigned (2:1) via a 
centralised interactive web-based and voice-based randomisation system to 
receive oral palbociclib (125 mg daily for 3 weeks followed by a week off over 
28-day cycles) plus 500 mg fulvestrant (intramuscular injection on days 1 and 15 
of cycle 1; then on day 1 of subsequent 28-day cycles) or placebo plus 
fulvestrant. The primary endpoint was investigator-assessed progression-free 
survival. Analysis was by intention to treat. We also assessed endocrine therapy 
resistance by clinical parameters, quantitative hormone-receptor expression, and 
tumour PIK3CA mutational status in circulating DNA at baseline. This study is 
registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01942135.
FINDINGS: Between Oct 7, 2013, and Aug 26, 2014, 521 patients were randomly 
assigned, 347 to fulvestrant plus palbociclib and 174 to fulvestrant plus 
placebo. Study enrolment is closed and overall survival follow-up is in 
progress. By March 16, 2015, 259 progression-free-survival events had occurred 
(145 in the fulvestrant plus palbociclib group and 114 in the fulvestrant plus 
placebo group); median follow-up was 8·9 months (IQR 8·7-9·2). Median 
progression-free survival was 9·5 months (95% CI 9·2-11·0) in the fulvestrant 
plus palbociclib group and 4·6 months (3·5-5·6) in the fulvestrant plus placebo 
group (hazard ratio 0·46, 95% CI 0·36-0·59, p<0·0001). Grade 3 or 4 adverse 
events occurred in 251 (73%) of 345 patients in the fulvestrant plus palbociclib 
group and 38 (22%) of 172 patients in the fulvestrant plus placebo group. The 
most common grade 3 or 4 adverse events were neutropenia (223 [65%] in the 
fulvestrant plus palbociclib group and one [1%] in the fulvestrant plus placebo 
group), anaemia (ten [3%] and three [2%]), and leucopenia (95 [28%] and two 
[1%]). Serious adverse events (all causalities) occurred in 44 patients (13%) of 
345 in the fulvestrant plus palbociclib group and 30 (17%) of 172 patients in 
the fulvestrant plus placebo group. PIK3CA mutation was detected in the plasma 
DNA of 129 (33%) of 395 patients for whom these data were available. Neither 
PIK3CA status nor hormone-receptor expression level significantly affected 
treatment response.
INTERPRETATION: Fulvestrant plus palbociclib was associated with significant and 
consistent improvement in progression-free survival compared with fulvestrant 
plus placebo, irrespective of the degree of endocrine resistance, 
hormone-receptor expression level, and PIK3CA mutational status. The combination 
could be considered as a therapeutic option for patients with recurrent 
hormone-receptor-positive, HER2-negative metastatic breast cancer that has 
progressed on previous endocrine therapy.
FUNDING: Pfizer.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(15)00613-0
PMID: 26947331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]