---
reference_id: "PMID:36632528"
title: "Relapsing Aspergillus otomycosis despite prolonged systemic antifungal therapy and resolution after topical voriconazole administration: A case report."
authors:
- Wee LE
- Tan MG
- Tan AL
- Tang JZ
journal: Med Mycol Case Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.mmcr.2022.12.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relapsing Aspergillus otomycosis despite prolonged systemic antifungal therapy and resolution after topical voriconazole administration: A case report.
**Authors:** Wee LE, Tan MG, Tan AL, Tang JZ
**Journal:** Med Mycol Case Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mmcr.2022.12.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mmcr.2022.12.006)

## Content

1. Med Mycol Case Rep. 2022 Dec 28;39:23-25. doi: 10.1016/j.mmcr.2022.12.006. 
eCollection 2023 Mar.

Relapsing Aspergillus otomycosis despite prolonged systemic antifungal therapy 
and resolution after topical voriconazole administration: A case report.

Wee LE(1), Tan MG(2), Tan AL(2), Tang JZ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Singapore General Hospital, Outram Road, 
16960, Singapore.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Singapore General Hospital, Outram Road, 16960, 
Singapore.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology, Singapore General Hospital, Outram Road, 16960, 
Singapore.

We report a case of intractable Aspergillus otomycosis with multiple relapses 
despite conventional topical and systemic antifungal treatment, and adjunctive 
usage of hyperbaric oxygen therapy. Of note, otomycosis relapsed even after six 
months of continuous systemic antifungal treatment with therapeutic drug levels 
and without treatment interruption; and only resolved after application of 
topical voriconazole. (max. 75 words).

© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mmcr.2022.12.006
PMCID: PMC9826810
PMID: 36632528

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.