---
reference_id: "PMID:21515266"
title: Why is PTPN22 a good candidate susceptibility gene for autoimmune disease?
authors:
- Burn GL
- Svensson L
- Sanchez-Blanco C
- Saini M
- Cope AP
journal: FEBS Lett
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.04.032
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Why is PTPN22 a good candidate susceptibility gene for autoimmune disease?
**Authors:** Burn GL, Svensson L, Sanchez-Blanco C, Saini M, Cope AP
**Journal:** FEBS Lett (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.febslet.2011.04.032](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2011.04.032)

## Content

1. FEBS Lett. 2011 Dec 1;585(23):3689-98. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.04.032.
Epub  2011 Apr 20.

Why is PTPN22 a good candidate susceptibility gene for autoimmune disease?

Burn GL(1), Svensson L, Sanchez-Blanco C, Saini M, Cope AP.

Author information:
(1)Academic Department of Rheumatology, Division of Immunology, Infection and 
Inflammatory Disease, King's College School of Medicine, King's College London, 
UK. garth.burn@kcl.ac.uk

The PTPN22 locus is one of the strongest risk factors outside of the major 
histocompatability complex that associates with autoimmune diseases. PTPN22 
encodes lymphoid protein tyrosine phosphatase (Lyp) which is expressed 
exclusively in immune cells. A single base change in the coding region of this 
gene resulting in an arginine to tryptophan amino acid substitution within a 
polyproline binding motif associates with type 1 diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, 
systemic lupus erythematosis, Hashimotos thyroiditis, Graves disease, Addison's 
disease, Myasthenia Gravis, vitiligo, systemic sclerosis juvenile idiopathic 
arthritis and psoriatic arthritis. Here, we review the current understanding of 
the PTPN22 locus from a genetic, geographical, biochemical and functional 
perspective.

Copyright © 2011 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.04.032
PMID: 21515266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]