---
reference_id: "PMID:10795375"
title: "Dientamoeba fragilis: the unflagellated human flagellate."
authors:
- Windsor JJ
- Johnson EH
journal: Br J Biomed Sci
year: '1999'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dientamoeba fragilis: the unflagellated human flagellate.
**Authors:** Windsor JJ, Johnson EH
**Journal:** Br J Biomed Sci (1999)

## Content

1. Br J Biomed Sci. 1999;56(4):293-306.

Dientamoeba fragilis: the unflagellated human flagellate.

Windsor JJ(1), Johnson EH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, Sultan Qaboos 
University, Muscat, Sultanate of Oman.

Dientamoeba fragilis is a pathogenic protozoan parasite with a world-wide 
distribution. Although originally described as an amoeboid organism, it has been 
reclassified as a flagellate, on the basis of a number of electron microscopic 
and immunological findings. Except for its lack of a flagellum, D. fragilis 
closely resembles Histomonas and Trichomonas. Interestingly, a resistant cyst 
stage has not been demonstrated and it is unlikely that its trophozoites can 
survive successfully outside the human host. As a consequence of its higher than 
anticipated coincidence of infection with Enterobius vermicularis, transmission 
may occur via ova of this pinworm. D. fragilis infection may be acute or 
chronic, and has been reported in both children and adults. The most common 
clinical symptoms include abdominal pain, persistent diarrhoea, loss of 
appetite, weight loss and flatulence. Occasionally, eosinophilia, urticaria and 
pruritus have been described. Demonstration of the characteristic nuclear 
structure of D. fragilis, needed for a definitive diagnosis, cannot be achieved 
in unstained faecal material; therefore, permanently stained smears are 
essential. Treatment is recommended in symptomatic cases, and iodoquinol, 
tetracycline and metronidazole have been used successfully.

PMID: 10795375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]