---
reference_id: "PMID:33907317"
title: Speech and language deficits are central to SETBP1 haploinsufficiency disorder.
authors:
- Morgan A
- Braden R
- Wong MMK
- Colin E
- Amor D
- Liégeois F
- Srivastava S
- Vogel A
- Bizaoui V
- Ranguin K
- Fisher SE
- van Bon BW
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41431-021-00894-x
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- Child
- Female
- Haploinsufficiency
- Humans
- Language Development
- Male
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Speech Disorders/genetics, pathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Speech and language deficits are central to SETBP1 haploinsufficiency disorder.
**Authors:** Morgan A, Braden R, Wong MMK, Colin E, Amor D, Liégeois F, Srivastava S, Vogel A, Bizaoui V, Ranguin K, Fisher SE, van Bon BW
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41431-021-00894-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-021-00894-x)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2021 Aug;29(8):1216-1225. doi: 10.1038/s41431-021-00894-x.
Epub  2021 Apr 27.

Speech and language deficits are central to SETBP1 haploinsufficiency disorder.

Morgan A(#)(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Braden R(#)(6)(7)(8), Wong MMK(9), Colin E(10), Amor 
D(6)(11)(12), Liégeois F(13), Srivastava S(14), Vogel A(15), Bizaoui V(16), 
Ranguin K(16), Fisher SE(9)(17), van Bon BW(18).

Author information:
(1)Speech & Language, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia. angela.morgan@mcri.edu.au.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia. angela.morgan@mcri.edu.au.
(3)Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. 
angela.morgan@mcri.edu.au.
(4)Victorian Clinical Genetics Service, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. 
angela.morgan@mcri.edu.au.
(5)Department of Audiology and Speech Pathology, University of Melbourne, 
Parkville, Victoria, Australia. angela.morgan@mcri.edu.au.
(6)Speech & Language, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia.
(7)Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.
(8)Department of Audiology and Speech Pathology, University of Melbourne, 
Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(9)Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(10)Service de Génétique Médicale, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire d'Angers, 
Angers, France.
(11)Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(12)Victorian Clinical Genetics Service, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(13)UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, UK.
(14)Boston Children's, Harvard Medical Centre, Boston, MA, USA.
(15)Centre for Neuroscience of Speech, Department of Audiology and Speech 
Pathology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(16)Service de Génétique, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Caen Normandie, Caen, 
France.
(17)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(18)Radboud University Medical centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2021 Aug;29(8):1166-1167. doi: 10.1038/s41431-021-00942-6.

Expressive communication impairment is associated with haploinsufficiency of 
SETBP1, as reported in small case series. Heterozygous pathogenic 
loss-of-function (LoF) variants in SETBP1 have also been identified in 
independent cohorts ascertained for childhood apraxia of speech (CAS), 
warranting further investigation of the roles of this gene in speech 
development. Thirty-one participants (12 males, aged 0; 8-23; 2 years, 28 with 
pathogenic SETBP1 LoF variants, 3 with 18q12.3 deletions) were assessed for 
speech, language and literacy abilities. Broader development was examined with 
standardised motor, social and daily life skills assessments. Gross and fine 
motor deficits (94%) and intellectual impairments (68%) were common. Protracted 
and aberrant speech development was consistently seen, regardless of motor or 
intellectual ability. We expand the linguistic phenotype associated with SETBP1 
LoF syndrome (SETBP1 haploinsufficiency disorder), revealing a striking 
speech presentation that implicates both motor (CAS, dysarthria) and language 
(phonological errors) systems, with CAS (80%) being the most common diagnosis. 
In contrast to past reports, the understanding of language was rarely better 
preserved than language expression (29%). Language was typically low, to 
moderately impaired, with commensurate expression and comprehension ability. 
Children were sociable with a strong desire to communicate. Minimally verbal 
children (32%) augmented speech with sign language, gestures or digital devices. 
Overall, relative to general development, spoken language and literacy were 
poorer than social, daily living, motor and adaptive behaviour skills. Our 
findings show that poor communication is a central feature of SETBP1 
haploinsufficiency disorder, confirming this gene as a strong candidate for 
speech and language disorders.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to European Society of Human 
Genetics.

DOI: 10.1038/s41431-021-00894-x
PMCID: PMC8384874
PMID: 33907317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.