---
reference_id: "PMID:38256041"
title: "Mitochondrial and Cellular Function in Fibroblasts, Induced Neurons, and Astrocytes Derived from Case Study Patients: Insights into Major Depression as a Mitochondria-Associated Disease."
authors:
- Cardon I
- Grobecker S
- Kücükoktay S
- Bader S
- Jahner T
- Nothdurfter C
- Koschitzki K
- Berneburg M
- Weber BHF
- Stöhr H
- Höring M
- Liebisch G
- Braun F
- Rothammer-Hampl T
- Riemenschneider MJ
- Rupprecht R
- Milenkovic VM
- Wetzel CH
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25020963
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial and Cellular Function in Fibroblasts, Induced Neurons, and Astrocytes Derived from Case Study Patients: Insights into Major Depression as a Mitochondria-Associated Disease.
**Authors:** Cardon I, Grobecker S, Kücükoktay S, Bader S, Jahner T, Nothdurfter C, Koschitzki K, Berneburg M, Weber BHF, Stöhr H, Höring M, Liebisch G, Braun F, Rothammer-Hampl T, Riemenschneider MJ, Rupprecht R, Milenkovic VM, Wetzel CH
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25020963](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25020963)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Jan 12;25(2):963. doi: 10.3390/ijms25020963.

Mitochondrial and Cellular Function in Fibroblasts, Induced Neurons, and 
Astrocytes Derived from Case Study Patients: Insights into Major Depression as a 
Mitochondria-Associated Disease.

Cardon I(1), Grobecker S(1), Kücükoktay S(1), Bader S(1), Jahner T(1), 
Nothdurfter C(1), Koschitzki K(2), Berneburg M(2), Weber BHF(3)(4), Stöhr H(3), 
Höring M(5), Liebisch G(5), Braun F(6), Rothammer-Hampl T(6), Riemenschneider 
MJ(6), Rupprecht R(1), Milenkovic VM(1), Wetzel CH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Regensburg, 93053 
Regensburg, Germany.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Regensburg University Hospital, 93053 Regensburg, 
Germany.
(3)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Regensburg, 93053 Regensburg, 
Germany.
(4)Institute of Clinical Human Genetics, Regensburg University Hospital, 93053 
Regensburg, Germany.
(5)Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Regensburg 
University Hospital, 93053 Regensburg, Germany.
(6)Department of Neuropathology, Regensburg University Hospital, 93053 
Regensburg, Germany.

The link between mitochondria and major depressive disorder (MDD) is 
increasingly evident, underscored both by mitochondria's involvement in many 
mechanisms identified in depression and the high prevalence of MDD in 
individuals with mitochondrial disorders. Mitochondrial functions and energy 
metabolism are increasingly considered to be involved in MDD's pathogenesis. 
This study focused on cellular and mitochondrial (dys)function in two atypical 
cases: an antidepressant non-responding MDD patient ("Non-R") and another with 
an unexplained mitochondrial disorder ("Mito"). Skin biopsies from these 
patients and controls were used to generate various cell types, including 
astrocytes and neurons, and cellular and mitochondrial functions were analyzed. 
Similarities were observed between the Mito patient and a broader MDD cohort, 
including decreased respiration and mitochondrial function. Conversely, the 
Non-R patient exhibited increased respiratory rates, mitochondrial calcium, and 
resting membrane potential. In conclusion, the Non-R patient's data offered a 
new perspective on MDD, suggesting a detrimental imbalance in mitochondrial and 
cellular processes, rather than simply reduced functions. Meanwhile, the Mito 
patient's data revealed the extensive effects of mitochondrial dysfunctions on 
cellular functions, potentially highlighting new MDD-associated impairments. 
Together, these case studies enhance our comprehension of MDD.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25020963
PMCID: PMC10815943
PMID: 38256041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.