---
reference_id: "PMID:21114483"
title: "Immune reconstitution in children following chemotherapy for haematological malignancies: a long-term follow-up."
authors:
- van Tilburg CM
- van Gent R
- Bierings MB
- Otto SA
- Sanders EA
- Nibbelke EE
- Gaiser JF
- Janssens-Korpela PL
- Wolfs TF
- Bloem AC
- Borghans JA
- Tesselaar K
journal: Br J Haematol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2010.08478.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immune reconstitution in children following chemotherapy for haematological malignancies: a long-term follow-up.
**Authors:** van Tilburg CM, van Gent R, Bierings MB, Otto SA, Sanders EA, Nibbelke EE, Gaiser JF, Janssens-Korpela PL, Wolfs TF, Bloem AC, Borghans JA, Tesselaar K
**Journal:** Br J Haematol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2141.2010.08478.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2141.2010.08478.x)

## Content

1. Br J Haematol. 2011 Jan;152(2):201-10. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2010.08478.x. 
Epub 2010 Nov 28.

Immune reconstitution in children following chemotherapy for haematological 
malignancies: a long-term follow-up.

van Tilburg CM(1), van Gent R, Bierings MB, Otto SA, Sanders EA, Nibbelke EE, 
Gaiser JF, Janssens-Korpela PL, Wolfs TF, Bloem AC, Borghans JA, Tesselaar K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Haematology/Oncology, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, The Netherlands. c.m.vantilburg@umcutrecht.nl

Modern intensive chemotherapy for childhood haematological malignancies has led 
to high cure rates, but has detrimental effects on the immune system. There is 
little knowledge concerning long-term recovery of the adaptive immune system. 
Here we studied the long-term reconstitution of the adaptive immune system in 31 
children treated for haematological malignancies between July 2000 and October 
2006. We performed detailed phenotypical and functional analyses of the various 
B and T cell subpopulations until 5 years after chemotherapy. We show that 
recovery of newly-developed transitional B cells and naive B and T cells 
occurred rapidly, within months, whereas recovery of the different memory B and 
T cell subpopulations was slower and incomplete, even after 5 years 
post-chemotherapy. The speed of B and T cell recovery was age-independent, 
despite a significant contribution of the thymus to T cell recovery. Plasmablast 
B cell levels remained above normal and immunoglobulin levels normalised within 
1 week. Functional T cell responses were normal, even within the first year 
post-chemotherapy. This study shows that after intensive chemotherapy for 
haematological malignancies in children, numbers of several memory B and T cell 
subpopulations were decreased on the long term, while functional T cell 
responses were not compromised.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2010.08478.x
PMID: 21114483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]