---
reference_id: "PMID:29207977"
title: "Acute Zonal Occult Outer Retinopathy (AZOOR): a case report of vision improvement after intravitreal injection of Ozurdex."
authors:
- Kuo YC
- Chen N
- Tsai RK
journal: BMC Ophthalmol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s12886-017-0638-5
keywords:
- Adult
- "Anti-Inflammatory Agents/administration & dosage"
- "Dexamethasone/administration & dosage"
- Humans
- Intravitreal Injections
- Male
- Scotoma/drug therapy
- Treatment Outcome
- White Dot Syndromes
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute Zonal Occult Outer Retinopathy (AZOOR): a case report of vision improvement after intravitreal injection of Ozurdex.
**Authors:** Kuo YC, Chen N, Tsai RK
**Journal:** BMC Ophthalmol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12886-017-0638-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12886-017-0638-5)

## Content

1. BMC Ophthalmol. 2017 Dec 6;17(1):236. doi: 10.1186/s12886-017-0638-5.

Acute Zonal Occult Outer Retinopathy (AZOOR): a case report of vision
improvement after intravitreal injection of Ozurdex.

Kuo YC(1), Chen N(1), Tsai RK(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Buddhist Tzu Chi General Hospital, Hualien,
Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Eye Research, Buddhist Tzu Chi General Hospital, Tzu Chi
University, 707, Sec. 3, Chung-Yang Rd., Hualien, 970, Taiwan.
tsai.rk@gmail.com.
(3)Institute of Medical Sciences, Tzu Chi University, Hualien, Taiwan.
tsai.rk@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: AZOOR was first described by Gass in 1993 as a syndrome with rapid
loss of one or more extensive zones of the outer retinal segments. It is
characterized by photopsia, minimal funduscopic changes, and
electroretinographic abnormalities. The efficacy of systemic steroids in
treating AZOOR has been previously described and advocated by the concept of
autoimmune retinopathy. However, the use of intravitreal of sustained-released
steroid had not been mentioned to date.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 34-year-old man had sudden onset of central scotoma and
photopsia in the left eye. His visual acuity continued deteriorating. The visual
field defect demonstrated bilateral enlarged blind spots and altitudinal
defects. Fluorescein angiography (FA) showed nonspecific retinal inflammation,
and an electroretinogram (ERG) illustrated decreased amplitude of the b wave in
both eyes. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) examinations revealed parafoveal
loss of the photoreceptor inner/outer segment (IS/OS) junction. Therefore, acute
zonal occult outer retinopathy (AZOOR) was diagnosed. Although his vision did
not improve under the initial treatment of systemic corticosteroid and calcium
channel blocker, remarkable improvement was noticed after the intravitreal
injection(IVI) of Ozurdex, consistent with the recovered IS/OS junction
disruption.
CONCLUSIONS: We herein report a typical case of AZOOR, suggesting that the
intravitreal injection of steroid may benefit in certain patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s12886-017-0638-5
PMCID: PMC5718015
PMID: 29207977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Our patient consent to publish the image of
eyes and other results of his medical examination in this manuscript or paper
which may be published in your journal. Written consent was obtained from our
patient. COMPETING INTERESTS: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
