---
reference_id: "PMID:32728994"
title: Blood Pressure-Lowering Therapy.
authors:
- Sudano I
- Osto E
- Ruschitzka F
journal: Handb Exp Pharmacol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/164_2020_372
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Blood Pressure-Lowering Therapy.
**Authors:** Sudano I, Osto E, Ruschitzka F
**Journal:** Handb Exp Pharmacol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/164_2020_372](https://doi.org/10.1007/164_2020_372)

## Content

1. Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2022;270:25-45. doi: 10.1007/164_2020_372.

Blood Pressure-Lowering Therapy.

Sudano I(1), Osto E(1)(2), Ruschitzka F(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, University Heart Center Zurich, Zürich, 
Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Clinical Chemistry, University of Zurich, University Hospital 
Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Cardiology, University Heart Center Zurich, Zürich, 
Switzerland. frank.ruschitzka@usz.ch.

Erratum in
    Handb Exp Pharmacol. 2022;270:537-538. doi: 10.1007/164_2020_410.

Extensive evidence demonstrates that lowering blood pressure can substantially 
reduce the risk of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease and death.In light of 
the latest 2018 European Society of Cardiology/European Society of Hypertension 
Joint Guidelines, we summarize the current recommendations about lifestyle 
intervention strategies, pharmacotherapy, and device-based treatments for the 
management of arterial hypertension. Special attention is given to direct 
effects exerted by some antihypertensive drugs targeting vascular wall cell 
components that are involved in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis.

© 2020. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/164_2020_372
PMID: 32728994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]