---
reference_id: "PMID:31562988"
title: Self-reported Outcomes After Cholecystectomy for Pediatric Hyperkinetic Biliary Dyskinesia.
authors:
- Dekonenko C
- Sujka JA
- Dorman RM
- Oyetunji TA
- St Peter SD
journal: J Surg Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2019.06.088
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Self-reported Outcomes After Cholecystectomy for Pediatric Hyperkinetic Biliary Dyskinesia.
**Authors:** Dekonenko C, Sujka JA, Dorman RM, Oyetunji TA, St Peter SD
**Journal:** J Surg Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jss.2019.06.088](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2019.06.088)

## Content

1. J Surg Res. 2020 Feb;246:73-77. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2019.06.088. Epub 2019 Sep 
25.

Self-reported Outcomes After Cholecystectomy for Pediatric Hyperkinetic Biliary 
Dyskinesia.

Dekonenko C(1), Sujka JA(1), Dorman RM(1), Oyetunji TA(2), St Peter SD(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Children's Mercy Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri.
(2)Department of Surgery, Children's Mercy Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri; 
Department of Surgery, Quality Improvement and Surgical Equity Research (QISER) 
Center, Children's Mercy Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri.
(3)Department of Surgery, Children's Mercy Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri. 
Electronic address: sspeter@cmh.edu.

BACKGROUND: Biliary dyskinesia (BD) is a common indication for cholecystectomy 
in children. Current literature demonstrates an improvement in symptoms after 
cholecystectomy in most pediatric patients with an EF <35%; however, data 
supporting the efficacy of cholecystectomy for hyperkinetic BD (EF >65%) is 
sparse. We sought to determine whether children with hyperkinetic BD (HBD) had 
resolution of their symptoms after laparoscopic cholecystectomy at our 
institution.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We conducted a retrospective chart review of children who 
had undergone laparoscopic cholecystectomy for HBD at our institution between 
September 2010 and July 2015. Patients completed a phone survey about symptom 
resolution, whether they were happy to have undergone cholecystectomy, overall 
satisfaction on a 1-10 scale, and additional workup for those with ongoing pain. 
Analysis was performed using STATA statistical software with a P-value < 0.05 as 
statistically significant.
RESULTS: Thirteen patients met inclusion criteria. Median gallbladder ejection 
fraction was 93% [IQR: 90, 97]. Median postoperative follow-up was 59 d [IQR: 
25, 151] at which time 50% reported resolution of symptoms. Eight patients 
participated in the survey at a median follow-up of 45 mo [IQR: 40, 66]. Fifty 
percent reported ongoing abdominal pain. Frequency of pain varied among patients 
with pain, occurring from <1 time per week to a few times per day. Five patients 
(63%), including one patient with ongoing pain, were happy that their 
gallbladder had been removed and overall satisfaction rating was 5 on a scale of 
1-10.
CONCLUSIONS: Only half of children with HBD were asymptomatic at long-term 
follow-up. Cholecystectomy for HBD may or may not improve symptoms.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jss.2019.06.088
PMID: 31562988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]