---
reference_id: "PMID:40862484"
title: "Update on autoimmune retinopathy: diagnosis and management."
authors:
- Elbasiony E
- Hu JCW
- McKay KM
- Sobrin L
journal: Curr Opin Ophthalmol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1097/ICU.0000000000001162
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update on autoimmune retinopathy: diagnosis and management.
**Authors:** Elbasiony E, Hu JCW, McKay KM, Sobrin L
**Journal:** Curr Opin Ophthalmol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1097/ICU.0000000000001162](https://doi.org/10.1097/ICU.0000000000001162)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Ophthalmol. 2025 Aug 25. doi: 10.1097/ICU.0000000000001162. Online 
ahead of print.

Update on autoimmune retinopathy: diagnosis and management.

Elbasiony E(1), Hu JCW, McKay KM, Sobrin L.

Author information:
(1)Massachussetts Eye and Ear, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Autoimmune retinopathy (AIR) is a rare but vision-threatening 
disorder characterized by retinal damage through humoral or cellular immune 
mechanisms. The purpose of this review is to summarize our current understanding 
on imaging, antibody testing, and immunosuppressive therapies for AIR.
RECENT FINDINGS: AIR includes paraneoplastic forms - such as cancer-associated 
retinopathy (CAR) and melanoma-associated retinopathy (MAR) - as well as a 
nonparaneoplastic (np) variant (npAIR). Definitive diagnosis of AIR is 
challenging due the similar clinical findings between AIR and inherited retinal 
dystrophies and the lack of specific laboratory testing. Therefore, a multimodal 
diagnostic approach including electroretinography, fundus imaging, visual field 
testing, genetic testing, and serologic assays is necessary to support a 
diagnosis of AIR. Early diagnosis and treatment with systemic or local 
immunomodulators may preserve retinal function and lead to better visual 
outcomes.
SUMMARY: This review highlights current diagnostic approach and treatment 
strategies in AIR. Advances in biomarkers and precision immunotherapy may 
improve diagnosis and outcomes.

Copyright © 2025 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/ICU.0000000000001162
PMID: 40862484