---
reference_id: PMID:20301369
title: Duane Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Barry BJ
- Whitman MC
- Hunter DG
- Engle EC
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Duane Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Barry BJ, Whitman MC, Hunter DG, Engle EC

## Content

1. Duane Syndrome.

Barry BJ(1)(2), Whitman MC(3), Hunter DG(4), Engle EC(5)(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2007 May 25 [updated 2019 Aug 29].

Author information:
(1)Research Specialist II, Boston Children's Hospital, Department of Neurology, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland
(3)Assistant Professor of Ophthalmology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
(4)Ophthalmologist-in-Chief, Boston Children's Hospital, Professor of 
Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
(5)Senior Associate in Neurology and Ophthalmology, Boston Children's Hospital, 
Professor of Neurology and Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Duane syndrome is a strabismus condition clinically 
characterized by congenital non-progressive limited horizontal eye movement 
accompanied by globe retraction which results in narrowing of the palpebral 
fissure. The lateral movement anomaly results from failure of the abducens 
nucleus and nerve (cranial nerve VI) to fully innervate the lateral rectus 
muscle; globe retraction occurs as a result of abnormal innervation of the 
lateral rectus muscle by the oculomotor nerve (cranial nerve III). At birth, 
affected infants have restricted ability to move the affected eye(s) outward 
(abduction) and/or inward (adduction), though the limitations may not be 
recognized in early infancy. In addition, the globe retracts into the orbit with 
attempted adduction, accompanied by narrowing of the palpebral fissure. Many 
individuals with Duane syndrome have strabismus in primary gaze but can use a 
compensatory head turn to align the eyes, and thus can preserve binocular vision 
and avoid diplopia. Individuals with Duane syndrome who lack binocular vision 
are at risk for amblyopia. The majority of affected individuals with Duane 
syndrome have isolated Duane syndrome (i.e., they do not have other detected 
congenital anomalies). Other individuals with Duane syndrome fall into 
well-defined syndromic diagnoses. However, many individuals with Duane syndrome 
have non-ocular findings that do not fit a known syndrome; these individuals are 
included as part of the discussion of nonsyndromic Duane syndrome.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of Duane syndrome is usually made by an 
ophthalmologist based on clinical findings. More than 98% of individuals with 
isolated Duane syndrome and no family history lack an identified genetic 
etiology. Molecular genetic testing for a pathogenic variant in CHN1, MAFB, or 
SALL4 is most appropriate for those with a positive family history of isolated 
Duane syndrome (although de novo pathogenic variants in these genes have been 
detected in some simplex cases) and for those with clinical ocular findings 
designated as type I or type III Duane syndrome.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Spectacles or contact lenses for 
refractive error; occlusion or penalization of the better-seeing eye for 
treatment of amblyopia; prism glasses (usually in older individuals with mild 
involvement) to improve the compensatory head position; extraocular muscle 
surgery to address alignment in primary gaze, compensatory head posture, and 
upshoot or downshoot. Prevention of secondary complications: Amblyopia therapy 
to prevent vision loss in the less preferred eye; extraocular muscle surgery to 
prevent loss of binocular vision in individuals who abandon the compensatory 
head posture and allow strabismus to become manifest, and to prevent neck muscle 
problems in those with large compensatory head postures. Surveillance: 
Ophthalmologic visits every three to six months during the first years of life 
to prevent, detect, and treat amblyopia; annual or biannual examinations once 
the presence of binocular vision and reduced risk for amblyopia is confirmed, 
and in all individuals older than age seven to 12; no surveillance in adulthood 
beyond public health guidelines. Evaluation of relatives at risk: Eye 
examination within the first year of life so that early diagnosis and treatment 
can prevent secondary complications.
GENETIC COUNSELING: The majority of individuals with isolated Duane syndrome 
represent simplex cases (i.e., a single occurrence in a family), with a positive 
family history apparent for only approximately 10% of affected individuals. 
Duane syndrome resulting from a CHN1, MAFB, or SALL4 pathogenic variant is 
inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Most individuals with isolated CHN1-, 
MAFB-, or SALL4-related Duane syndrome have the disorder as the result of a 
pathogenic variant inherited from an affected parent. Each child of an 
individual with Duane syndrome resulting from an identified pathogenic variant 
has a 50% chance of inheriting the variant. Prenatal and preimplantation genetic 
testing are possible once the causative pathogenic variant has been identified 
in an affected family member.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301369