---
reference_id: "PMID:24645145"
title: "'Visual snow' - a disorder distinct from persistent migraine aura."
authors:
- Schankin CJ
- Maniyar FH
- Digre KB
- Goadsby PJ
journal: Brain
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awu050
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 'Visual snow' - a disorder distinct from persistent migraine aura.
**Authors:** Schankin CJ, Maniyar FH, Digre KB, Goadsby PJ
**Journal:** Brain (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awu050](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awu050)

## Content

1. Brain. 2014 May;137(Pt 5):1419-28. doi: 10.1093/brain/awu050. Epub 2014 Mar
18.

'Visual snow' - a disorder distinct from persistent migraine aura.

Schankin CJ(1), Maniyar FH, Digre KB, Goadsby PJ.

Author information:
(1)1 Headache Group, Department of Neurology, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Patients with 'visual snow' report continuous tiny dots in the entire visual 
field similar to the noise of an analogue television. As they frequently have 
migraine as a comorbidity with ophthalmological, neurological and radiological 
studies being normal, they are offered various diagnoses, including persistent 
migraine aura, post-hallucinogen flashback, or psychogenic disorder. Our aim was 
to study patients with 'visual snow' to characterize the phenotype. A three-step 
approach was followed: (i) a chart review of patients referred to us identified 
22 patients with 'visual snow'. Fifteen had additional visual symptoms, and 20 
patients had comorbid migraine, five with aura; (ii) to identify systematically 
additional visual symptoms, an internet survey (n = 275) of self-assessed 
'visual snow' subjects done by Eye On Vision Foundation was analysed. In two 
random samples from 235 complete data sets, the same eight additional visual 
symptoms were present in >33% of patients: palinopsia (trailing and 
afterimages), entoptic phenomena (floaters, blue field entoptic phenomenon, 
spontaneous photopsia, self-light of the eye), photophobia, and nyctalopia 
(impaired night vision); and (iii) a prospective semi-structured telephone 
interview in a further 142 patients identified 78 (41 female) with confirmed 
'visual snow' and normal ophthalmological exams. Of these, 72 had at least three 
of the additional visual symptoms from step (ii). One-quarter of patients had 
'visual snow' as long as they could remember, whereas for the others the mean 
age of onset was 21 ± 9 years. Thirty-two patients had constant visual symptoms, 
whereas the remainder experienced either progressive or stepwise worsening. 
Headache was the most frequent symptom associated with the beginning or a 
worsening of the visual disturbance (36%), whereas migraine aura (seven 
patients) and consumption of illicit drugs (five, no hallucinogens) were rare. 
Migraine (59%), migraine with aura (27%), anxiety and depression were common 
comorbidities over time. Eight patients had first degree relatives with visual 
snow. Clinical investigations were not contributory. Only a few treatment trials 
have been successful in individual patients. Our data suggest that 'visual snow' 
is a unique visual disturbance clinically distinct from migraine aura that can 
be disabling for patients. Migraine is a common concomitant although standard 
migraine treatments are often unhelpful. 'Visual snow' should be considered a 
distinct disorder and systematic studies of its clinical features, biology and 
treatment responses need to be commenced to begin to understand what has been an 
almost completely ignored problem.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awu050
PMID: 24645145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]