---
reference_id: "PMID:20490926"
title: Glycogen storage disease type III in the Irish population.
authors:
- Crushell E
- Treacy EP
- Dawe J
- Durkie M
- Beauchamp NJ
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-010-9096-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glycogen storage disease type III in the Irish population.
**Authors:** Crushell E, Treacy EP, Dawe J, Durkie M, Beauchamp NJ
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-010-9096-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-010-9096-4)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2010 Dec;33 Suppl 3:S215-8. doi:
10.1007/s10545-010-9096-4.  Epub 2010 May 20.

Glycogen storage disease type III in the Irish population.

Crushell E(1), Treacy EP, Dawe J, Durkie M, Beauchamp NJ.

Author information:
(1)National Centre for Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Children's University 
Hospital, Temple St, Dublin 1, Ireland. ellen.crushell@cuh.ie

Glycogen storage disease type III (GSD III) results from mutations of the AGL 
gene encoding the glycogen debrancher enzyme. The disease has clinical and 
biochemical heterogeneity reflecting the severity of the AGL mutations. We 
sought to characterise the molecular defects in our cohort of Irish patients 
with GSD III. Fifteen patients from eight unrelated Irish families were 
identified: six males and nine females. The age ranged from 2-39 years old, and 
all presented in the first 3 years of life. Four patients (of three families) 
had mild disease with hepatomegaly, mild hypoglycaemia and normal creatine 
kinase (CK) levels. Five families had more severe disease, with liver and 
skeletal muscle involvement and elevated CK. Eleven different mutations were 
identified amongst the eight families. Of the 11, six were novel: p.T512fs, 
p.S736fs, p.A1400fs, p.K1407fs, p.Y519X and p.D627Y. The family homozygous for 
p.A1400fs had the most severe phenotype (early-onset hypoglycaemia, massive 
hepatomegaly, myopathy and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy before age 2 years), 
which was not halted by aggressive carbohydrate and protein supplementation. 
Conversely, the only missense mutation identified in the cohort, p.D627Y, was 
associated with a mild phenotype. The phenotypic diversity in our GSD III cohort 
is mirrored by the allelic heterogeneity. We describe two novel null mutations 
in exon 32 in two families with severe GSD III resistant to current treatment 
modalities. Knowledge of the specific mutations segregating in this cohort may 
allow for the development of new therapeutic interventions.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-010-9096-4
PMID: 20490926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]