---
reference_id: "PMID:40719714"
title: "Orbital Rhabdomyosarcoma: Clinicodemographic Features and Outcomes from Turkey."
authors:
- Ulas B
- Ozcan AA
- Aljundi S
journal: Indian J Ophthalmol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.4103/IJO.IJO_921_24
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- "Orbital Neoplasms/epidemiology, diagnosis, therapy"
- Female
- Retrospective Studies
- Turkey/epidemiology
- Child
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma/epidemiology, diagnosis"
- Adolescent
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- Prognosis
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Young Adult
- Adult
- Orbit/diagnostic imaging
- Biopsy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Orbital Rhabdomyosarcoma: Clinicodemographic Features and Outcomes from Turkey.
**Authors:** Ulas B, Ozcan AA, Aljundi S
**Journal:** Indian J Ophthalmol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.4103/IJO.IJO_921_24](https://doi.org/10.4103/IJO.IJO_921_24)

## Content

1. Indian J Ophthalmol. 2025 Aug 1;73(8):1132-1137. doi: 10.4103/IJO.IJO_921_24.
Epub 2025 Jul 28.

Orbital Rhabdomyosarcoma: Clinicodemographic Features and Outcomes from Turkey.

Ulas B(1), Ozcan AA, Aljundi S.

Author information:
(1)Ophthalmology Department, Cukurova University Faculty of Medicine, Adana,
Turkey.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the clinical features, radiologic, and histopathologic
characteristics of patients with orbital rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS).
METHODS: The records of 14 patients with histologically proven orbital
rhabdomyosarcoma between November 2012 and January 2024 were evaluated
retrospectively. The age, gender, referring diagnosis, year of diagnosis,
clinical features, histopathological results, radiology reports, follow-up
period, management plans, and prognosis were obtained from patient electronic
files and descriptively presented.
RESULTS: A total of 14 patients with a mean age of 12.64 ± 6.68 years were
evaluated. Ten were males 71.43%, and four were females 28.57%. Six (42.85%)
patients presented initially with proptosis as the main presenting complaint,
and all of the patients had some degree of proptosis. Eleven patients (78.57%)
had embryonal RMS, and three patients (21.42%) had alveolar RMS subtypes. The
follow-up period ranged between 6 months and 6 years (26.36 ± 21.55 months). In
10 (71.42%) patients, there was a good response to treatment with no orbital
recurrence or progression of the lesion during the follow-up period. Two
patients had (14.28%) mortality during follow-up.
CONCLUSION: Rhabdomyosarcoma management and diagnosis are important for
preventing its spread and threatening patients' life and visual survival.
Orbital RMS is a rare but important diagnosis in the orbit, and differential
diagnoses need to be considered because RMS may have presenting features
resembling other inflammatory orbital conditions.

Copyright © 2025 Indian Journal of Ophthalmology.

DOI: 10.4103/IJO.IJO_921_24
PMCID: PMC12416614
PMID: 40719714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.
