---
reference_id: "PMID:35948564"
title: mTORC1 controls Golgi architecture and vesicle secretion by phosphorylation of SCYL1.
authors:
- Kaeser-Pebernard S
- Vionnet C
- Mari M
- Sankar DS
- Hu Z
- Roubaty C
- Martínez-Martínez E
- Zhao H
- Spuch-Calvar M
- Petri-Fink A
- Rainer G
- Steinberg F
- Reggiori F
- Dengjel J
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-32487-7
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Vesicular Transport/metabolism"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- Golgi Apparatus/metabolism
- Humans
- Intracellular Membranes/metabolism
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- Mechanistic Target of Rapamycin Complex 1/metabolism
- Phosphorylation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# mTORC1 controls Golgi architecture and vesicle secretion by phosphorylation of SCYL1.
**Authors:** Kaeser-Pebernard S, Vionnet C, Mari M, Sankar DS, Hu Z, Roubaty C, Martínez-Martínez E, Zhao H, Spuch-Calvar M, Petri-Fink A, Rainer G, Steinberg F, Reggiori F, Dengjel J
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-022-32487-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-32487-7)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2022 Aug 10;13(1):4685. doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-32487-7.

mTORC1 controls Golgi architecture and vesicle secretion by phosphorylation of 
SCYL1.

Kaeser-Pebernard S(1), Vionnet C(1), Mari M(2)(3), Sankar DS(1), Hu Z(1), 
Roubaty C(1), Martínez-Martínez E(1), Zhao H(4), Spuch-Calvar M(5)(6), 
Petri-Fink A(5)(7), Rainer G(4), Steinberg F(8), Reggiori F(2)(3)(9), Dengjel 
J(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Fribourg, 1700, Fribourg, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences of Cells and Systems, University of 
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, 9713 AV, Groningen, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, 8000, Aarhus, Denmark.
(4)Section of Medicine, University of Fribourg, 1700, Fribourg, Switzerland.
(5)Adolf Merkle Institute, University of Fribourg, 1700, Fribourg, Switzerland.
(6)CINBIO, Universidade de Vigo, 36310, Vigo, Spain.
(7)Department of Chemistry, University of Fribourg, 1700, Fribourg, Switzerland.
(8)Center for Biological Systems Analysis, University of Freiburg, 79104, 
Freiburg, Germany.
(9)Aarhus Institute of Advanced Studies (AIAS), Aarhus University, 8000, Aarhus, 
Denmark.
(10)Department of Biology, University of Fribourg, 1700, Fribourg, Switzerland. 
joern.dengjel@unifr.ch.

The protein kinase mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) is a 
master regulator of cell growth and proliferation, supporting anabolic reactions 
and inhibiting catabolic pathways like autophagy. Its hyperactivation is a 
frequent event in cancer promoting tumor cell proliferation. Several 
intracellular membrane-associated mTORC1 pools have been identified, linking its 
function to distinct subcellular localizations. Here, we characterize the 
N-terminal kinase-like protein SCYL1 as a Golgi-localized target through which 
mTORC1 controls organelle distribution and extracellular vesicle secretion in 
breast cancer cells. Under growth conditions, SCYL1 is phosphorylated by mTORC1 
on Ser754, supporting Golgi localization. Upon mTORC1 inhibition, Ser754 
dephosphorylation leads to SCYL1 displacement to endosomes. Peripheral, 
dephosphorylated SCYL1 causes Golgi enlargement, redistribution of early and 
late endosomes and increased extracellular vesicle release. Thus, the 
mTORC1-controlled phosphorylation status of SCYL1 is an important determinant 
regulating subcellular distribution and function of endolysosomal compartments. 
It may also explain the pathophysiology underlying human genetic diseases such 
as CALFAN syndrome, which is caused by loss-of-function of SCYL1.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-022-32487-7
PMCID: PMC9365812
PMID: 35948564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.