---
reference_id: "PMID:39627752"
title: "Treatment options for unilateral vestibular schwannoma: a network meta-analysis."
authors:
- Huo X
- Zhao X
- Liu X
- Zhang Y
- Tian J
- Li M
journal: BMC Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12885-024-13242-1
keywords:
- Humans
- Microsurgery/methods
- "Neuroma, Acoustic/complications, therapy"
- Radiosurgery/methods
- "Tinnitus/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- Treatment Outcome
- "Vertigo/diagnosis, etiology, therapy"
- Watchful Waiting
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment options for unilateral vestibular schwannoma: a network meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Huo X, Zhao X, Liu X, Zhang Y, Tian J, Li M
**Journal:** BMC Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12885-024-13242-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12885-024-13242-1)

## Content

1. BMC Cancer. 2024 Dec 3;24(1):1490. doi: 10.1186/s12885-024-13242-1.

Treatment options for unilateral vestibular schwannoma: a network meta-analysis.

Huo X(1), Zhao X(2), Liu X(2), Zhang Y(1), Tian J(3), Li M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, General Hospital of Ningxia Medical University, 
Yinchuan, China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, North China University of Science and Technology 
Affiliated Hospital, Tangshan, Hebei, China.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, General Hospital of Ningxia Medical University, 
Yinchuan, China. nxtjh1968@163.com.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Medical Center of Chinese PLA General 
Hospital, Beijing, China. 18332758771@163.com.

This study aimed to explore the effect of observation, microsurgery, and 
radiotherapy for patients with vestibular schwannoma (VS). We searched PubMed, 
Medline, Embase, Web of Science, and Cochrane library from their establishment 
to July 31, 2024. 34 non-RCTs and 1 RCT that included 6 interventions were 
analyzed. We found the MS, and different SRS all had better tumor local control 
rates. Regarding preserved hearing, the order from the highest to the lowest was 
FSRT 5 fractions, FSRT 3 fractions, SRS, ConFSRT, Observation, and MS. Regarding 
improvement in the rate of tinnitus, the order from the highest to the lowest 
was ConFSRT, FSRT 3 fractions, SRS, Observation, MS, and FSRT 5 fractions. In 
terms of improving the rate of disequilibrium/vertigo, the order from the 
highest to the lowest was SRS, Observation, FSRT 3 fractions, FSRT 5 fractions, 
MS, and ConFSRT. In terms of protection of the trigeminal nerve, the order from 
the highest to lowest was observation, SRS, ConFSRT, FSRT 3 fractions, FSRT 5 
fractions, and MS. Lastly, in terms of protection of the facial nerve, the order 
from the highest to lowest was SRS, ConFSRT, Observation, FSRT 3 fractions, FSRT 
5 fractions, and MS. In patients with VS, MS and radiosurgery showed better 
local tumor control rates; however, compared with MS, different SRS all provided 
better protection of nerve function and improved the symptoms of vestibular 
function and tinnitus, among which the best was SRS. Therefore, in these 
patients, SRS may be a promising alternative treatment.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-024-13242-1
PMCID: PMC11613487
PMID: 39627752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: Not Applicable. Consent for publication: Not applicable. Competing 
interests: The authors declare no competing interests.