---
reference_id: "PMID:39152028"
title: "Safety and efficacy of intra-erythrocyte dexamethasone sodium phosphate in children with ataxia telangiectasia (ATTeST): a multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial."
authors:
- Zielen S
- Crawford T
- Benatti L
- Magnani M
- Kieslich M
- Ryan M
- Meyts I
- Gulati S
- Borgohain R
- Yadav R
- Pal P
- Hegde A
- Kumar S
- Venkateswar A
- Udani V
- Vinayan KP
- Nissenkorn A
- Fazzi E
- Leuzzi V
- Stray-Pedersen A
- Pietrucha B
- Pascual SI
- Gouider R
- Koenig MK
- Wu S
- Perlman S
- Thye D
- Janhofer G
- Horn B
- Whitehouse W
- Lederman H
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(24)00220-5
keywords:
- Humans
- "Dexamethasone/administration & dosage, analogs & derivatives"
- Double-Blind Method
- Child
- Female
- Male
- Adolescent
- Ataxia Telangiectasia/drug therapy
- Treatment Outcome
- Erythrocytes/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Safety and efficacy of intra-erythrocyte dexamethasone sodium phosphate in children with ataxia telangiectasia (ATTeST): a multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial.
**Authors:** Zielen S, Crawford T, Benatti L, Magnani M, Kieslich M, Ryan M, Meyts I, Gulati S, Borgohain R, Yadav R, Pal P, Hegde A, Kumar S, Venkateswar A, Udani V, Vinayan KP, Nissenkorn A, Fazzi E, Leuzzi V, Stray-Pedersen A, Pietrucha B, Pascual SI, Gouider R, Koenig MK, Wu S, Perlman S, Thye D, Janhofer G, Horn B, Whitehouse W, Lederman H
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(24)00220-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(24)00220-5)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2024 Sep;23(9):871-882. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(24)00220-5.

Safety and efficacy of intra-erythrocyte dexamethasone sodium phosphate in 
children with ataxia telangiectasia (ATTeST): a multicentre, randomised, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial.

Zielen S(1), Crawford T(2), Benatti L(3), Magnani M(4), Kieslich M(1), Ryan 
M(5), Meyts I(6), Gulati S(7), Borgohain R(8), Yadav R(9), Pal P(9), Hegde 
A(10), Kumar S(11), Venkateswar A(11), Udani V(12), Vinayan KP(13), Nissenkorn 
A(14), Fazzi E(15), Leuzzi V(16), Stray-Pedersen A(17), Pietrucha B(18), Pascual 
SI(19), Gouider R(20), Koenig MK(21), Wu S(22), Perlman S(23), Thye D(24), 
Janhofer G(3), Horn B(25), Whitehouse W(26), Lederman H(27).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany.
(2)Department of Neurology, The Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, 
MD, USA.
(3)EryDel, Bresso, Italy.
(4)Department of Biomolecular Sciences, University of Urbino, Urbino, Italy.
(5)Department of Neurology, Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, VIC, 
Australia.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Centre of Excellence and Advanced Research for 
Childhood Neuro-developmental Disorders and Child Neurology Division, All India 
Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.
(8)Department of Neurology, Nizam's Institute of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad, 
India.
(9)Department of Neurology, National Institute of Mental Health and 
Neurosciences, Bangalore, India.
(10)Department of Neurology, Jaslok Hospital and Medical Research Center, 
Mumbai, India.
(11)Department of Neurology, Vijaya Hospital, Chennai, India.
(12)Pediatric Neurology, Hinduja National Hospital and Research Center, Mumbai, 
India.
(13)Pediatric Neurology, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences, Kochi, India.
(14)Children's Neurology Clinic, Sheba Medical Centre, Tel-Hashomer, School of 
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(15)Child Neurology and Psychiatry Unit, Civil Hospital, and Department of 
Clinical and Experimental Sciences, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(16)Department of Neurosciences and Mental Health, La Sapienza University, Rome, 
Italy.
(17)Norwegian National Unit for Newborn Screening, Division of Pediatric and 
Adolescent Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(18)Department of Immunology, The Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, 
Poland.
(19)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Hospital Universitario La Paz Madrid, 
Madrid, Spain.
(20)Neurology Department, Clinical Investigation Center "Neurosciences and 
Mental Health", Razi Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia.
(21)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Child and Adolescent Neurology, UT 
Health, McGovern Medical School, Houston, TX, USA.
(22)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati 
College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(23)Department of Neurology, Ataxia Center, and Huntington's Disease Center of 
Excellence, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(24)Quince Therapeutics, South San Francisco, CA, USA.
(25)Quince Therapeutics, South San Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address: 
bhorn@quincetx.com.
(26)Paediatric Neurology, Nottingham Children's Hospital, Nottingham University 
Hospitals NHS Trust and School of Medicine University of Nottingham, Nottingham, 
UK.
(27)Division of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, The Johns Hopkins Medical 
Institutions, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2024 Sep;23(9):846-847. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(24)00310-7.

BACKGROUND: Ataxia telangiectasia is a multisystem disorder with progressive 
neurodegeneration. Corticosteroids can improve neurological functioning in 
patients with the disorder but adrenal suppression and symptom recurrence on 
treatment discontinuation has limited their use, prompting the development of 
novel steroid delivery systems. The aim of the ATTeST study was to evaluate the 
efficacy and safety of intra-erythrocyte delivery of dexamethasone sodium 
phosphate compared with placebo in children with ataxia telangiectasia.
METHODS: This multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 
trial was done at 22 centres in 12 countries (Australia, Belgium, Germany, 
India, Israel, Italy, Norway, Poland, Spain, Tunisia, the UK, and the USA). 
Eligible participants were children aged 6 years or older weighing more than 15 
kg who met clinical criteria for ataxia telangiectasia but who had preserved 
autonomous gait. Participants were randomly assigned (1:1:1) to low-dose 
(approximately 5-10 mg), or high-dose (approximately 14-22 mg) intra-erythrocyte 
dexamethasone sodium phosphate, or placebo, using an independent interactive web 
response system, with minimisation for sex and age (6-9 years vs ≥10 years). 
Intravenous intra-erythrocyte dexamethasone sodium phosphate was administered 
once a month for 6 months. Participants, employees of the sponsor, 
investigators, all raters of efficacy endpoints, and central reviewers were 
masked to treatment assignment and dose allocations. The primary efficacy 
endpoint was change in the modified International Cooperative Ataxia Rating 
Scale (mICARS) from baseline to month 6, assessed in the modified 
intention-to-treat (mITT) population, which included all randomly assigned 
participants who received at least one dose of study drug and had at least one 
post-baseline efficacy assessment. This trial is registered with 
Clinicaltrials.gov (NCT02770807) and is complete.
FINDINGS: Between March 2, 2017, and May 13, 2021, 239 children were assessed 
for eligibility, of whom 176 were randomly assigned. One patient assigned to 
high-dose intra-erythrocyte dexamethasone sodium phosphate did not initiate 
treatment. 175 patients received at least one dose of treatment (59 patients 
received the low dose and 57 received the high dose of intra-erythrocyte 
dexamethasone sodium phosphate, and 59 received placebo). The mITT population 
comprised 164 participants (56 children in the low-dose group, 54 children in 
the high-dose group, and 54 in the placebo group). Compared with the placebo 
group, no differences were identified with regard to change in mICARS score from 
baseline to 6 months in the low-dose group (least squares mean difference -1·37 
[95% CI -2·932 to 0·190]) or the high-dose group (-1·40 [-2·957 to 0·152]; 
p=0·0765). Adverse events were reported in 43 (73%) of 59 participants in the 
low-dose group, 47 (82%) of 57 participants in the high-dose group, and 43 (73%) 
of 59 participants in the placebo group. Serious adverse events were observed in 
six (10%) of 59 participants in the low-dose group, seven (12%) of 57 
participants in the high-dose group, and seven (12%) of 59 participants in the 
placebo group. There were no reports of hyperglycaemia, hypertension, hirsutism, 
or Cushingoid appearance in any of the treatment groups, nor any 
treatment-related deaths.
INTERPRETATION: Although there were no safety concerns, the primary efficacy 
endpoint was not met, possibly related to delays in treatment reducing the 
number of participants who received treatment as outlined in the protocol, and 
potentially different treatment effects according to age. Studies of 
intra-erythrocyte delivery of dexamethasone sodium phosphate will continue in 
participants aged 6-9 years, on the basis of findings from subgroup analyses 
from this trial.
FUNDING: EryDel and Quince Therapeutics.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved, including those for text and 
data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(24)00220-5
PMID: 39152028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests AN reports 
participation in a consortium that obtained the Horizon 2020 grant for this 
project. AS-P received study materials and the study drug from EryDel for this 
trial; reports grants for research in ataxia telangiectasia (AT children's 
project, AEFAT, Action for AT, Klinbeforsk, and Dam Foundation); and is the 
president of the Norwegian Society for Medical Genetics. EF received funding to 
her institution from EryDel for this project. GJ is employed as a chief medical 
officer by EryDel and Quince Therapeutics; was medical monitor for this trial; 
and received stock options from the sponsors. IM reports consulting fees, 
honoraria, or travel expenses from Boehringer-Ingelheim, Takeda, and 
CSL-Behring, for work unrelated to this project; and has held unpaid leadership 
positions in the past (president of the European Society for Immunodeficiencies 
Society, Monoclonal Antibodies for Children with Primary Immunodeficiencies, and 
International Patient Organisation for Primary Immunodeficiencies). KV reports 
honoraria from MedLink Neurology and holds leadership positions (secretary 
general of the Indian Epilepsy Society and Asian Epilepsy Academy). LB has a 
leadership role in Newron Pharmaceuticals; has received stock options from 
Quince Therapeutics; was the chief executive officer of EryDel; and holds a 
board position with Quince Therapeutics. MKK reports funding to her institution 
from EryDel for this trial; funding from Quince Therapeutics for the expanded 
access programme; and travel expenses from EryDel for attendance at the 
investigator meeting. MM received a grant and travel support from EryDel; holds 
a leadership position with Diatheva; and has stock options in EryDel and Quince 
Therapeutics. PP received grants from EryDel for this trial, paid to his 
institution; reports research grants from the Indian Council of Medical 
Research, Department of Science and Technology Science and Engineering Research 
Board, the Science and Engineering Research Board, Department of Biotechnology, 
Welcome-Department of Biotechnology, Promoting Academic research Conversion to 
Enterprise, Scientific Knowledge for Ageing and Neurological Ailments, and the 
Michael J Fox Foundation all paid to his institution; honoraria as a speaker 
from the International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society, Movement 
Disorders Societies of Korea, Taiwan, and Bangladesh, and the National Institute 
of Mental Health and Neurosciences; holds leadership positions including chair 
of the education committee of the International Parkison's and Movement 
Disorders Society; and is the unpaid editor-in-chief of Annals of Movement 
Disorders. RY reports research grants from the Indian Council of Medical 
Research, Parkinson's and Movement Disorders Research Fund of the National 
Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences, and the SKAN foundation; book 
royalties from Jaypee; speaker honoraria from International Parkison's and 
Movement Disorders Society; and holds a leadership role in the Parkinson's 
Society of Karnataka. RG reports participation on data safety monitoring or 
advisory boards for Biogen, Hikma, Merck, Roche, and Sanofi. TC received 
consulting fees from Syneos Health Communications and Scholar Rock; honoraria 
for CME educational programme development from Med Force and the Muscular 
Dystrophy Association; and participation on safety monitoring or advisory boards 
for Taysha Giant Axonal Neuropathy. WW reports grants from EryDel to their 
institution for this trial; is a member of a data safety monitoring board for a 
clinical trial of A-TC7 in ataxia telangiectasia; and is a trustee of the 
charity Syncope Trust & Reflex Anoxic Seizures. HL declares reports grants and 
equipment from EryDel to their institution for this trial; consulting fees from 
EryDel for analysis of adverse events and presentation to the US Food and Drug 
Administration; and travel expenses from EryDel for attending investigator 
meetings for this trial. VU received grants from EryDel to his institution for 
this trial. SZ declares that Frankfurt University was funded by the Horizon 
grant from the EU and by EryDel for conducting this trial; research grants 
outside submitted work (Palas GmbH Company Karlsruhe Germany and Ministry of 
Health of the German Republic); consulting fees or honoraria from Engelhard 
GmbH, Boehringer Ingelheim, Allergy Therapeutics, AstraZeneca, Sanofi Aventis, 
EryDel SpA, and Lofarma; and is a member of the European Academy of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology guidelines group on allergic asthma. MK received grants from 
EryDel for this trial and funding from Quince Therapeutics for the expanded 
access programme; consulting fees from Desitin Pharma, Eisai Pharma, STADA 
pharm, and Life Science Consulting; travel expenses from Desitin Pharma; reports 
participation on a data safety monitoring board for Eisai Pharma; and is a board 
member and the vice president of the Neuropaediatric Society (Germany, Austria, 
and Switzerland). BH reports personal fees from Quince Therapeutics for her work 
in Clinical Development; received travel expenses from Quince Therapeutics for 
the investigator's meeting; is a consultant for Foundation for the Accreditation 
of Cellular Therapy; holds an unpaid position as the founder and chair of 
Florida Pediatric BMT and Cell Therapy Consortium (FPBCC) for 2018–23; and has 
received multiple grants for the work of the FPBCC. DT is the chief medical 
officer and chief executive officer of Quince Therapeutics. AV, BP, MR, RB, SIP, 
SG, SW, SP, VL, and AH declare no competing interests.