---
reference_id: "PMID:26303086"
title: Androgen receptor roles in spermatogenesis and infertility.
authors:
- "O'Hara L"
- Smith LB
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.beem.2015.04.006
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- "Infertility, Male/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Mutation
- "Receptors, Androgen/genetics, metabolism"
- Spermatogenesis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Androgen receptor roles in spermatogenesis and infertility.
**Authors:** O'Hara L, Smith LB
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.beem.2015.04.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beem.2015.04.006)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Aug;29(4):595-605. doi:
10.1016/j.beem.2015.04.006. Epub 2015 Apr 25.

Androgen receptor roles in spermatogenesis and infertility.

O'Hara L(1), Smith LB(2).

Author information:
(1)MRC Centre for Reproductive Health, University of Edinburgh, The Queen's
Medical Research Institute, 47 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh EH16 4TJ, UK.
Electronic address: l.ohara@ed.ac.uk.
(2)MRC Centre for Reproductive Health, University of Edinburgh, The Queen's
Medical Research Institute, 47 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh EH16 4TJ, UK.
Electronic address: Lee.Smith@ed.ac.uk.

Androgens such as testosterone are steroid hormones essential for normal male
reproductive development and function. Mutations of androgen receptors (AR) are
often found in patients with disorders of male reproductive development, and
milder mutations may be responsible for some cases of male infertility.
Androgens exert their action through AR and its signalling in the testis is
essential for spermatogenesis. AR is not expressed in the developing germ cell
lineage so is thought to exert its effects through testicular Sertoli and
peri-tubular myoid (PTM) cells. AR signalling in spermatogenesis has been
investigated in rodent models where testosterone levels are chemically supressed
or models with transgenic disruption of AR. These models have pinpointed the
steps of spermatogenesis that require AR signalling, specifically maintenance of
spermatogonial numbers, blood-testis barrier integrity, completion of meiosis,
adhesion of spermatids and spermiation, together these studies detail the
essential nature of androgens in the promotion of male fertility.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.beem.2015.04.006
PMID: 26303086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
