---
reference_id: "PMID:39538135"
title: "Clinicopathologic features and treatment efficacy of patients with BRAF V600E-mutated metastatic colorectal cancer: a multi-center real-world propensity score matching study."
authors:
- Wei GX
- Zhou YW
- Dong C
- Zhang T
- Cao P
- Xie L
- Qiu M
journal: BMC Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12885-024-13171-z
keywords:
- Humans
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Male
- Female
- "Colorectal Neoplasms/genetics, drug therapy, pathology, mortality"
- Propensity Score
- Middle Aged
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- Aged
- "Bevacizumab/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- Mutation
- "Leucovorin/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- Adult
- Prognosis
- "Fluorouracil/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- Retrospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
- Organoplatinum Compounds/therapeutic use
- "Camptothecin/analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinicopathologic features and treatment efficacy of patients with BRAF V600E-mutated metastatic colorectal cancer: a multi-center real-world propensity score matching study.
**Authors:** Wei GX, Zhou YW, Dong C, Zhang T, Cao P, Xie L, Qiu M
**Journal:** BMC Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12885-024-13171-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12885-024-13171-z)

## Content

1. BMC Cancer. 2024 Nov 13;24(1):1395. doi: 10.1186/s12885-024-13171-z.

Clinicopathologic features and treatment efficacy of patients with BRAF
V600E-mutated metastatic colorectal cancer: a multi-center real-world propensity
score matching study.

Wei GX(#)(1)(2), Zhou YW(#)(1), Dong C(#)(3), Zhang T(4), Cao P(1), Xie L(5),
Qiu M(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Colorectal Cancer Center, West China Hospital of Sichuan
University, 37 Guoxue Xiang Street, Chengdu, 610041, Sichuan Province, China.
(2)The Clinical Medical College of Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.
(3)Department of Oncology, Yunnan Cancer Hospital, The Third Affiliated Hospital
of Kunming Medical University, Kunming, China.
(4)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing, China.
(5)Department of Oncology, Yunnan Cancer Hospital, The Third Affiliated Hospital
of Kunming Medical University, Kunming, China. xielinyanghan@163.com.
(6)Department of Colorectal Cancer Center, West China Hospital of Sichuan
University, 37 Guoxue Xiang Street, Chengdu, 610041, Sichuan Province, China.
qiumeng@wchscu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Patients with BRAF 600E mutated mCRC are associated with specific
clinicopathological features and poor prognosis. The relative efficacy of
first-line FOLFOXIRI triplet chemotherapy or doublet chemotherapy combined with
bevacizumab in patients with BRAF 600E mutated mCRC remains controversial.
METHODS: BRAF V600E-mutated mCRC patients from 3 institutions were included. The
clinicopathological characteristics of the enrolled patients were analyzed.
Overall survival (OS) of patients was divided into 4 fractions, including 0-25%,
25-50%, 50-75%,75-100% by quartile method. Patients with OS ranging from 0 to
25% were defined as the poor prognosis group, and patients with OS ranging from
75 to 100% were defined as the good prognosis group. A propensity score matching
(PSM) analysis was performed to balance the baseline characteristics of patients
treated with doublet chemotherapy and triplet chemotherapy combined with
bevacizumab. Survival and tumor response of the two regimens were evaluated.
RESULTS: A total of 125 patients with BRAF V600E-mutated mCRC were enrolled. The
median OS of BRAF V600E-mutated mCRC was 14.9 months and the median PFS of
first-line therapy was 6.1 months. According to the multivariate analysis and
the difference in baseline characteristics between the poor prognosis group and
the good prognosis group, poor differentiation and liver metastasis were
negative independent prognostic factors for OS in patientsx with BRAF
V600E-mutated mCRC. Patients treated with first-line triplets had a longer OS
than those treated with doublets both before PSM (17.4 months vs. 13.4 months,
p = 0.022) and after PSM (17.4 months vs. 10.4 months, p = 0.004). There was no
significant benefit between triplet-drug group and doublet-drug group for PFS,
ORR and DCR. Subgroup analysis showed that patients in the triplet-drug group
had a better prognosis with the following favorable factors: age ≤ 60 years old,
PS score of 0-1, liver metastases and multiple organ metastases.
CONCLUSION: The overall prognosis of BRAF V600E mutant mCRC patients is poor.
Poor differentiation and liver metastases were negative independent prognostic
factors for OS. First-line triplet-drug therapy was associated with better OS,
especially in patients with good physical condition and high tumor burden.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12885-024-13171-z
PMCID: PMC11558966
PMID: 39538135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Ethics approval and consent to
participate The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of West
China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China [Approval number: 2022 Review
(NO.807)]. Consent to participate This is a retrospective observational study,
so patients ' informed consent is not required. And this was approved by the
Institutional Review Board of West China Hospital, Sichuan University. Consent
for publication Not applicable. Competing interests The authors declare no
competing interests.
