---
reference_id: "PMID:16801345"
title: A molecular and clinical study of Larsen syndrome caused by mutations in FLNB.
authors:
- Bicknell LS
- Farrington-Rock C
- Shafeghati Y
- Rump P
- Alanay Y
- Alembik Y
- Al-Madani N
- Firth H
- Karimi-Nejad MH
- Kim CA
- Leask K
- Maisenbacher M
- Moran E
- Pappas JG
- Prontera P
- de Ravel T
- Fryns JP
- Sweeney E
- Fryer A
- Unger S
- Wilson LC
- Lachman RS
- Rimoin DL
- Cohn DH
- Krakow D
- Robertson SP
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2006.043687
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A molecular and clinical study of Larsen syndrome caused by mutations in FLNB.
**Authors:** Bicknell LS, Farrington-Rock C, Shafeghati Y, Rump P, Alanay Y, Alembik Y, Al-Madani N, Firth H, Karimi-Nejad MH, Kim CA, Leask K, Maisenbacher M, Moran E, Pappas JG, Prontera P, de Ravel T, Fryns JP, Sweeney E, Fryer A, Unger S, Wilson LC, Lachman RS, Rimoin DL, Cohn DH, Krakow D, Robertson SP
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2006.043687](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2006.043687)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2007 Feb;44(2):89-98. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2006.043687. Epub 2006 Jun
 26.

A molecular and clinical study of Larsen syndrome caused by mutations in FLNB.

Bicknell LS(1), Farrington-Rock C, Shafeghati Y, Rump P, Alanay Y, Alembik Y, 
Al-Madani N, Firth H, Karimi-Nejad MH, Kim CA, Leask K, Maisenbacher M, Moran E, 
Pappas JG, Prontera P, de Ravel T, Fryns JP, Sweeney E, Fryer A, Unger S, Wilson 
LC, Lachman RS, Rimoin DL, Cohn DH, Krakow D, Robertson SP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Otago, Dunedin, New 
Zealand.

BACKGROUND: Larsen syndrome is an autosomal dominant osteochondrodysplasia 
characterised by large-joint dislocations and craniofacial anomalies. Recently, 
Larsen syndrome was shown to be caused by missense mutations or small inframe 
deletions in FLNB, encoding the cytoskeletal protein filamin B. To further 
delineate the molecular causes of Larsen syndrome, 20 probands with Larsen 
syndrome together with their affected relatives were evaluated for mutations in 
FLNB and their phenotypes studied.
METHODS: Probands were screened for mutations in FLNB using a combination of 
denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography, direct sequencing and 
restriction endonuclease digestion. Clinical and radiographical features of the 
patients were evaluated.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: The clinical signs most frequently associated with a 
FLNB mutation are the presence of supernumerary carpal and tarsal bones and 
short, broad, spatulate distal phalanges, particularly of the thumb. All 
individuals with Larsen syndrome-associated FLNB mutations are heterozygous for 
either missense or small inframe deletions. Three mutations are recurrent, with 
one mutation, 5071G-->A, observed in 6 of 20 subjects. The distribution of 
mutations within the FLNB gene is non-random, with clusters of mutations leading 
to substitutions in the actin-binding domain and filamin repeats 13-17 being the 
most common cause of Larsen syndrome. These findings collectively define 
autosomal dominant Larsen syndrome and demonstrate clustering of causative 
mutations in FLNB.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2006.043687
PMCID: PMC2598053
PMID: 16801345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.