---
reference_id: "PMID:37529414"
title: "Autosomal Recessive Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 9 With a Response to Phosphate Repletion: A Case Report."
authors:
- Haji S
- Miyamoto R
- Morino H
- Osaki Y
- Tsuji S
- Nishino I
- Abe M
- Izumi Y
journal: Neurol Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200070
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal Recessive Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 9 With a Response to Phosphate Repletion: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Haji S, Miyamoto R, Morino H, Osaki Y, Tsuji S, Nishino I, Abe M, Izumi Y
**Journal:** Neurol Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1212/NXG.0000000000200070](https://doi.org/10.1212/NXG.0000000000200070)

## Content

1. Neurol Genet. 2023 May 9;9(3):e200070. doi: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200070.
eCollection 2023 Jun.

Autosomal Recessive Spinocerebellar Ataxia Type 9 With a Response to Phosphate
Repletion: A Case Report.

Haji S(1), Miyamoto R(1), Morino H(1), Osaki Y(1), Tsuji S(1), Nishino I(1), Abe
M(1), Izumi Y(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neurology (S.H., R.M., Y.O., Y.I.), Tokushima
University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences; Department of Clinical
Neuroscience and Therapeutics (H.M.), Graduate School of Biomedical and Health
Sciences; Department of Hematology (S.T., M.A.), Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Tokushima University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences; Department of
Neuromuscular Research (I.N.), National Institute of Neuroscience, National
Centre of Neurology and Psychiatry; and Department of Clinical Genome Analysis
(I.N.), Medical Genome Center, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry,
Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Autosomal recessive spinocerebellar ataxia type 9 (SCAR9) has
received attention due to its potential response to coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10)
supplementation; however, the response has so far been limited and variable.
METHODS: We report a SCAR9 patient with severe hypophosphatemia who responded
well to CoQ10 and phosphate repletion.
RESULTS: A 70-year-old man (the offspring of a consanguineous marriage)
presented with cerebellar ataxia and intense fatigue after exercise. Whole-exome
sequencing identified a novel homozygous deletion mutation
(NM_020247.5:c.1218_1219del) in COQ8A. We thus diagnosed him with SCAR9.
Supplementation of CoQ10 alleviated his symptoms, with the Scale for the
Assessment and Rating of Ataxia (SARA) dropping from 16 to 14. During the course
of the disease, he demonstrated continuous hypophosphatemia caused by renal
phosphate wasting. Gait dysfunction due to weakness and eye movement was
partially alleviated, and SARA dropped from 17 to 13 after phosphate repletion.
DISCUSSION: Phosphate repletion should be considered for patients with severe
hypophosphatemia without any apparent subjective symptoms. In this case,
phosphate repletion could have improved myopathy leading to partial improvement
in the patient's symptoms. Further analyses regarding the association between
COQ8A mutation and phosphate wasting are required to elucidate the detailed
pathogenesis.
CLASSIFICATION OF EVIDENCE: This provides Class IV evidence. This is a single
observational study without controls.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/NXG.0000000000200070
PMCID: PMC10389171
PMID: 37529414

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no disclosures relevant to
the manuscript. Full disclosure form information provided by the authors is
available with the full text of this article at Neurology.org/NG.
