---
reference_id: "PMID:29159982"
title: "Temple syndrome as a differential diagnosis to Prader-Willi syndrome: Identifying three new patients."
authors:
- Lande A
- Kroken M
- Rabben K
- Retterstøl L
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38533
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Temple syndrome as a differential diagnosis to Prader-Willi syndrome: Identifying three new patients.
**Authors:** Lande A, Kroken M, Rabben K, Retterstøl L
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.38533](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.38533)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2018 Jan;176(1):175-180. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38533. Epub
2017  Nov 21.

Temple syndrome as a differential diagnosis to Prader-Willi syndrome: 
Identifying three new patients.

Lande A(1)(2), Kroken M(1), Rabben K(3), Retterstøl L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(3)Frambu Resource Center for Rare Disorders, Norway.

The two imprinting syndromes Temple syndrome (TS14) and Prader-Willi syndrome 
(PWS) share many features in infancy and childhood. TS14 is an important, yet 
often neglected, differential diagnosis to PWS. We wanted to assess the 
frequency of TS14 among patients tested for PWS. In all samples submitted to our 
lab for genetic PWS testing during 2014 and 2015, we consecutively conducted 
additional analyses for TS14. A total of 143 samples were included. The most 
frequent indications for testing were developmental delay, overweight, and 
hypotonia. For TS14 testing, we performed a methylation-sensitive MLPA-kit 
detecting deletions and methylation aberrations in chromosomal region 14q32. 
TS14 was confirmed in 3 out of 143 patients (2.1%). In comparison, PWS was also 
confirmed in three patients. Brief clinical descriptions of the TS14 patients 
are presented. Temple syndrome is presumably underdiagnosed, and should be 
considered when testing children for PWS.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38533
PMID: 29159982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]