---
reference_id: "PMID:28878676"
title: "PD-1 and PD-L1 Checkpoint Signaling Inhibition for Cancer Immunotherapy: Mechanism, Combinations, and Clinical Outcome."
authors:
- Alsaab HO
- Sau S
- Alzhrani R
- Tatiparti K
- Bhise K
- Kashaw SK
- Iyer AK
journal: Front Pharmacol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.3389/fphar.2017.00561
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PD-1 and PD-L1 Checkpoint Signaling Inhibition for Cancer Immunotherapy: Mechanism, Combinations, and Clinical Outcome.
**Authors:** Alsaab HO, Sau S, Alzhrani R, Tatiparti K, Bhise K, Kashaw SK, Iyer AK
**Journal:** Front Pharmacol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fphar.2017.00561](https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2017.00561)

## Content

1. Front Pharmacol. 2017 Aug 23;8:561. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2017.00561. eCollection
 2017.

PD-1 and PD-L1 Checkpoint Signaling Inhibition for Cancer Immunotherapy: 
Mechanism, Combinations, and Clinical Outcome.

Alsaab HO(1)(2), Sau S(1), Alzhrani R(1)(2), Tatiparti K(1), Bhise K(1), Kashaw 
SK(1)(3), Iyer AK(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Use-Inspired Biomaterials and Integrated Nano Delivery Systems Laboratory, 
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Eugene Applebaum College of Pharmacy and 
Health Sciences, Wayne State UniversityDetroit, MI, United States.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutics and Pharmaceutical Technology, College of 
Pharmacy, Taif UniversityTaif, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Dr. Harisingh Gour UniversitySagar, 
India.
(4)Molecular Therapeutics Program, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne 
State University, School of MedicineDetroit, MI, United States.

Several cancers are highly refractory to conventional chemotherapy. The survival 
of tumors in several cases is assisted by checkpoint immunomodulation to 
maintain the imbalance between immune surveillance and cancer cell 
proliferation. Check point antibody inhibitors, such as anti-PD-1/PD-L1, are a 
novel class of inhibitors that function as a tumor suppressing factor via 
modulation of immune cell-tumor cell interaction. These checkpoint blockers are 
rapidly becoming a highly promising cancer therapeutic approach that yields 
remarkable antitumor responses with limited side effects. In recent times, more 
than four check point antibody inhibitors have been commercialized for targeting 
PD-1, PDL-1, and CTLA-4. Despite the huge success and efficacy of the anti-PD 
therapy response, it is limited to specific types of cancers, which attributes 
to the insufficient and heterogeneous expression of PD-1 in the tumor 
microenvironment. Herein, we review the current landscape of the PD-1/PD-L1 
mechanistic role in tumor immune evasion and therapeutic outcome for cancer 
treatment. We also review the current progress in clinical trials, combination 
of drug therapy with immunotherapy, safety, and future of check point inhibitors 
for multiple types of cancer.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2017.00561
PMCID: PMC5572324
PMID: 28878676