---
reference_id: "PMID:17940615"
title: "Ankyrin-B syndrome: enhanced cardiac function balanced by risk of cardiac death and premature senescence."
authors:
- Mohler PJ
- Healy JA
- Xue H
- Puca AA
- Kline CF
- Allingham RR
- Kranias EG
- Rockman HA
- Bennett V
journal: PLoS One
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001051
keywords:
- Aging
- Animals
- "Ankyrins/genetics, physiology"
- Cellular Senescence
- Death
- Echocardiography/methods
- "Heart Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Myocardial Contraction
- Phenotype
- Risk
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ankyrin-B syndrome: enhanced cardiac function balanced by risk of cardiac death and premature senescence.
**Authors:** Mohler PJ, Healy JA, Xue H, Puca AA, Kline CF, Allingham RR, Kranias EG, Rockman HA, Bennett V
**Journal:** PLoS One (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0001051](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0001051)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2007 Oct 17;2(10):e1051. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001051.

Ankyrin-B syndrome: enhanced cardiac function balanced by risk of cardiac death
and premature senescence.

Mohler PJ(1), Healy JA, Xue H, Puca AA, Kline CF, Allingham RR, Kranias EG,
Rockman HA, Bennett V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa Carver College of
Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa, United States of America. peter-mohler@uiowa.edu

Here we report the unexpected finding that specific human ANK2 variants
represent a new example of balanced human variants. The prevalence of certain
ANK2 (encodes ankyrin-B) variants range from 2 percent of European individuals
to 8 percent in individuals from West Africa. Ankyrin-B variants associated with
severe human arrhythmia phenotypes (eg E1425G, V1516D, R1788W) were rare in the
general population. Variants associated with less severe clinical and in vitro
phenotypes were unexpectedly common. Studies with the ankyrin-B(+/-) mouse
reveal both benefits of enhanced cardiac contractility, as well as costs in
earlier senescence and reduced lifespan. Together these findings suggest a
constellation of traits that we term "ankyrin-B syndrome", which may contribute
to both aging-related disorders and enhanced cardiac function.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001051
PMCID: PMC2013943
PMID: 17940615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.
