---
reference_id: "PMID:18515143"
title: IGF signaling defects as causes of growth failure and IUGR.
authors:
- Klammt J
- Pfäffle R
- Werner H
- Kiess W
journal: Trends Endocrinol Metab
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.tem.2008.03.003
keywords:
- Animals
- Female
- "Fetal Growth Retardation/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Infant, Small for Gestational Age"
- "Models, Biological"
- Pregnancy
- "Signal Transduction/genetics, physiology"
- "Somatomedins/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IGF signaling defects as causes of growth failure and IUGR.
**Authors:** Klammt J, Pfäffle R, Werner H, Kiess W
**Journal:** Trends Endocrinol Metab (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tem.2008.03.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tem.2008.03.003)

## Content

1. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Aug;19(6):197-205. doi:
10.1016/j.tem.2008.03.003.

IGF signaling defects as causes of growth failure and IUGR.

Klammt J(1), Pfäffle R, Werner H, Kiess W.

Author information:
(1)Hospital for Children and Adolescents, University of Leipzig, 04103 Leipzig, 
Liebigstrasse 20a, Germany. juergen.klammt@medizin.uni-leipzig.de

A substantial portion of children born small for gestational age (SGA) fail to 
catch up height, despite normal or even elevated insulin-like growth factor 
(IGF1) serum levels. In most cases, the etiology of the apparent IGF1 resistance 
is regarded as idiopathic. However, the recent identification of human IGF1 and 
IGF1 receptor (IGF1R) mutations, as well as information obtained from transgenic 
animals, points to a strong genetic component being of pivotal importance in the 
development of growth retardation. These findings direct attention to molecules 
downstream of the IGF1R, which have both growth-promoting and, to a lesser 
extent, metabolic functions. Therefore, defects in these molecules are likely to 
participate in the etiology of human SGA.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tem.2008.03.003
PMID: 18515143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]