---
reference_id: "PMID:9292509"
title: STAT5A-deficient mice demonstrate a defect in granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor-induced proliferation and gene expression.
authors:
- Feldman GM
- Rosenthal LA
- Liu X
- Hayes MP
- Wynshaw-Boris A
- Leonard WJ
- Hennighausen L
- Finbloom DS
journal: Blood
year: '1997'
keywords:
- Animals
- Bone Marrow/pathology
- "Cell Division/drug effects, genetics"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Gene Expression Regulation/drug effects
- Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor/pharmacology
- "Macrophage Activation/drug effects, genetics"
- Macrophages/pathology
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Milk Proteins
- STAT5 Transcription Factor
- Trans-Activators/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# STAT5A-deficient mice demonstrate a defect in granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor-induced proliferation and gene expression.
**Authors:** Feldman GM, Rosenthal LA, Liu X, Hayes MP, Wynshaw-Boris A, Leonard WJ, Hennighausen L, Finbloom DS
**Journal:** Blood (1997)

## Content

1. Blood. 1997 Sep 1;90(5):1768-76.

STAT5A-deficient mice demonstrate a defect in granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor-induced proliferation and gene expression.

Feldman GM(1), Rosenthal LA, Liu X, Hayes MP, Wynshaw-Boris A, Leonard WJ,
Hennighausen L, Finbloom DS.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cytokine Biology, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research,
Food and Drug Administration, Bethesda, MD 20892-4555, USA.

Responses of cells to cytokines typically involve the activation of a family of
latent DNA binding proteins, referred to as signal transducers and activators of
transcription (STAT) proteins, which are critical for the expression of early
response genes. Of the seven known STAT proteins, STAT5 (originally called
mammary gland factor) has been shown to be activated by several cytokines, such
as granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), interleukin-3
(IL-3), and IL-5, which are known to play important roles in growth and
differentiation of hematopoietic precursors. In this report we have used mice
that are deficient in STAT5A (one of two homologues of STAT5) to study the role
of STAT5A in GM-CSF stimulation of cells. When bone marrow-derived macrophages
were generated by differentiation with macrophage-CSF (M-CSF), exposure of cells
from wild-type mice to GM-CSF resulted in a typical pattern of assembly of DNA
binding proteins specific for the gamma activation sequence (GAS) element within
the beta-casein promoter. However, in cells from the STAT5A null mouse one of
the shifted bands was absent. Immunoblotting analysis in the null mice showed
that lack of STAT5A protein resulted in no alteration in activation of STAT5B by
tyrosine phosphorylation. Proliferation experiments revealed that, when exposed
to increasing concentrations of GM-CSF, cells derived from the null mice grew
considerably more slowly than cells derived from the wild-type mice. Moreover,
expression of GM-CSF-dependent genes, CIS and A1, was markedly inhibited in
cells derived from null mice as compared with those of wild-type mice. The
decreased expression observed with A1, a bcl-2 like gene, may account in part
for the suppression of growth in cells from the null mice. These data suggest
that the presence of STAT5A during the GM-CSF-induced assembly of STAT5 dimers
is critical for the formation of competent transcription factors that are
required for both gene expression and cell proliferation.

PMID: 9292509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
