---
reference_id: "PMID:28668983"
title: "The role of Blastocystis sp. and Dientamoeba fragilis in irritable bowel syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Rostami A
- Riahi SM
- Haghighi A
- Saber V
- Armon B
- Seyyedtabaei SJ
journal: Parasitol Res
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s00436-017-5535-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of Blastocystis sp. and Dientamoeba fragilis in irritable bowel syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Rostami A, Riahi SM, Haghighi A, Saber V, Armon B, Seyyedtabaei SJ
**Journal:** Parasitol Res (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00436-017-5535-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00436-017-5535-6)

## Content

1. Parasitol Res. 2017 Sep;116(9):2361-2371. doi: 10.1007/s00436-017-5535-6. Epub
 2017 Jul 1.

The role of Blastocystis sp. and Dientamoeba fragilis in irritable bowel 
syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Rostami A(1)(2), Riahi SM(3)(4), Haghighi A(5), Saber V(5), Armon B(6), 
Seyyedtabaei SJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine Research Center, Babol University 
of Medical Sciences, Babol, Iran. Alirostami1984@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Parasitology and Mycology, School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Alirostami1984@gmail.com.
(3)Faculty of Health, Birjand University of Medical Sciences, Birjand, Iran.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public health, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Department of Parasitology and Mycology, School of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Psychosis Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

Erratum in
    Parasitol Res. 2017 Sep;116(9):2611-2612. doi: 10.1007/s00436-017-5556-1.

Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is globally one of the most prevalent 
gastrointestinal disorders with a negative impact on quality of life and 
socio-economic status of patients. Recently, controversial evidences suggest 
that Blastocystis sp. and Dientamoeba fragilis infections may be implicated in 
the development of IBS. We performed a systematic review and meta-analysis to 
examine the possible association regarding this issue. PubMed, ScienceDirect, 
Scopus, Web of Science, and Cochrane electronic databases were searched (up to 
February 2017) to identify the relevant studies. Pooled odds ratio (OR) and 95% 
confidence intervals were estimated using a random effects meta-analysis model 
on data from included studies. A total of 17 studies including 5882 participants 
(2527 patients and 3310 controls) met the eligibility criteria. Individuals with 
Blastocystis infection were found to have a positive association with IBS (OR, 
2.19; 95% CI, 1.54-3.13), while this association was not observed for D. 
fragilis infection (OR, 1.13; 95% CI, 0.22-5.72). In subgroup analysis for 
Blastocystis infection, the pooled ORs were OR 2.29, 95% CI 1.55-3.41; OR 1.70, 
95% CI 0.83-3.44; and OR 3.83, 95% CI 2.34-6.27 for hospital-based, healthy 
volunteers, and combined controls, respectively. Considering the subtypes, 
meta-analysis result demonstrated significant positive ORs for ST1 (OR, 4.40; 
95% CI, 2.81-6.90) and ST3 (OR, 1.94; 95% CI, 1.36-2.77) to be potential risk 
factors for IBS. Our results support the existence of a positive association 
between Blastocystis sp. and IBS. Further studies with more sample size should 
be performed to better investigate the real impact of these parasites on the 
occurrence of IBS.

DOI: 10.1007/s00436-017-5535-6
PMID: 28668983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]