---
reference_id: "PMID:16353154"
title: Cytogenetic damage and genetic variants in the individuals susceptible to arsenic-induced cancer through drinking water.
authors:
- Ghosh P
- Basu A
- Mahata J
- Basu S
- Sengupta M
- Das JK
- Mukherjee A
- Sarkar AK
- Mondal L
- Ray K
- Giri AK
journal: Int J Cancer
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1002/ijc.21640
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cytogenetic damage and genetic variants in the individuals susceptible to arsenic-induced cancer through drinking water.
**Authors:** Ghosh P, Basu A, Mahata J, Basu S, Sengupta M, Das JK, Mukherjee A, Sarkar AK, Mondal L, Ray K, Giri AK
**Journal:** Int J Cancer (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ijc.21640](https://doi.org/10.1002/ijc.21640)

## Content

1. Int J Cancer. 2006 May 15;118(10):2470-8. doi: 10.1002/ijc.21640.

Cytogenetic damage and genetic variants in the individuals susceptible to 
arsenic-induced cancer through drinking water.

Ghosh P(1), Basu A, Mahata J, Basu S, Sengupta M, Das JK, Mukherjee A, Sarkar 
AK, Mondal L, Ray K, Giri AK.

Author information:
(1)Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, Kolkata, and West Bank Hospital, 
Howrah, India.

In West Bengal, India, more than 300,000 arsenic-exposed people are showing 
symptoms of arsenic toxicity, which include cancers of skin and different 
internal organs. Since only 15-20% of the exposed population manifest 
arsenic-induced skin lesions, it is thought that genetic variation might play an 
important role in arsenic toxicity and carcinogenicity. A total of 422 unrelated 
arsenic-exposed subjects (244 skin-symptomatic and 178 asymptomatic) were 
recruited for this study. Cytogenetic damage, as measured by chromosomal 
aberrations in lymphocytes and micronuclei formation in oral mucosa cells, 
urothelial cells and binucleated lymphocytes, was studied in unexposed, 
skin-symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals with similar socioeconomic status. 
Identification of null mutations in GSTT1 and GSTM1 genes were carried out by 
PCR amplification. GSTP1 SNPs, implicated in susceptibility to various cancers, 
were assessed by PCR-RFLP method. Symptomatic individuals had higher level of 
cytogenetic damage compared to asymptomatic individuals and asymptomatic 
individuals had significantly higher genotoxicity than unexposed individuals. No 
difference in allelic variants in GSTT1 and GSTP1 was observed between these 2 
groups. Incidence of GSTM1 null gene frequencies was significantly higher in the 
asymptomatic group. Individuals with GSTM1-positive (at least one allele) had 
significantly higher risk of arsenic-induced skin lesions (odds ratio, 1.73; 95% 
confidence interval, 1.24-2.22). These results show a protective role of GSTM1 
null in arsenic toxicity. This study also indicates that asymptomatic 
individuals are sub clinically affected and are also significantly susceptible 
to arsenic-induced genotoxicity.

Copyright (c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.21640
PMID: 16353154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]