---
reference_id: "PMID:25452572"
title: "Ranbp1, Deleted in DiGeorge/22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome, is a Microcephaly Gene That Selectively Disrupts Layer 2/3 Cortical Projection Neuron Generation."
authors:
- Paronett EM
- Meechan DW
- Karpinski BA
- LaMantia AS
- Maynard TM
journal: Cereb Cortex
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhu285
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ranbp1, Deleted in DiGeorge/22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome, is a Microcephaly Gene That Selectively Disrupts Layer 2/3 Cortical Projection Neuron Generation.
**Authors:** Paronett EM, Meechan DW, Karpinski BA, LaMantia AS, Maynard TM
**Journal:** Cereb Cortex (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cercor/bhu285](https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhu285)

## Content

1. Cereb Cortex. 2015 Oct;25(10):3977-93. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhu285. Epub 2014
Dec  1.

Ranbp1, Deleted in DiGeorge/22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome, is a Microcephaly Gene 
That Selectively Disrupts Layer 2/3 Cortical Projection Neuron Generation.

Paronett EM(1), Meechan DW(1), Karpinski BA(2), LaMantia AS(1), Maynard TM(1).

Author information:
(1)GW Institute for Neuroscience Department of Pharmacology and Physiology.
(2)GW Institute for Neuroscience Department of Anatomy and Regenerative Biology, 
The George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences, 
Washington, DC 20037, USA.

Ranbp1, a Ran GTPase-binding protein implicated in nuclear/cytoplasmic 
trafficking, is included within the DiGeorge/22q11.2 Deletion Syndrome (22q11.2 
DS) critical region associated with behavioral impairments including autism and 
schizophrenia. Ranbp1 is highly expressed in the developing forebrain 
ventricular/subventricular zone but has no known obligate function during brain 
development. We assessed the role of Ranbp1 in a targeted mouse mutant. 
Ranbp1(-/-) mice are not recovered live at birth, and over 60% of Ranbp1(-/-) 
embryos are exencephalic. Non-exencephalic Ranbp1(-/-) embryos are 
microcephalic, and proliferation of cortical progenitors is altered. At E10.5, 
radial progenitors divide more slowly in the Ranpb1(-/-) dorsal pallium. At 
E14.5, basal, but not apical/radial glial progenitors, are compromised in the 
cortex. In both E10.5 apical and E14.5 basal progenitors, M phase of the cell 
cycle appears selectively retarded by loss of Ranpb1 function. 
Ranbp1(-/-)-dependent proliferative deficits substantially diminish the 
frequency of layer 2/3, but not layer 5/6 cortical projection neurons. 
Ranbp1(-/-) cortical phenotypes parallel less severe alterations in LgDel mice 
that carry a deletion parallel to many (but not all) 22q11.2 DS patients. Thus, 
Ranbp1 emerges as a microcephaly gene within the 22q11.2 deleted region that may 
contribute to altered cortical precursor proliferation and neurogenesis 
associated with broader 22q11.2 deletion.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhu285
PMCID: PMC4585528
PMID: 25452572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]