---
reference_id: "PMID:21493862"
title: Noncanonical TGFβ signaling contributes to aortic aneurysm progression in Marfan syndrome mice.
authors:
- Holm TM
- Habashi JP
- Doyle JJ
- Bedja D
- Chen Y
- van Erp C
- Lindsay ME
- Kim D
- Schoenhoff F
- Cohn RD
- Loeys BL
- Thomas CJ
- Patnaik S
- Marugan JJ
- Judge DP
- Dietz HC
journal: Science
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1126/science.1192149
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Noncanonical TGFβ signaling contributes to aortic aneurysm progression in Marfan syndrome mice.
**Authors:** Holm TM, Habashi JP, Doyle JJ, Bedja D, Chen Y, van Erp C, Lindsay ME, Kim D, Schoenhoff F, Cohn RD, Loeys BL, Thomas CJ, Patnaik S, Marugan JJ, Judge DP, Dietz HC
**Journal:** Science (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1126/science.1192149](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1192149)

## Content

1. Science. 2011 Apr 15;332(6027):358-61. doi: 10.1126/science.1192149.

Noncanonical TGFβ signaling contributes to aortic aneurysm progression in Marfan 
syndrome mice.

Holm TM(1), Habashi JP, Doyle JJ, Bedja D, Chen Y, van Erp C, Lindsay ME, Kim D, 
Schoenhoff F, Cohn RD, Loeys BL, Thomas CJ, Patnaik S, Marugan JJ, Judge DP, 
Dietz HC.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2011 Apr 15;332(6027):297. doi: 10.1126/science.332.6027.297.

Transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ) signaling drives aneurysm progression in 
multiple disorders, including Marfan syndrome (MFS), and therapies that inhibit 
this signaling cascade are in clinical trials. TGFβ can stimulate multiple 
intracellular signaling pathways, but it is unclear which of these pathways 
drives aortic disease and, when inhibited, which result in disease amelioration. 
Here we show that extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1 and 2 and Smad2 
are activated in a mouse model of MFS, and both are inhibited by therapies 
directed against TGFβ. Whereas selective inhibition of ERK1/2 activation 
ameliorated aortic growth, Smad4 deficiency exacerbated aortic disease and 
caused premature death in MFS mice. Smad4-deficient MFS mice uniquely showed 
activation of Jun N-terminal kinase-1 (JNK1), and a JNK antagonist ameliorated 
aortic growth in MFS mice that lacked or retained full Smad4 expression. Thus, 
noncanonical (Smad-independent) TGFβ signaling is a prominent driver of aortic 
disease in MFS mice, and inhibition of the ERK1/2 or JNK1 pathways is a 
potential therapeutic strategy for the disease.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1192149
PMCID: PMC3111087
PMID: 21493862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]