---
reference_id: "PMID:25464124"
title: Evidence of hormone resistance in a pseudo-pseudohypoparathyroidism patient with a novel paternal mutation in GNAS.
authors:
- Turan S
- Thiele S
- Tafaj O
- Brix B
- Atay Z
- Abali S
- Haliloglu B
- Bereket A
- Bastepe M
journal: Bone
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2014.10.006
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Alleles
- Calcium/blood
- Chromogranins
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Fathers
- Female
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits, Gs/genetics"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Parathyroid Hormone/blood
- "Pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism/blood, genetics"
- Vitamin D/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evidence of hormone resistance in a pseudo-pseudohypoparathyroidism patient with a novel paternal mutation in GNAS.
**Authors:** Turan S, Thiele S, Tafaj O, Brix B, Atay Z, Abali S, Haliloglu B, Bereket A, Bastepe M
**Journal:** Bone (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bone.2014.10.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2014.10.006)

## Content

1. Bone. 2015 Feb;71:53-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2014.10.006. Epub 2014 Oct 18.

Evidence of hormone resistance in a pseudo-pseudohypoparathyroidism patient with 
a novel paternal mutation in GNAS.

Turan S(1), Thiele S(2), Tafaj O(3), Brix B(2), Atay Z(4), Abali S(4), Haliloglu 
B(4), Bereket A(4), Bastepe M(5).

Author information:
(1)Marmara University, Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Istanbul, Turkey. 
Electronic address: serap.turan@marmara.edu.tr.
(2)Division of Experimental Paediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, University of 
Luebeck, Germany.
(3)Endocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, USA.
(4)Marmara University, Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Istanbul, Turkey.
(5)Endocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, USA. Electronic address: bastepe@helix.mgh.harvard.edu.

CONTEXT: Loss-of-function GNAS mutations lead to hormone resistance and 
Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO) when maternally inherited, i.e. 
pseudohypoparathyroidism-Ia (PHPIa), but cause AHO alone when located on the 
paternal allele, i.e. pseudoPHP (PPHP).
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to establish the molecular diagnosis in a patient with AHO 
and evidence of hormone resistance.
CASE: The patient is a female who presented at the age of 13.5years with short 
stature and multiple AHO features. No evidence for TSH or 
gonadotropin-resistance was present. Serum calcium and vitamin D levels were 
normal. However, serum PTH was elevated on multiple occasions (64-178pg/mL, 
normal: 9-52) and growth hormone response to clonidine or L-DOPA was blunted, 
suggesting hormone resistance and PHP-Ia. The patient had diminished erythrocyte 
Gsα activity and a novel heterozygous GNAS mutation (c.328 G>C; p.A109P). The 
mother lacked the mutation, and the father's DNA was not available. Hence, a 
diagnosis of PPHP also appeared possible, supported by low birth weight and a 
lack of AHO features associated predominantly with PHP-Ia, i.e. obesity and 
cognitive impairment. To determine the parental origin of the mutation, we 
amplified the paternally expressed A/B and biallelically expressed Gsα 
transcripts from the patient's peripheral blood RNA. While both wild-type and 
mutant nucleotides were detected in the Gsα amplicon, only the mutant nucleotide 
was present in the A/B amplicon, indicating that the mutation was paternal.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that PTH and other hormone resistance may not 
be an exclusive feature of PHP-Ia and could also be observed in patients with 
PPHP.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2014.10.006
PMCID: PMC4273232
PMID: 25464124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]