---
reference_id: "PMID:36926048"
title: "Sex-specific association of serum uric acid trajectories with risk of incident retinal arteriosclerosis in Chinese population: A population-based longitudinal study."
authors:
- Geng R
- Feng Q
- Ji M
- Dong Y
- Xu S
- Liu C
- He Y
- Tang Z
journal: Front Cardiovasc Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2023.1116486
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sex-specific association of serum uric acid trajectories with risk of incident retinal arteriosclerosis in Chinese population: A population-based longitudinal study.
**Authors:** Geng R, Feng Q, Ji M, Dong Y, Xu S, Liu C, He Y, Tang Z
**Journal:** Front Cardiovasc Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcvm.2023.1116486](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2023.1116486)

## Content

1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2023 Feb 28;10:1116486. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2023.1116486. 
eCollection 2023.

Sex-specific association of serum uric acid trajectories with risk of incident 
retinal arteriosclerosis in Chinese population: A population-based longitudinal 
study.

Geng R(1)(2), Feng Q(3), Ji M(3), Dong Y(1)(2), Xu S(1)(2), Liu C(3), He Y(4), 
Tang Z(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Suzhou Medical College 
of Soochow University, Suzhou, China.
(2)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Preventive and Translational Medicine for Geriatric 
Diseases, Suzhou Medical College of Soochow University, Suzhou, China.
(3)Department of Laboratory, Hua Dong Sanatorium, Wuxi, China.
(4)Department of Stomatology, Hua Dong Sanatorium, Wuxi, China.

BACKGROUND: The impact of serum uric acid (SUA) trajectories on the development 
of retinal arteriosclerosis is uncertain. The purpose of this study was to 
identify adult SUA trajectories by sex and determine their association with risk 
of retinal arteriosclerosis.
METHODS: In this longitudinal study, 4,324 participants who were aged between 18 
and 60 years without retinal arteriosclerosis at or before baseline (from 
January 1, 2010, through December 31, 2010) were included. Group-based 
trajectory modeling was used to identify SUA trajectories during the exposure 
period (from January 1, 2006, through December 31, 2010). Cox 
proportional-hazards models were applied to evaluate the associations between 
SUA trajectories and the risk of incident retinal arteriosclerosis during the 
outcome period (from January 1, 2011, through December 31, 2019).
RESULTS: 4 distinct SUA trajectories were identified in both women and men: low, 
moderate, moderate-high, and high. During a median follow-up of 9.54 years (IQR 
9.53-9.56), 97 women and 295 men had developed retinal arteriosclerosis. In the 
fully adjusted model, a significant association between the moderate-high SUA 
trajectory group and incidence of retinal arteriosclerosis was observed only in 
men (HR: 1.76, 95% CI: 1.17-2.65) compared with the low trajectory group, but 
not in women (HR: 0.77, 95% CI: 0.39-1.52). Also, the high SUA trajectory group 
had the highest risk with an adjusted HR of 1.81 (95% CI, 1.04-3.17) in men. 
However, they did not exhibit a substantially increased risk in women.
CONCLUSION: Higher SUA trajectory groups were significantly associated with an 
increased risk of incident retinal arteriosclerosis in men but not in women.

Copyright © 2023 Geng, Feng, Ji, Dong, Xu, Liu, He and Tang.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2023.1116486
PMCID: PMC10011080
PMID: 36926048

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.