---
reference_id: "PMID:24103308"
title: Analysis of cases of 3-methylcrotonyl CoA carboxylase deficiency (3-MCCD) in the California newborn screening program reported in the state database.
authors:
- Lam C
- Carter JM
- Cederbaum SD
- Neidich J
- Gallant NM
- Lorey F
- Feuchtbaum L
- Wong DA
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.09.006
keywords:
- Acetonitriles
- California
- "Carbon-Carbon Ligases/deficiency, genetics"
- Carnitine
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Neonatal Screening
- "Urea Cycle Disorders, Inborn/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Analysis of cases of 3-methylcrotonyl CoA carboxylase deficiency (3-MCCD) in the California newborn screening program reported in the state database.
**Authors:** Lam C, Carter JM, Cederbaum SD, Neidich J, Gallant NM, Lorey F, Feuchtbaum L, Wong DA
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.09.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.09.006)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2013 Dec;110(4):477-83. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.09.006.
Epub  2013 Sep 17.

Analysis of cases of 3-methylcrotonyl CoA carboxylase deficiency (3-MCCD) in the
California newborn screening program reported in the state database.

Lam C(1), Carter JM, Cederbaum SD, Neidich J, Gallant NM, Lorey F, Feuchtbaum L,
Wong DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND AND METHODS: There are considerable uncertainty and debate regarding
all aspects of newborn screen-positive cases of 3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase
deficiency (3-MCCD), including diagnostic criteria, clinical spectrum,
morbidity, prognosis, and appropriate management. To address some of these
questions, we queried data from the California Newborn Screening Program's
Screening Information System (SIS) and available scanned laboratory reports on
cases of 3-MCCD reported by 15 state contracted metabolic specialty care centers
born between July 2005 and December 2010. We evaluated the completeness and
utility of the database as a tool for clinical disease characterization.
RESULTS: During the study period, 2,959,108 infants were screened and 71 infants
were diagnosed with 3-MCCD for an overall incidence of 1:41,676. The
availability of diagnostic biochemical laboratory data varied significantly from
subject to subject. Using a new case classification based on biochemical
severity, we found that 8 of the cases met our criteria for biochemically severe
(category 1), 19 cases met our criteria for biochemically mild (category 2) that
we suspect to possibly be hypomorphic variants or heterozygote carriers, and 44
cases could not be classified (category 3) as mild or severe based on the data
available in SIS. Documentation of the treatment regimens also varied
significantly with 49% receiving dietary modification and 44% receiving
carnitine. 15% of cases were documented to have experienced at least one of the
following symptoms: lethargy, vomiting, irritability, ketosis, poor feeding, or
poor tone. The majority of the subjects were completely developmentally age
appropriate at their last assessment.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that a significant portion of the 3-MCCD
"confirmed" cases have a mild biochemical phenotype. Moreover the majority of
cases had insufficient data entered to allow for adequate clinical
characterization of the cases. These findings raise the concern that a
significant number of individuals receiving treatment for 3-MCCD may not have a
clinically significant condition. Additionally, the utility of this data system
could be improved if centers provided complete confirmatory test results and
more specific documentation of clinical outcomes and health/developmental
status. Further studies, including a clinical chart review, are necessary to
validate the data and further characterize this cohort.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.09.006
PMID: 24103308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
