---
reference_id: "PMID:20560210"
title: Mutations in HPSE2 cause urofacial syndrome.
authors:
- Daly SB
- Urquhart JE
- Hilton E
- McKenzie EA
- Kammerer RA
- Lewis M
- Kerr B
- Stuart H
- Donnai D
- Long DA
- Burgu B
- Aydogdu O
- Derbent M
- Garcia-Minaur S
- Reardon W
- Gener B
- Shalev S
- Smith R
- Woolf AS
- Black GC
- Newman WG
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.05.006
keywords:
- Brain/metabolism
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 10"
- Facies
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- "Glucuronidase/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Male
- "Models, Molecular"
- Muscles/metabolism
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Syndrome
- Urinary Bladder/metabolism
- Urologic Diseases/genetics
- Heparanase
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in HPSE2 cause urofacial syndrome.
**Authors:** Daly SB, Urquhart JE, Hilton E, McKenzie EA, Kammerer RA, Lewis M, Kerr B, Stuart H, Donnai D, Long DA, Burgu B, Aydogdu O, Derbent M, Garcia-Minaur S, Reardon W, Gener B, Shalev S, Smith R, Woolf AS, Black GC, Newman WG
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.05.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.05.006)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Jun 11;86(6):963-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.05.006.

Mutations in HPSE2 cause urofacial syndrome.

Daly SB(1), Urquhart JE, Hilton E, McKenzie EA, Kammerer RA, Lewis M, Kerr B, 
Stuart H, Donnai D, Long DA, Burgu B, Aydogdu O, Derbent M, Garcia-Minaur S, 
Reardon W, Gener B, Shalev S, Smith R, Woolf AS, Black GC, Newman WG.

Author information:
(1)Genetic Medicine, St. Mary's Hospital, Manchester Academic Health Sciences 
Centre (MAHSC), School of Biomedicine, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 
9WL, UK.

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Aug 13;87(2):309.

Urinary voiding dysfunction in childhood, manifesting as incontinence, dysuria, 
and urinary frequency, is a common condition. Urofacial syndrome (UFS) is a rare 
autosomal recessive disease characterized by facial grimacing when attempting to 
smile and failure of the urinary bladder to void completely despite a lack of 
anatomical bladder outflow obstruction or overt neurological damage. UFS 
individuals often have reflux of infected urine from the bladder to the upper 
renal tract, with a risk of kidney damage and renal failure. Whole-genome SNP 
mapping in one affected individual defined an autozygous region of 16 Mb on 
chromosome 10q23-q24, within which a 10 kb deletion encompassing exons 8 and 9 
of HPSE2 was identified. Homozygous exonic deletions, nonsense mutations, and 
frameshift mutations in five further unrelated families confirmed HPSE2 as the 
causative gene for UFS. Mutations were not identified in four additional UFS 
patients, indicating genetic heterogeneity. We show that HPSE2 is expressed in 
the fetal and adult central nervous system, where it might be implicated in 
controlling facial expression and urinary voiding, and also in bladder smooth 
muscle, consistent with a role in renal tract morphology and function. Our 
findings have broader implications for understanding the genetic basis of lower 
renal tract malformations and voiding dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.05.006
PMCID: PMC3032078
PMID: 20560210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]