---
reference_id: "PMID:36776982"
title: "Updates in the chronic kidney disease-mineral bone disorder show the role of osteocytic proteins, a potential mechanism of the bone-Vascular paradox, a therapeutic target, and a biomarker."
authors:
- Williams MJ
- White SC
- Joseph Z
- Hruska KA
journal: Front Physiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2023.1120308
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Updates in the chronic kidney disease-mineral bone disorder show the role of osteocytic proteins, a potential mechanism of the bone-Vascular paradox, a therapeutic target, and a biomarker.
**Authors:** Williams MJ, White SC, Joseph Z, Hruska KA
**Journal:** Front Physiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fphys.2023.1120308](https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2023.1120308)

## Content

1. Front Physiol. 2023 Jan 26;14:1120308. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2023.1120308. 
eCollection 2023.

Updates in the chronic kidney disease-mineral bone disorder show the role of 
osteocytic proteins, a potential mechanism of the bone-Vascular paradox, a 
therapeutic target, and a biomarker.

Williams MJ(1), White SC(1), Joseph Z(1), Hruska KA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, Washington 
University, Saint Louis, MO, United States.
(2)Departments of Medicine and Cell Biology, Washington University, Saint Louis, 
MO, United States.

The chronic kidney disease-mineral bone disorder (CKD-MBD) is a complex 
multi-component syndrome occurring during kidney disease and its progression. 
Here, we update progress in the components of the syndrome, and synthesize 
recent investigations, which suggest a potential mechanism of the bone-vascular 
paradox. The discovery that calcified arteries in chronic kidney disease inhibit 
bone remodeling lead to the identification of factors produced by the 
vasculature that inhibit the skeleton, thus providing a potential explanation 
for the bone-vascular paradox. Among the factors produced by calcifying 
arteries, sclerostin secretion is especially enlightening. Sclerostin is a 
potent inhibitor of bone remodeling and an osteocyte specific protein. Its 
production by the vasculature in chronic kidney disease identifies the key role 
of vascular cell osteoblastic/osteocytic transdifferentiation in vascular 
calcification and renal osteodystrophy. Subsequent studies showing that 
inhibition of sclerostin activity by a monoclonal antibody improved bone 
remodeling as expected, but stimulated vascular calcification, demonstrate that 
vascular sclerostin functions to brake the Wnt stimulation of the calcification 
milieu. Thus, the target of therapy in the chronic kidney disease-mineral bone 
disorder is not inhibition of sclerostin function, which would intensify 
vascular calcification. Rather, decreasing sclerostin production by decreasing 
the vascular osteoblastic/osteocytic transdifferentiation is the goal. This 
might decrease vascular calcification, decrease vascular stiffness, decrease 
cardiac hypertrophy, decrease sclerostin production, reduce serum sclerostin and 
improve skeletal remodeling. Thus, the therapeutic target of the chronic kidney 
disease-mineral bone disorder may be vascular osteoblastic transdifferentiation, 
and sclerostin levels may be a useful biomarker for the diagnosis of the chronic 
kidney disease-mineral bone disorder and the progress of its therapy.

Copyright © 2023 Williams, White, Joseph and Hruska.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2023.1120308
PMCID: PMC9909112
PMID: 36776982

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.