---
reference_id: "PMID:21113628"
title: "Cystic diseases of the kidney: ciliary dysfunction and cystogenic mechanisms."
authors:
- Gascue C
- Katsanis N
- Badano JL
journal: Pediatr Nephrol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s00467-010-1697-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cystic diseases of the kidney: ciliary dysfunction and cystogenic mechanisms.
**Authors:** Gascue C, Katsanis N, Badano JL
**Journal:** Pediatr Nephrol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00467-010-1697-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00467-010-1697-5)

## Content

1. Pediatr Nephrol. 2011 Aug;26(8):1181-95. doi: 10.1007/s00467-010-1697-5. Epub 
2010 Nov 27.

Cystic diseases of the kidney: ciliary dysfunction and cystogenic mechanisms.

Gascue C(1), Katsanis N, Badano JL.

Author information:
(1)Institut Pasteur de Montevideo, Mataojo 2020, Montevideo, CP 11400, Uruguay.

Ciliary dysfunction has emerged as a common factor underlying the pathogenesis 
of both syndromic and isolated kidney cystic disease, an observation that has 
contributed to the unification of human genetic disorders of the cilium, the 
ciliopathies. Such grouping is underscored by two major observations: the fact 
that genes encoding ciliary proteins can contribute causal and modifying 
mutations across several clinically discrete ciliopathies, and the emerging 
realization that an understanding of the clinical pathology of one ciliopathy 
can provide valuable insight into the pathomechanism of renal cyst formation 
elsewhere in the ciliopathy spectrum. In this review, we discuss and attempt to 
stratify the different lines of proposed cilia-driven mechanisms for 
cystogenesis, ranging from mechano- and chemo-sensation, to cell shape and 
polarization, to the transduction of a variety of signaling cascades. We 
evaluate both common trends and differences across the models and discuss how 
each proposed mechanism can contribute to the development of novel therapeutic 
paradigms.

DOI: 10.1007/s00467-010-1697-5
PMCID: PMC3640323
PMID: 21113628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]