---
reference_id: "PMID:36603894"
title: "Targeted therapy for mucinous ovarian carcinoma: evidence from clinical trials."
authors:
- Nugawela D
- Gorringe KL
journal: Int J Gynecol Cancer
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1136/ijgc-2022-003658
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Ovarian Epithelial/drug therapy"
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology"
- Bevacizumab/therapeutic use
- Trastuzumab
- Europe
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeted therapy for mucinous ovarian carcinoma: evidence from clinical trials.
**Authors:** Nugawela D, Gorringe KL
**Journal:** Int J Gynecol Cancer (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1136/ijgc-2022-003658](https://doi.org/10.1136/ijgc-2022-003658)

## Content

1. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2023 Jan 3;33(1):102-108. doi: 10.1136/ijgc-2022-003658.

Targeted therapy for mucinous ovarian carcinoma: evidence from clinical trials.

Nugawela D(1), Gorringe KL(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Sir Peter MacCallum Dept of Oncology, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia kylie.gorringe@petermac.org.
(3)Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

Mucinous ovarian carcinoma is a rare subtype of epithelial ovarian cancer. 
Despite being a chemoresistant tumour type, surgical resection and chemotherapy 
are still the current standard for management. This narrative review aims to 
explore the current evidence for targeted therapies in mucinous ovarian 
carcinoma. A review of the literature was performed to identify clinical trials 
and case reports of targeted therapy in patients with mucinous ovarian 
carcinoma. The databases and registers (PubMed, MEDLINE, Embase, Europe PMC, 
Cochrane Central Register of Clinical Trials, clinicaltrials.gov) were searched 
for articles published between January 2009 to June 2021 using keywords specific 
for mucinous ovarian carcinoma and targeted therapy. Records were screened and 
assessed for eligibility based on inclusion and exclusion criteria. From 684 
records, 21 studies met the criteria to be included in the review. A total of 11 
different targeted therapies were identified, each demonstrating varying degrees 
of clinical evidence supporting further investigation in patients with mucinous 
ovarian carcinoma. Targeted therapies identified in this review that warrant 
further investigations are bevacizumab, trastuzumab, nintedanib, AZD1775, 
sunitinib, cediranib and pazopanib. Many of the therapeutic agents may be 
investigated further in combination with other targeted therapies or 
chemotherapy. More clinical trials focusing on targeted therapy specifically in 
patients with mucinous ovarian cancer are required to inform clinical use. 
Multinational efforts are likely to be required to successfully conduct trials 
in this rare tumor type.

© IGCS and ESGO 2023. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/ijgc-2022-003658
PMCID: PMC9811085
PMID: 36603894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.