---
reference_id: "PMID:38562931"
title: Rare copy number variation in autoimmune Addison's disease.
authors:
- Artaza H
- Eriksson D
- Lavrichenko K
- Aranda-Guillén M
- Bratland E
- Vaudel M
- Knappskog P
- Husebye ES
- Bensing S
- Wolff ASB
- Kämpe O
- Røyrvik EC
- Johansson S
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1374499
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rare copy number variation in autoimmune Addison's disease.
**Authors:** Artaza H, Eriksson D, Lavrichenko K, Aranda-Guillén M, Bratland E, Vaudel M, Knappskog P, Husebye ES, Bensing S, Wolff ASB, Kämpe O, Røyrvik EC, Johansson S
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2024.1374499](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2024.1374499)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2024 Mar 18;15:1374499. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1374499. 
eCollection 2024.

Rare copy number variation in autoimmune Addison's disease.

Artaza H(1)(2), Eriksson D(3)(4), Lavrichenko K(1)(5), Aranda-Guillén M(4), 
Bratland E(2)(6)(7), Vaudel M(7)(8)(9), Knappskog P(1)(6), Husebye ES(2)(10), 
Bensing S(11)(12), Wolff ASB(1)(2)(10), Kämpe O(3), Røyrvik EC(1)(2)(13), 
Johansson S(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(2)K. G. Jebsen Center for Autoimmune Diseases, University of Bergen, Bergen, 
Norway.
(3)Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden.
(4)Center for Molecular Medicine, Department of Medicine (Solna), Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(6)Department of Medical Genetics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, 
Norway.
(7)Mohn Center for Diabetes Precision Medicine, Department of Clinical Science, 
University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
(8)Computational Biology Unit, Department of Informatics, University of Bergen, 
Bergen, Norway.
(9)Department of Genetics and Bioinformatics, Health Data and Digitalization, 
Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Oslo, Norway.
(10)Department of Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(11)Department of Endocrinology, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(12)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(13)Department of Genetics and Bioinformatics, Norwegian Institute of Public 
Health, Bergen, Norway.

Autoimmune Addison's disease (AAD) is a rare but life-threatening endocrine 
disorder caused by an autoimmune destruction of the adrenal cortex. A previous 
genome-wide association study (GWAS) has shown that common variants near 
immune-related genes, which mostly encode proteins participating in the immune 
response, affect the risk of developing this condition. However, little is known 
about the contribution of copy number variations (CNVs) to AAD susceptibility. 
We used the genome-wide genotyping data from Norwegian and Swedish individuals 
(1,182 cases and 3,810 controls) to investigate the putative role of CNVs in the 
AAD aetiology. Although the frequency of rare CNVs was similar between cases and 
controls, we observed that larger deletions (>1,000 kb) were more common among 
patients (OR = 4.23, 95% CI 1.85-9.66, p = 0.0002). Despite this, none of the 
large case-deletions were conclusively pathogenic, and the clinical presentation 
and an AAD-polygenic risk score were similar between cases with and without the 
large CNVs. Among deletions exclusive to individuals with AAD, we highlight two 
ultra-rare deletions in the genes LRBA and BCL2L11, which we speculate might 
have contributed to the polygenic risk in these carriers. In conclusion, rare 
CNVs do not appear to be a major cause of AAD but further studies are needed to 
ascertain the potential contribution of rare deletions to the polygenic load of 
AAD susceptibility.

Copyright © 2024 Artaza, Eriksson, Lavrichenko, Aranda-Guillén, Bratland, 
Vaudel, Knappskog, Husebye, Bensing, Wolff, Kämpe, Røyrvik and Johansson.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1374499
PMCID: PMC10982488
PMID: 38562931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that 
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. 
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.