---
reference_id: "PMID:40162756"
title: "Antimicrobial susceptibility and treatment of clinical cases of yersiniosis in Aotearoa | New Zealand."
authors:
- Rivas L
- Szeto J
- Elvy J
- Dyet K
- Wright J
- Williams E
- Gilpin B
journal: Microbiol Spectr
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1128/spectrum.02751-24
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antimicrobial susceptibility and treatment of clinical cases of yersiniosis in Aotearoa | New Zealand.
**Authors:** Rivas L, Szeto J, Elvy J, Dyet K, Wright J, Williams E, Gilpin B
**Journal:** Microbiol Spectr (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1128/spectrum.02751-24](https://doi.org/10.1128/spectrum.02751-24)

## Content

1. Microbiol Spectr. 2025 Mar 31;13(5):e0275124. doi: 10.1128/spectrum.02751-24. 
Online ahead of print.

Antimicrobial susceptibility and treatment of clinical cases of yersiniosis in 
Aotearoa | New Zealand.

Rivas L(1), Szeto J(2), Elvy J(2)(3), Dyet K(2), Wright J(1), Williams E(4), 
Gilpin B(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Environmental Science and Research (ESR), Christchurch Science 
Centre, Christchurch, Canterbury, New Zealand.
(2)Institute of Environmental Science and Research, Kenepuru Science Centre, 
Porirua, Wellington, New Zealand.
(3)Awanui Labs, Dunedin Hospital, Dunedin, Otago, New Zealand.
(4)Institute of Environmental Science and Research, Wallaceville Science Centre, 
Upper Hutt, Wellington, New Zealand.

Yersiniosis is the second most notified bacterial disease in Aotearoa | New 
Zealand (NZ). National clinical treatment guidelines for yersiniosis are 
available, but there is a lack of supporting antimicrobial susceptibility data 
for clinical isolates of Yersinia spp. and prescribing data for yersiniosis 
cases. Data were collected through interviews with 148 consenting individuals 
notified with yersiniosis. Forty-three percent (n = 63) of cases indicated 
antimicrobial use while symptomatic with yersiniosis, including two cases with 
dual diagnosis (Campylobacteriosis). Children under the age of 5 were 
predominantly notified with Yersinia enterocolitica (YE) biotype (BT) 2/3 (87%; 
27/31) and reported significantly (P = 0.008) less antimicrobial use compared to 
adults (aged 20-70+ years). Antimicrobial use was significantly (P = 0.006) 
higher for cases reporting pre-existing gastrointestinal condition(s) and with 
YE BT 1A (26%; 12/47) compared to YE BT 2/3 (8%; 7/86). Eighty-six percent 
(44/51) of cases that indicated antimicrobial use identified the commencement 
date. Of these, 9% (4/44), 77% (34/44), and 14% (6/44) received an 
antimicrobial(s) as either empirical, directed, or empirical and directed 
treatment, respectively. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (49% [25/51]), 
ciprofloxacin (16% [8/51]), and doxycycline (10% [5/51]) were the most 
prescribed antimicrobials. Phenotypic antimicrobial susceptibility testing 
demonstrated clinical Yersinia spp. were susceptible to all antimicrobials 
commonly prescribed for the treatment of yersiniosis. Whole-genome sequence 
(WGS) analysis showed very few (1-3) antimicrobial resistance (AMR) genes within 
the Yersinia genomes. The results support the current antimicrobial prescribing 
recommendation for the treatment of yersiniosis in NZ and the utility of WGS to 
assess for AMR profiles in Yersinia spp.
IMPORTANCE: This study demonstrates that currently almost half of yersiniosis 
cases interviewed receive antimicrobial treatment, with most prescriptions as 
directed therapy after a diagnosis has been made. This study also confirms the 
appropriateness of current treatment guidelines for the management of 
yersiniosis in NZ, and that most primary care practitioners in the study areas 
follow these recommendations. Phenotypic testing was well correlated with the 
genomic assessments of antimicrobial resistance (AMR). Both types of analysis 
indicated a low level of AMR for Yersinia spp. in New Zealand (NZ) compared to 
data from overseas studies. However, ongoing surveillance given the burden of 
yersiniosis and high rates of treatment in NZ is paramount to ensuring timely 
detection of emerging multi-drug resistance and to help devise evidence-informed 
interventions.

DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.02751-24
PMCID: PMC12054125
PMID: 40162756

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.