---
reference_id: "PMID:30635863"
title: "Type 1 Sialidosis Patient With a Novel Deletion Mutation in the NEU1 Gene: Case Report and Literature Review."
authors:
- Ahn JH
- Kim AR
- Lee C
- Kim NKD
- Kim NS
- Park WY
- Kim M
- Youn J
- Cho JW
- Kim JS
journal: Cerebellum
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s12311-019-1005-2
keywords:
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- Mucolipidoses/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Neuraminidase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type 1 Sialidosis Patient With a Novel Deletion Mutation in the NEU1 Gene: Case Report and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Ahn JH, Kim AR, Lee C, Kim NKD, Kim NS, Park WY, Kim M, Youn J, Cho JW, Kim JS
**Journal:** Cerebellum (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12311-019-1005-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12311-019-1005-2)

## Content

1. Cerebellum. 2019 Jun;18(3):659-664. doi: 10.1007/s12311-019-1005-2.

Type 1 Sialidosis Patient With a Novel Deletion Mutation in the NEU1 Gene: Case 
Report and Literature Review.

Ahn JH(1)(2), Kim AR(3), Lee C(3), Kim NKD(3), Kim NS(4)(5), Park WY(3)(6), Kim 
M(1)(2), Youn J(1)(2), Cho JW(1)(2), Kim JS(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, 81, Irwon-ro, Gangnam-gu, Seoul, 06351, Republic of Korea.
(2)Neuroscience Center, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Samsung Medical Center, Samsung Genome Institute, Gangnam-gu, Seoul, Republic 
of Korea.
(4)Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology 
(KRIBB), Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Functional Genomics, KRIBB School of Bioscience, Korea 
University of Science and Technology (UST), Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(6)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Sungkyunkwan University School of 
Medicine, Suwon, Gyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea.
(7)Department of Neurology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University 
School of Medicine, 81, Irwon-ro, Gangnam-gu, Seoul, 06351, Republic of Korea. 
sunnyfor@hanmail.net.
(8)Neuroscience Center, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea. 
sunnyfor@hanmail.net.

Recent advances in next-generation sequencing technologies have uncovered the 
genetic backgrounds of various diseases. Type 1 sialidosis (OMIM#256550) is a 
rare autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disease caused by a mutation in the 
NEU1 (OMIM * 608272) gene. In this study, we aimed to review the previous 
reports of type 1 sialidosis and compare those with the first case of type 1 
sialidosis in Korea. A 36-year-old woman presented with progressive ataxia, 
myoclonus, and seizure since the age of 12. Whole-exome sequencing revealed a 
pathogenic missense variant c.928G > A (p.D310N) and novel c.15_16del 
(p.P6Qfs*21) of the NEU1 gene as final causal candidate as compound 
heterozygotes. We reviewed the literature and selected the clinical reports of 
genetically confirmed type 1 sialidosis patients. A total of 45 patients in 17 
reports were identified. Cherry-red spot, myoclonus, ataxia, and seizure were 
reported in 51.2%, 100.0%, 87.8%, and 73.7% of patients, respectively. 
Abnormalities of cognitive function, EEG, and brain MRI and visual symptoms were 
reported in 22.2%, 40.7%, 66.7%, and 70.2% of patients, respectively. Overall, 
our patient showed similar clinical features to previous type 1 sialidosis 
patients, but she did not complain of visual symptoms despite having cherry-red 
spots. We summarize the clinical features of type 1 sialidosis and report the 
first case of type 1 sialidosis with novel deletion variant in the NEU1 gene in 
the Korean population. Our study suggests the importance of ophthalmologic 
examinations in patients with myoclonus, ataxia, and seizure who do not complain 
of visual symptoms.

DOI: 10.1007/s12311-019-1005-2
PMID: 30635863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]