---
reference_id: "PMID:9285796"
title: "Novel mutations in Sanfilippo A syndrome: implications for enzyme function."
authors:
- Weber B
- Guo XH
- Wraith JE
- Cooper A
- Kleijer WJ
- Bunge S
- Hopwood JJ
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/6.9.1573
keywords:
- DNA Primers
- Gene Frequency
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Hydrolases/deficiency, genetics"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mucopolysaccharidosis III/genetics
- Phenotype
- Point Mutation
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- "Polymorphism, Single-Stranded Conformational"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel mutations in Sanfilippo A syndrome: implications for enzyme function.
**Authors:** Weber B, Guo XH, Wraith JE, Cooper A, Kleijer WJ, Bunge S, Hopwood JJ
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/6.9.1573](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/6.9.1573)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 1997 Sep;6(9):1573-9. doi: 10.1093/hmg/6.9.1573.

Novel mutations in Sanfilippo A syndrome: implications for enzyme function.

Weber B(1), Guo XH, Wraith JE, Cooper A, Kleijer WJ, Bunge S, Hopwood JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Pathology, Women's and Children's Hospital, North
Adelaide, Australia. weberb@wch.sa.gov.au

Sanfilippo syndrome type A or mucopolysaccharidosis IIIA (MPS IIIA) is an
autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disorder caused by the deficiency of
sulfamidase. The resulting lysosomal storage of heparan sulfate may lead to
severe neurodegeneration preceded by progressive dementia, often combined with
aggressive and hyperactive behaviour. A total of 109 patients from four
different geographic areas were screened for the common mutation R245H and two
other previously identified mutations. SSCP analysis of exons was used to
characterize the unknown alleles. We identified 16 novel sequence variants, 12
of them likely to be pathogenic. The majority of the pathogenic variants were
single base pair changes leading to missense mutations. Several single base pair
deletions/insertions and one nonsense mutation were also identified. Altogether,
we were able to characterize 55% of the pathogenic alleles. Sequence homology
between sulfamidase and N-acetylgalactosamine 4-sulfatase, the first sulfatase
to have its tertiary structure defined, suggests that amino acid residues R74
and T79, which were found to be mutated, are likely to be involved in the
formation of the active site of sulfamidase. R245H accounts for 31% of the
Sanfilippo A alleles in Australasia, for 19.2% of the alleles in patients from
the UK and has a high frequency of 57.8% in patients from The Netherlands. The
identification of mutations common in certain geographic regions or ethnic
groups will help in the diagnosis of MPS IIIA and allow carrier testing and
improved genetic counselling.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/6.9.1573
PMID: 9285796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
