---
reference_id: "PMID:9789265"
title: "[Long-term treatment of chronic schizophrenia]."
authors:
- Albers M
journal: Nervenarzt
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1007/s001150050338
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Long-term treatment of chronic schizophrenia].
**Authors:** Albers M
**Journal:** Nervenarzt (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s001150050338](https://doi.org/10.1007/s001150050338)

## Content

1. Nervenarzt. 1998 Sep;69(9):737-51. doi: 10.1007/s001150050338.

[Long-term treatment of chronic schizophrenia].

[Article in German]

Albers M(1).

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Psychiatrie und Psychotherapie, RWTH Aachen.

Comment in
    Nervenarzt. 1999 Mar;70(3):291-2. doi: 10.1007/s001150050438.

Long-term treatment of patients with chronic schizophrenias requires integration 
of many therapeutic approaches, co-operation of several professions, and regard 
for the views of patients and relatives. This review deals with practical 
aspects of pharmacotherapy, psychotherapy, cognitive resp. psychological 
treatments, social resp. milieu therapy, rehabilitation, interventions based on 
the concept of Expressed Emotions (EE), psychoeducation and work with relatives. 
Continuous neuroleptic treatment is indispensable in most cases to achieve 
social integration. Indications for adding on antidepressants, lithium, 
carbamazepine, benzodiazepines and other drugs are discussed, as well as 
treatment of negative symptoms, depression and management of treatment-resistant 
symptoms. Psychotherapy needs to regard the possibilities of the patient. In the 
context of a stable long-term relationship, the patient is supported in 
experiencing himself as a subject capable of action. Effectiveness of cognitive 
treatments to date is limited. The best results are achieved by social skills 
training. Social therapy, which aims at the improvement of functional aspects of 
the patient, is of paramount importance. Improved possibilities for work 
rehabilitation are contrasted by difficulties in financing long-term social 
rehabilitation. Interventions based on the EE concept are highly effective, but 
are rarely used. Programs that merely convey information without targeting 
behaviour modification are ineffective. The functions of facilities of treatment 
in the community are explained, the integrative role of case-management is 
stressed.

DOI: 10.1007/s001150050338
PMID: 9789265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]