---
reference_id: PMID:37175579
title: "Breaking the Mold: Epigenetics and Genomics Approaches Addressing Novel Treatments and Chemoresponse in TGCT Patients."
authors:
- Cuevas-Estrada B
- Montalvo-Casimiro M
- Munguia-Garza P
- Ríos-Rodríguez JA
- González-Barrios R
- Herrera LA
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms24097873
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Breaking the Mold: Epigenetics and Genomics Approaches Addressing Novel Treatments and Chemoresponse in TGCT Patients.
**Authors:** Cuevas-Estrada B, Montalvo-Casimiro M, Munguia-Garza P, Ríos-Rodríguez JA, González-Barrios R, Herrera LA
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms24097873](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24097873)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Apr 26;24(9):7873. doi: 10.3390/ijms24097873.

Breaking the Mold: Epigenetics and Genomics Approaches Addressing Novel 
Treatments and Chemoresponse in TGCT Patients.

Cuevas-Estrada B(1), Montalvo-Casimiro M(1), Munguia-Garza P(1), Ríos-Rodríguez 
JA(1), González-Barrios R(1), Herrera LA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Investigación Biomédica en Cáncer, Instituto Nacional de 
Cancerología-Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, UNAM, Mexico City 14080, 
Mexico.
(2)Tecnológico de Monterrey, Escuela de Medicina y Ciencias de la Salud, 
Monterrey 64710, Mexico.

Testicular germ-cell tumors (TGCT) have been widely recognized for their 
outstanding survival rates, commonly attributed to their high sensitivity to 
cisplatin-based therapies. Despite this, a subset of patients develops cisplatin 
resistance, for whom additional therapeutic options are unsuccessful, and ~20% 
of them will die from disease progression at an early age. Several efforts have 
been made trying to find the molecular bases of cisplatin resistance. However, 
this phenomenon is still not fully understood, which has limited the development 
of efficient biomarkers and precision medicine approaches as an alternative that 
could improve the clinical outcomes of these patients. With the aim of providing 
an integrative landscape, we review the most recent genomic and epigenomic 
features attributed to chemoresponse in TGCT patients, highlighting how we can 
seek to combat cisplatin resistance through the same mechanisms by which TGCTs 
are particularly hypersensitive to therapy. In this regard, we explore ongoing 
treatment directions for resistant TGCT and novel targets to guide future 
clinical trials. Through our exploration of recent findings, we conclude that 
epidrugs are promising treatments that could help to restore cisplatin 
sensitivity in resistant tumors, shedding light on potential avenues for better 
prognosis for the benefit of the patients.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24097873
PMCID: PMC10178517
PMID: 37175579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.