---
reference_id: "PMID:38015438"
title: "Long-term prognosis of fatty-acid oxidation disorders in adults: Optimism despite the limited effective therapies available."
authors:
- Rouyer A
- Tard C
- Dessein AF
- Spinazzi M
- Bédat-Millet AL
- Dimitri-Boulos D
- Nadaj-Pakleza A
- Chanson JB
- Nicolas G
- Douillard C
- Laforêt P
journal: Eur J Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/ene.16138
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term prognosis of fatty-acid oxidation disorders in adults: Optimism despite the limited effective therapies available.
**Authors:** Rouyer A, Tard C, Dessein AF, Spinazzi M, Bédat-Millet AL, Dimitri-Boulos D, Nadaj-Pakleza A, Chanson JB, Nicolas G, Douillard C, Laforêt P
**Journal:** Eur J Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ene.16138](https://doi.org/10.1111/ene.16138)

## Content

1. Eur J Neurol. 2024 Feb;31(2):e16138. doi: 10.1111/ene.16138. Epub 2023 Nov 28.

Long-term prognosis of fatty-acid oxidation disorders in adults: Optimism 
despite the limited effective therapies available.

Rouyer A(1), Tard C(2), Dessein AF(3), Spinazzi M(4), Bédat-Millet AL(5), 
Dimitri-Boulos D(6), Nadaj-Pakleza A(7), Chanson JB(7), Nicolas G(1)(8)(9), 
Douillard C(10), Laforêt P(1)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Neurology Department, Raymond Poincaré University Hospital, Assitance 
Publique des Hopitaux de Paris, Garches, France.
(2)Neurology Department, University of Lille, Inserm, Centre 
Hospialo-Niversitaire Lille, U1172-LilNCog (JPARC)-Lille Neuroscience and 
Cognition, Nord-Est-Ile-de-France Neuromuscular Reference Center, 
Cognitive-Motor Unit of Expertise, Centre Hospitalo-Régional Universitaire 
Lille, Lille, France.
(3)Institute of Biochemistry, Biology, and Pathology Center, Metabolism 
Department and Medical Reference Center for Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Lille 
University Hospital, Lille, France.
(4)Department of Neurology, Neuromuscular Reference Center Atlantique Occitanie 
Caraïbe, University Hospital, Angers, France.
(5)Neurophysiology Department, University Hospital of Rouen, Rouen, France.
(6)Internal Medicine Department, Quinze-Vingts National Ophthalmology Hospital, 
Paris, France.
(7)Department of Neurology, Reference Center for Neuromuscular Disorders 
Nord-Est-Ile-de-France, European Reference Network for Rare Neuromuscular 
Diseases, University Hospital of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France.
(8)Nord-Est-Ile-de-France Neuromuscular Reference Center, Fédération 
Hospitalo-Universitaire PHENIX, Garches, France.
(9)U 1179 INSERM, Paris-Saclay University, Montigny-le-Bretonneux, France.
(10)Endocrinology-Diabetology-Metabolism Department and Medical Reference Center 
for Inherited Metabolic Diseases Jeanne de Flandre Hospital, Centre 
Hospitalo-Régional Universitaire Lille, Lille, France.

INTRODUCTION: Fatty-acid oxidation disorders (FAODs) are recessive genetic 
diseases.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We report here clinical and paraclinical data from a 
retrospective study of 44 adults with muscular FAODs from six French reference 
centers for neuromuscular or metabolic diseases.
RESULTS: The study cohort consisted of 44 adult patients: 14 with carnitine 
palmitoyl transferase 2 deficiency (32%), nine with multiple acyl-CoA deficiency 
(20%), 13 with very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (30%), three 
with long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (7%), and five with 
short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (11%). Disease onset occurred 
during childhood in the majority of patients (59%), with a mean age at onset of 
15 years (range = 0.5-35) and a mean of 12.6 years (range = 0-58) from disease 
onset to diagnosis. The principal symptoms were acute muscle manifestations 
(rhabdomyolysis, exercise intolerance, myalgia), sometimes associated with 
permanent muscle weakness. Episodes of rhabdomyolysis were frequent (84%), with 
a mean creatinine kinase level of 68,958 U/L (range = 660-300,000). General 
metabolic complications were observed in 58% of patients, respiratory 
manifestations in 18% of cases, and cardiological manifestations in 9% of cases. 
Fasting acylcarnitine profile was used to orient genetic explorations in 65% of 
cases. After a mean follow-up of 10 years, 33% of patients were asymptomatic and 
56% continued to display symptoms after exercise. The frequency of 
rhabdomyolysis decreased after diagnosis in 64% of cases.
CONCLUSION: A standardized register would complete this cohort description of 
muscular forms of FAODs with exhaustive data, making it possible to assess the 
efficacy of therapeutic protocols in real-life conditions and during the 
long-term follow-up of patients.

© 2023 The Authors. European Journal of Neurology published by John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd on behalf of European Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1111/ene.16138
PMCID: PMC11235989
PMID: 38015438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]