---
reference_id: "PMID:39011401"
title: "Succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency: a metabolic and genomic approach to diagnosis."
authors:
- Glinton KE
- Gijavanekar C
- Rajagopal A
- Mackay LP
- Martin KA
- Pearl PL
- Gibson KM
- Wilson TA
- Sutton VR
- Elsea SH
journal: Front Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1405468
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency: a metabolic and genomic approach to diagnosis.
**Authors:** Glinton KE, Gijavanekar C, Rajagopal A, Mackay LP, Martin KA, Pearl PL, Gibson KM, Wilson TA, Sutton VR, Elsea SH
**Journal:** Front Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2024.1405468](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2024.1405468)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2024 Jun 19;15:1405468. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1405468.
eCollection 2024.

Succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency: a metabolic and genomic approach
to diagnosis.

Glinton KE(#)(1), Gijavanekar C(#)(1), Rajagopal A(1), Mackay LP(1), Martin
KA(2), Pearl PL(3), Gibson KM(4), Wilson TA(1), Sutton VR(1)(5), Elsea SH(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, United States.
(2)NeoGenomics Laboratories, Aliso Viejo, CA, United States.
(3)Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United
States.
(4)Department of Pharmacotherapy, College of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Washington State University, Spokane, WA, United States.
(5)Baylor Genetics Laboratories, Houston, TX, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

Genomic sequencing offers an untargeted, data-driven approach to genetic
diagnosis; however, variants of uncertain significance often hinder the
diagnostic process. The discovery of rare genomic variants without previously
known functional evidence of pathogenicity often results in variants being
overlooked as potentially causative, particularly in individuals with
undifferentiated phenotypes. Consequently, many neurometabolic conditions,
including those in the GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid) catabolism pathway, are
underdiagnosed. Succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency (SSADHD, OMIM
#271980) is a neurometabolic disorder in the GABA catabolism pathway. The
disorder is due to bi-allelic pathogenic variants in ALDH5A1 and is usually
characterized by moderate-to-severe developmental delays, hypotonia,
intellectual disability, ataxia, seizures, hyperkinetic behavior, aggression,
psychiatric disorders, and sleep disturbances. In this study, we utilized an
integrated approach to diagnosis of SSADHD by examining molecular, clinical, and
metabolomic data from a single large commercial laboratory. Our analysis led to
the identification of 16 patients with likely SSADHD along with three novel
variants. We also showed that patients with this disorder have a clear
metabolomic signature that, along with molecular and clinical findings, may
allow for more rapid and efficient diagnosis. We further surveyed all available
pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants and used this information to estimate the
global prevalence of this disease. Taken together, our comprehensive analysis
allows for a global approach to the diagnosis of SSADHD and provides a pathway
to improved diagnosis and potential incorporation into newborn screening
programs. Furthermore, early diagnosis facilitates referral to genetic
counseling, family support, and access to targeted treatments-taken together,
these provide the best outcomes for individuals living with either GABA-TD or
SSADHD, as well as other rare conditions.

Copyright © 2024 Glinton, Gijavanekar, Rajagopal, Mackay, Martin, Pearl, Gibson,
Wilson, Sutton and Elsea.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2024.1405468
PMCID: PMC11247174
PMID: 39011401

Conflict of interest statement: Authors KEG, CG, AR, TAW, VRS and SHE are
employees of Baylor College of Medicine, which receives revenue from clinical
testing in association with Baylor Genetics. Author KM was employed by
NeoGenomics Laboratories. The remaining authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission.
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.
