---
reference_id: "PMID:17055431"
title: CRTAP is required for prolyl 3- hydroxylation and mutations cause recessive osteogenesis imperfecta.
authors:
- Morello R
- Bertin TK
- Chen Y
- Hicks J
- Tonachini L
- Monticone M
- Castagnola P
- Rauch F
- Glorieux FH
- Vranka J
- Bächinger HP
- Pace JM
- Schwarze U
- Byers PH
- Weis M
- Fernandes RJ
- Eyre DR
- Yao Z
- Boyce BF
- Lee B
journal: Cell
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.08.039
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CRTAP is required for prolyl 3- hydroxylation and mutations cause recessive osteogenesis imperfecta.
**Authors:** Morello R, Bertin TK, Chen Y, Hicks J, Tonachini L, Monticone M, Castagnola P, Rauch F, Glorieux FH, Vranka J, Bächinger HP, Pace JM, Schwarze U, Byers PH, Weis M, Fernandes RJ, Eyre DR, Yao Z, Boyce BF, Lee B
**Journal:** Cell (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2006.08.039](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2006.08.039)

## Content

1. Cell. 2006 Oct 20;127(2):291-304. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.08.039.

CRTAP is required for prolyl 3- hydroxylation and mutations cause recessive 
osteogenesis imperfecta.

Morello R(1), Bertin TK, Chen Y, Hicks J, Tonachini L, Monticone M, Castagnola 
P, Rauch F, Glorieux FH, Vranka J, Bächinger HP, Pace JM, Schwarze U, Byers PH, 
Weis M, Fernandes RJ, Eyre DR, Yao Z, Boyce BF, Lee B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Prolyl hydroxylation is a critical posttranslational modification that affects 
structure, function, and turnover of target proteins. Prolyl 3-hydroxylation 
occurs at only one position in the triple-helical domain of fibrillar collagen 
chains, and its biological significance is unknown. CRTAP shares homology with a 
family of putative prolyl 3-hydroxylases (P3Hs), but it does not contain their 
common dioxygenase domain. Loss of Crtap in mice causes an osteochondrodysplasia 
characterized by severe osteoporosis and decreased osteoid production. CRTAP can 
form a complex with P3H1 and cyclophilin B (CYPB), and Crtap-/- bone and 
cartilage collagens show decreased prolyl 3-hydroxylation. Moreover, mutant 
collagen shows evidence of overmodification, and collagen fibrils in mutant skin 
have increased diameter consistent with altered fibrillogenesis. In humans, 
CRTAP mutations are associated with the clinical spectrum of recessive 
osteogenesis imperfecta, including the type II and VII forms. Hence, 
dysregulation of prolyl 3-hydroxylation is a mechanism for connective tissue 
disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.08.039
PMID: 17055431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]