---
reference_id: "PMID:22081021"
title: Requirement of argininosuccinate lyase for systemic nitric oxide production.
authors:
- Erez A
- Nagamani SC
- Shchelochkov OA
- Premkumar MH
- Campeau PM
- Chen Y
- Garg HK
- Li L
- Mian A
- Bertin TK
- Black JO
- Zeng H
- Tang Y
- Reddy AK
- Summar M
- "O'Brien WE"
- Harrison DG
- Mitch WE
- Marini JC
- Aschner JL
- Bryan NS
- Lee B
journal: Nat Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1038/nm.2544
keywords:
- Animals
- Arginine/pharmacology
- Argininosuccinate Lyase/metabolism
- Argininosuccinate Synthase/metabolism
- "Argininosuccinic Aciduria/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Line
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Endothelial Cells
- Female
- "Fibroblasts/cytology, metabolism"
- Gene Knockdown Techniques
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Nitric Oxide/biosynthesis, deficiency"
- Nitric Oxide Synthase/metabolism
- Nitrites/metabolism
- "RNA, Small Interfering/genetics, metabolism"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Swine
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Requirement of argininosuccinate lyase for systemic nitric oxide production.
**Authors:** Erez A, Nagamani SC, Shchelochkov OA, Premkumar MH, Campeau PM, Chen Y, Garg HK, Li L, Mian A, Bertin TK, Black JO, Zeng H, Tang Y, Reddy AK, Summar M, O'Brien WE, Harrison DG, Mitch WE, Marini JC, Aschner JL, Bryan NS, Lee B
**Journal:** Nat Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nm.2544](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.2544)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2011 Nov 13;17(12):1619-26. doi: 10.1038/nm.2544.

Requirement of argininosuccinate lyase for systemic nitric oxide production.

Erez A(1), Nagamani SC, Shchelochkov OA, Premkumar MH, Campeau PM, Chen Y, Garg
HK, Li L, Mian A, Bertin TK, Black JO, Zeng H, Tang Y, Reddy AK, Summar M,
O'Brien WE, Harrison DG, Mitch WE, Marini JC, Aschner JL, Bryan NS, Lee B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2011 Dec 06;17(12):1556-7. doi: 10.1038/nm.2591.

Nitric oxide (NO) is crucial in diverse physiological and pathological
processes. We show that a hypomorphic mouse model of argininosuccinate lyase
(encoded by Asl) deficiency has a distinct phenotype of multiorgan dysfunction
and NO deficiency. Loss of Asl in both humans and mice leads to reduced NO
synthesis, owing to both decreased endogenous arginine synthesis and an impaired
ability to use extracellular arginine for NO production. Administration of
nitrite, which can be converted into NO in vivo, rescued the manifestations of
NO deficiency in hypomorphic Asl mice, and a nitric oxide synthase
(NOS)-independent NO donor restored NO-dependent vascular reactivity in humans
with ASL deficiency. Mechanistic studies showed that ASL has a structural
function in addition to its catalytic activity, by which it contributes to the
formation of a multiprotein complex required for NO production. Our data
demonstrate a previously unappreciated role for ASL in NOS function and NO
homeostasis. Hence, ASL may serve as a target for manipulating NO production in
experimental models, as well as for the treatment of NO-related diseases.

DOI: 10.1038/nm.2544
PMCID: PMC3348956
PMID: 22081021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
