---
reference_id: "PMID:37054392"
title: Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in New Zealand Children.
authors:
- Taylor A
- Duncanson M
- Mitchelson B
- Nuthall G
- Voss L
- Walls T
- Dalziel SR
- Ostring G
- Best EJ
journal: Pediatr Infect Dis J
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/INF.0000000000003933
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in New Zealand Children.
**Authors:** Taylor A, Duncanson M, Mitchelson B, Nuthall G, Voss L, Walls T, Dalziel SR, Ostring G, Best EJ
**Journal:** Pediatr Infect Dis J (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/INF.0000000000003933](https://doi.org/10.1097/INF.0000000000003933)

## Content

1. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2023 Jul 1;42(7):e232-e234. doi: 
10.1097/INF.0000000000003933. Epub 2023 Apr 11.

Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in New Zealand Children.

Taylor A(1), Duncanson M(2), Mitchelson B(3), Nuthall G(4), Voss L(1), Walls 
T(5), Dalziel SR(6)(7)(8), Ostring G(9), Best EJ(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Starship Children's 
Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand.
(2)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Dunedin School of Medicine, 
University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.
(3)Departments of Pediatric Cardiology, Starship Children's Hospital, Auckland, 
New Zealand.
(4)Departments of Pediatric Intensive Care, Starship Children's Hospital, 
Auckland, New Zealand.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Otago, Christchurch, New Zealand.
(6)Departments of Children's Emergency Department, Starship Children's Hospital, 
Auckland, New Zealand.
(7)Departments of Pediatric Rheumatology, Starship Children's Hospital, 
Auckland, New Zealand.
(8)Departments of Pediatrics: Child and Youth Health, The University of 
Auckland, New Zealand.
(9)Departments of Surgery, The University of Auckland, New Zealand.

New Zealand (NZ) initially adopted an elimination approach to severe acute 
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Pre-Omicron variant, the NZ 
pediatric population was immunologically naïve to SARS-CoV-2. This study, 
utilizing national data sources, describes the NZ incidence of multisystem 
inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) following infection with the Omicron 
variant. MIS-C incidence was 1.03 of 100,000 age-specific population and 0.04 of 
1000 recorded SARS-CoV-2 infections.

Copyright © 2023 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/INF.0000000000003933
PMCID: PMC10289066
PMID: 37054392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.