---
reference_id: "PMID:31113472"
title: Preclinical rationale for entinostat in embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma.
authors:
- Bharathy N
- Berlow NE
- Wang E
- Abraham J
- Settelmeyer TP
- Hooper JE
- Svalina MN
- Bajwa Z
- Goros MW
- Hernandez BS
- Wolff JE
- Pal R
- Davies AM
- Ashok A
- Bushby D
- Mancini M
- Noakes C
- Goodwin NC
- Ordentlich P
- Keck J
- Hawkins DS
- Rudzinski ER
- Mansoor A
- Perkins TJ
- Vakoc CR
- Michalek JE
- Keller C
journal: Skelet Muscle
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13395-019-0198-x
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Animals
- "Antineoplastic Agents, Phytogenic/administration & dosage"
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/administration & dosage"
- "Benzamides/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- CRISPR-Cas Systems
- Cell Differentiation/drug effects
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Cellular Reprogramming/drug effects, genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Drug Screening Assays, Antitumor"
- Female
- "Histone Deacetylase 1/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- "Histone Deacetylase Inhibitors/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred NOD"
- "Mice, SCID"
- "Pyridines/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- RNA-Seq
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma, Alveolar/drug therapy, enzymology, pathology"
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma, Embryonal/drug therapy, enzymology, pathology"
- Tumor Burden/drug effects
- "Tumor Microenvironment/drug effects, genetics"
- "Vincristine/administration & dosage"
- Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Preclinical rationale for entinostat in embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma.
**Authors:** Bharathy N, Berlow NE, Wang E, Abraham J, Settelmeyer TP, Hooper JE, Svalina MN, Bajwa Z, Goros MW, Hernandez BS, Wolff JE, Pal R, Davies AM, Ashok A, Bushby D, Mancini M, Noakes C, Goodwin NC, Ordentlich P, Keck J, Hawkins DS, Rudzinski ER, Mansoor A, Perkins TJ, Vakoc CR, Michalek JE, Keller C
**Journal:** Skelet Muscle (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13395-019-0198-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13395-019-0198-x)

## Content

1. Skelet Muscle. 2019 May 21;9(1):12. doi: 10.1186/s13395-019-0198-x.

Preclinical rationale for entinostat in embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma.

Bharathy N(1), Berlow NE(2), Wang E(3), Abraham J(4), Settelmeyer TP(2), Hooper
JE(5), Svalina MN(2), Bajwa Z(2)(6), Goros MW(7), Hernandez BS(7), Wolff
JE(8)(9), Pal R(10), Davies AM(11), Ashok A(11), Bushby D(11), Mancini M(11),
Noakes C(11), Goodwin NC(11), Ordentlich P(12), Keck J(13), Hawkins DS(14),
Rudzinski ER(14), Mansoor A(6), Perkins TJ(15)(16), Vakoc CR(3), Michalek JE(7),
Keller C(17).

Author information:
(1)Children's Cancer Therapy Development Institute, 12655 Sw Beaverdam Rd. W,
Beaverton, OR, 97005, USA. naren@cc-tdi.org.
(2)Children's Cancer Therapy Development Institute, 12655 Sw Beaverdam Rd. W,
Beaverton, OR, 97005, USA.
(3)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, 11724, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR,
97239, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, 21287, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR,
97239, USA.
(7)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Texas Health
Science Center, San Antonio, TX, 78229, USA.
(8)Department of Pediatric Hematology Oncology and Blood and Marrow
Transplantation, Cleveland Clinic Children's, Cleveland, OH, 44195, USA.
(9)Present Address: AbbVie, North Chicago, IL, 60064, USA.
(10)Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX,
79409, USA.
(11)Champions Oncology, Rockville, MD, 20850, USA.
(12)Syndax Pharmaceuticals, Waltham, MA, 02451, USA.
(13)The Jackson Laboratory, Sacramento, CA, 95838, USA.
(14)Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA, 98105, USA.
(15)Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa,
K1H 8L6, Canada.
(16)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, K1H 8M5, Canada.
(17)Children's Cancer Therapy Development Institute, 12655 Sw Beaverdam Rd. W,
Beaverton, OR, 97005, USA. charles@cc-tdi.org.

BACKGROUND: Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most common soft tissue sarcoma in the
pediatric cancer population. Survival among metastatic RMS patients has remained
dismal yet unimproved for years. We previously identified the class I-specific
histone deacetylase inhibitor, entinostat (ENT), as a pharmacological agent that
transcriptionally suppresses the PAX3:FOXO1 tumor-initiating fusion gene found
in alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma (aRMS), and we further investigated the mechanism
by which ENT suppresses PAX3:FOXO1 oncogene and demonstrated the preclinical
efficacy of ENT in RMS orthotopic allograft and patient-derived xenograft (PDX)
models. In this study, we investigated whether ENT also has antitumor activity
in fusion-negative eRMS orthotopic allografts and PDX models either as a single
agent or in combination with vincristine (VCR).
METHODS: We tested the efficacy of ENT and VCR as single agents and in
combination in orthotopic allograft and PDX mouse models of eRMS. We then
performed CRISPR screening to identify which HDAC among the class I HDACs is
responsible for tumor growth inhibition in eRMS. To analyze whether ENT
treatment as a single agent or in combination with VCR induces myogenic
differentiation, we performed hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining in tumors.
RESULTS: ENT in combination with the chemotherapy VCR has synergistic antitumor
activity in a subset of fusion-negative eRMS in orthotopic "allografts,"
although PDX mouse models were too hypersensitive to the VCR dose used to detect
synergy. Mechanistic studies involving CRISPR suggest that HDAC3 inhibition is
the primary mechanism of cell-autonomous cytoreduction in eRMS. Following
cytoreduction in vivo, residual tumor cells in the allograft models treated with
chemotherapy undergo a dramatic, entinostat-induced (70-100%) conversion to
non-proliferative rhabdomyoblasts.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that the targeting class I HDACs may provide a
therapeutic benefit for selected patients with eRMS. ENT's preclinical in vivo
efficacy makes ENT a rational drug candidate in a phase II clinical trial for
eRMS.

DOI: 10.1186/s13395-019-0198-x
PMCID: PMC6528217
PMID: 31113472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: C.K. received an unrestricted grant from Syndax
Pharmaceuticals that supported third-party testing of ENT in PDXs. P.O. is an
employee of Syndax Pharmaceuticals. J.E.W. is an employee of AbbVie
Pharmaceuticals. Unrelated to this study, C.K. has had sponsored research
agreements with Eli Lilly and Roche-Genentech, and N.E.B. is a scientific
officer at First Ascent Biomedical Corp. C.R.V. is an advisor to KSQ
Therapeutics and receives research funding from Boehringer-Ingelheim. D.S.H. has
received reimbursement for travel to Medical Advisory Board meetings for Loxo
Oncology, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Celgene, and Bayer but no compensation
otherwise. All other authors declare that they have no competing interests.
