---
reference_id: "PMID:23343561"
title: "Role of PRRT2 in common paroxysmal neurological disorders: a gene with remarkable pleiotropy."
authors:
- Heron SE
- Dibbens LM
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101406
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Chorea/genetics
- Dyskinesias/genetics
- "Epilepsy, Benign Neonatal/genetics"
- Humans
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Seizures/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of PRRT2 in common paroxysmal neurological disorders: a gene with remarkable pleiotropy.
**Authors:** Heron SE, Dibbens LM
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101406](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101406)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2013 Mar;50(3):133-9. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101406. Epub
2013  Jan 23.

Role of PRRT2 in common paroxysmal neurological disorders: a gene with 
remarkable pleiotropy.

Heron SE(1), Dibbens LM.

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy and Medical Sciences, University of South Australia, 
P4-47, City East Campus, GPO Box 2471, Adelaide, SA 5001, Australia. 
sarah.heron@unisa.edu.au

Mutations in the gene PRRT2 encoding proline-rich transmembrane protein 2 have 
recently been identified as the cause of three clinical entities: benign 
familial infantile epilepsy (BFIE), infantile convulsions with choreoathetosis 
(ICCA) syndrome, and paroxysmal kinesigenic dyskinesia (PKD). Patients with ICCA 
have both BFIE and PKD and families with ICCA may contain individuals who 
exhibit all three phenotypes. These three phenotypes were all mapped by linkage 
analyses to the pericentromeric region of chromosome 16, and were hypothesised 
to have the same genetic basis due to the co-occurrence of the disorders in some 
families. Despite considerable effort, the gene or genes for BFIE, ICCA, and PKD 
were not identified for many years after the linkage region was identified. 
Mutations in the gene PRRT2 were identified in several Chinese families with 
PKD, suggesting that the gene may also be responsible for ICCA and BFIE in 
families linked to the chromosome 16 locus. This was demonstrated to be the 
case, with the majority of families with ICCA and BFIE found to have PRRT2 
mutations. The vast majority of these mutations are truncating and are predicted 
to lead to haploinsufficiency. PRRT2 is a largely uncharacterised protein. It is 
expressed in the brain and has been demonstrated to interact with SNAP-25, a 
component of the molecular machinery involved in the release of 
neurotransmitters at the presynaptic membrane. Therefore, the PRRT2 protein may 
play a role in this process. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the 
remarkable pleiotropy associated with PRRT2 mutations have still to be 
determined.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101406
PMID: 23343561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]