---
reference_id: "PMID:29439324"
title: "Altered Expression of Urea Cycle Enzymes in Amyloid-β Protein Precursor Overexpressing PC12 Cells and in Sporadic Alzheimer's Disease Brain."
authors:
- Jęśko H
- Lukiw WJ
- Wilkaniec A
- Cieślik M
- Gąssowska-Dobrowolska M
- Murawska E
- Hilgier W
- Adamczyk A
journal: J Alzheimers Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3233/JAD-170427
keywords:
- "Alzheimer Disease/metabolism, pathology"
- Amyloid beta-Protein Precursor/metabolism
- Animals
- Arginase/metabolism
- Arginine/metabolism
- Argininosuccinate Lyase/metabolism
- Argininosuccinate Synthase/metabolism
- "CA1 Region, Hippocampal/metabolism, pathology"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Homeostasis/physiology
- Humans
- Nitric Oxide Synthase/metabolism
- PC12 Cells
- "RNA, Messenger/metabolism"
- Rats
- Urea/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Altered Expression of Urea Cycle Enzymes in Amyloid-β Protein Precursor Overexpressing PC12 Cells and in Sporadic Alzheimer's Disease Brain.
**Authors:** Jęśko H, Lukiw WJ, Wilkaniec A, Cieślik M, Gąssowska-Dobrowolska M, Murawska E, Hilgier W, Adamczyk A
**Journal:** J Alzheimers Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3233/JAD-170427](https://doi.org/10.3233/JAD-170427)

## Content

1. J Alzheimers Dis. 2018;62(1):279-291. doi: 10.3233/JAD-170427.

Altered Expression of Urea Cycle Enzymes in Amyloid-β Protein Precursor
Overexpressing PC12 Cells and in Sporadic Alzheimer's Disease Brain.

Jęśko H(1), Lukiw WJ(2), Wilkaniec A(1), Cieślik M(1), Gąssowska-Dobrowolska
M(1), Murawska E(1), Hilgier W(3), Adamczyk A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular Signalling, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre,
Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.
(2)LSU Neuroscience Center and Departments of Neurology and Ophthalmology,
Louisiana State University School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA, USA.
(3)Department of Neurotoxicology, Mossakowski Medical Research Centre, Polish
Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.

Urea cycle enzymes may play important yet poorly characterized roles in
Alzheimer's disease (AD). Our previous results showed that amyloid-β (Aβ)
affects urea cycle enzymes in rat pheochromocytoma (PC12) cells. The aim of the
present study was to investigate the changes in arginases, other urea cycle
enzymes, and nitric oxide synthases (NOSs) in PC12 cells transfected with AβPP
bearing the double 'Swedish' mutation (APPsw, K670M/N671L) and in postmortem
sporadic AD brain hippocampus; the mutation intensifies Aβ production and
strongly associates with AD neuropathology. mRNA expression was analyzed using
real-time PCR in cell cultures and DNA microarrays in hippocampal CA1 area of
human AD brains. Arginase activity was measured spectrophotometrically, and
arginine, ornithine, and citrulline levels by high-performance liquid
chromatography. Our data demonstrated that the expression and activity of
arginases (Arg1 and Arg2), as well as the expression of argininosuccinate
synthase (Ass) were significantly reduced in APPsw cells compared to control.
However, argininosuccinate lyase (Asl) was upregulated in APPsw cells. Real-time
PCR analysis revealed significant elevation of neuronal nitric oxide synthase
(Nnos) mRNA in APPsw cells, without changes in the endothelial Enos, whereas
inducible Inos was undetectable. The changes were found to follow closely those
observed in the human hippocampal CA1 region of sporadic AD brains. The changes
in enzyme expression were accompanied in APPsw cells by significantly elevated
citrulline, ornithine, and arginine. Our findings demonstrate that AβPP/Aβ
alters arginine metabolism and induces a shift of cellular homeostasis that may
support the oxidative/nitrosative stress observed in AD.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-170427
PMID: 29439324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
