---
reference_id: "PMID:40204565"
title: "Isolated joint involvement in Whipple's disease: a cohort study."
authors:
- Eiferman V
- Chanteloup A
- Lagier JC
- Puéchal X
journal: Eur J Intern Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2025.04.003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Isolated joint involvement in Whipple's disease: a cohort study.
**Authors:** Eiferman V, Chanteloup A, Lagier JC, Puéchal X
**Journal:** Eur J Intern Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejim.2025.04.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejim.2025.04.003)

## Content

1. Eur J Intern Med. 2025 Jun;136:95-100. doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2025.04.003. Epub 
2025 Apr 9.

Isolated joint involvement in Whipple's disease: a cohort study.

Eiferman V(1), Chanteloup A(1), Lagier JC(2), Puéchal X(3).

Author information:
(1)APHM, Pôle de Maladies Infectieuses, Marseille, France.
(2)Aix-Marseille Univ, MEPHI, APHM, IHU-Méditerranée Infection, Marseille, 
France.
(3)National Referral Centre for Rare Systemic Autoimmune Diseases, Hôpital 
Cochin, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Université Paris Cité, Paris, 
France. Electronic address: xavier.puechal@aphp.fr.

BACKGROUND: To analyse the joint manifestations of Whipple's disease and compare 
clinical isolated joint involvement (CIJI) with systemic joint involvement 
(SJI).
METHODS: A cohort study included patients diagnosed with Whipple's disease and 
joint involvement at two expert centres. Patients were divided according to 
their clinical presentation at diagnosis: those with CIJI and those with SJI.
RESULTS: Of the 60 patients, 17 (28 %) exhibited CIJI. Both groups were 
predominantly middle-aged men (75 %) with a median time to diagnosis of six 
(2-11) years. Joint involvement was similar, with initial episodic migratory 
arthritis (91 %) predominantly affecting large joints and lasting 2-7 days. 
Saliva and stool PCR tests were positive in 59 % and 75 % of CIJI patients, 
respectively, compared to 91 % and 88 % in the SJI group (P = 0 02 and P = 0 24, 
respectively). In CIJI patients, duodenal PCR was negative in 65 % of cases and 
PAS staining consistently negative. Synovial fluid PCR was positive in 100 % of 
CIJI and 89 % of SJI patients. Treatment with doxycycline and 
hydroxychloroquine, initiated in 52 (88 %) patients, resulted in resolution of 
joint symptoms within ten (7-15) days in all but one patient, who had 
destructive arthritis.
CONCLUSION: Whipple's disease can present with isolated articular forms. Joint 
involvement is usually inaugural and stereotypical, with little difference 
between the CIJI and SJI groups. The diagnosis should be considered in cases 
with the typical pattern of recurrent intermittent large joint arthritis with 
elevated acute phase reactants, particularly in middle-aged men. Synovial fluid 
PCR is a valuable diagnostic tool. Doxycycline and hydroxychloroquine resulted 
in dramatic improvement.

Copyright © 2025. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejim.2025.04.003
PMID: 40204565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]