---
reference_id: "PMID:23973399"
title: "Panton-Valentine leukocidin producing Staphylococcus aureus nasal carriage, in North-Lebanon."
authors:
- Beyrouthy R
- Hamze M
- Hleis S
- Mallat H
- Dabboussi F
journal: Med Mal Infect
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.medmal.2013.07.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Panton-Valentine leukocidin producing Staphylococcus aureus nasal carriage, in North-Lebanon.
**Authors:** Beyrouthy R, Hamze M, Hleis S, Mallat H, Dabboussi F
**Journal:** Med Mal Infect (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.medmal.2013.07.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.medmal.2013.07.005)

## Content

1. Med Mal Infect. 2013 Sep;43(9):386-90. doi: 10.1016/j.medmal.2013.07.005. Epub
 2013 Aug 20.

Panton-Valentine leukocidin producing Staphylococcus aureus nasal carriage, in 
North-Lebanon.

Beyrouthy R(1), Hamze M, Hleis S, Mallat H, Dabboussi F.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de microbiologie santé et environnement, centre AZM pour la 
recherche en biotechnologies et ses applications, école doctorale des sciences 
et de technologie, université Libanaise, Tripoli, Lebanon.

OBJECTIVES: We investigated the prevalence and the risk factors of nasal 
carriage of Staphylococcus aureus carrying Panton-Valentine leukocidin genes [Sa 
PVL(+)] in pupils.
STUDY POPULATION AND METHODS: Two hundred and fifty-seven pupils were screened 
by nasal swabbing. The detection of 16S rRNA, mecA and luk-PV genes was 
performed by PCR and the risk factors were assessed with the statistical 
analysis of a questionnaire.
RESULTS: Thirty-one percent of pupils were colonized, with 16.4% of isolates 
carrying the luk-PV gene and 8.8% the mecA gene. Children aged 7years or more 
and living in a boarding school were the factors promoting nasal carriage 60% of 
children who presented with an abscess in the previous year were carriers of 
luk-PV gene Sa.
CONCLUSION: The study revealed a high prevalence of luk-PV gene among 
methicillin-susceptible strains and a statistically significant correlation 
between the presence of this gene and presenting with an abscess.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.medmal.2013.07.005
PMID: 23973399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]