---
reference_id: "PMID:30543055"
title: Mesencephalic astrocyte-derived neurotropic factor is an important factor in chondrocyte ER homeostasis.
authors:
- Bell PA
- Dennis EP
- Hartley CL
- Jackson RM
- Porter A
- Boot-Handford RP
- Pirog KA
- Briggs MD
journal: Cell Stress Chaperones
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s12192-018-0953-7
keywords:
- Animals
- Apoptosis/drug effects
- "Cartilage/drug effects, metabolism"
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Chondrocytes/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
- Embryo Loss/pathology
- "Endoplasmic Reticulum/drug effects, metabolism"
- Endoplasmic Reticulum Chaperone BiP
- Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress/drug effects
- Gene Deletion
- "Growth Plate/drug effects, metabolism"
- Homeostasis/drug effects
- "Lung/abnormalities, pathology"
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Nerve Growth Factors/metabolism
- Organ Specificity/drug effects
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnostic imaging, metabolism, pathology"
- Osteogenesis/drug effects
- Protein Binding/drug effects
- Respiration
- Tunicamycin/pharmacology
- Unfolded Protein Response/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mesencephalic astrocyte-derived neurotropic factor is an important factor in chondrocyte ER homeostasis.
**Authors:** Bell PA, Dennis EP, Hartley CL, Jackson RM, Porter A, Boot-Handford RP, Pirog KA, Briggs MD
**Journal:** Cell Stress Chaperones (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12192-018-0953-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12192-018-0953-7)

## Content

1. Cell Stress Chaperones. 2019 Jan;24(1):159-173. doi:
10.1007/s12192-018-0953-7.  Epub 2018 Dec 12.

Mesencephalic astrocyte-derived neurotropic factor is an important factor in 
chondrocyte ER homeostasis.

Bell PA(1)(2), Dennis EP(1)(3), Hartley CL(3)(4), Jackson RM(1), Porter A(5), 
Boot-Handford RP(3), Pirog KA(6), Briggs MD(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, International Centre for Life, Newcastle 
University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, NE1 3BZ, UK.
(2)Centre for Blood Research, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, V6T 
1Z3, Canada.
(3)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester, 
Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT, UK.
(4)Genomic Diagnostics Laboratory, Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, 
Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, M13 
9WL, UK.
(5)Newcastle University Protein and Proteome Analysis Facility, Newcastle 
University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, NE1 7RU, UK.
(6)Institute of Genetic Medicine, International Centre for Life, Newcastle 
University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, NE1 3BZ, UK. katarzyna.pirog@ncl.ac.uk.

Mesencephalic astrocyte-derived neurotrophic factor (MANF) is an endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) resident protein that can be secreted due to an imperfect KDEL 
motif. MANF plays a cytoprotective role in several soft tissues and is 
upregulated in conditions resulting from intracellular retention of mutant 
protein, including two skeletal diseases, metaphyseal chondrodysplasia, Schmid 
type (MCDS) and multiple epiphyseal dysplasia (MED). The role of MANF in 
skeletal tissue homeostasis is currently unknown. Interestingly, 
cartilage-specific deletion of Manf in a mouse model of MED resulted in 
increased disease severity, suggesting its upregulation may be 
chondroprotective. Treatment of MED chondrocytes with exogenous MANF led to a 
decrease in the cellular levels of BiP (GRP78), confirming MANF's potential to 
modulate ER stress responses. However, it did not alleviate the intracellular 
retention of mutant matrilin-3, suggesting that it is the intracellular MANF 
that is of importance in the pathobiology of skeletal dysplasias. The 
Col2Cre-driven deletion of Manf from mouse cartilage resulted in a 
chondrodysplasia-like phenotype. Interestingly, ablation of MANF in cartilage 
did not have extracellular consequences but led to an upregulation of several 
ER-resident chaperones including BiP. This apparent induction of ER stress in 
turn led to dysregulated chondrocyte apoptosis and decreased proliferation, 
resulting in reduced long bone growth. We have previously shown that ER stress 
is an underlying disease mechanism for several skeletal dysplasias. The 
cartilage-specific deletion of Manf described in this study phenocopies our 
previously published chondrodysplasia models, further confirming that ER stress 
itself is sufficient to disrupt skeletal growth and thus represents a potential 
therapeutic target.

DOI: 10.1007/s12192-018-0953-7
PMCID: PMC6363614
PMID: 30543055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]