---
reference_id: "PMID:37456434"
title: "Rare Case of Ludwig's Angina in a Child."
authors:
- Kakkat S
- Lohiya S
- Maheswara Y Jr
- Vagha JD
- Taksande A
- Meshram RJ
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.40446
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rare Case of Ludwig's Angina in a Child.
**Authors:** Kakkat S, Lohiya S, Maheswara Y Jr, Vagha JD, Taksande A, Meshram RJ
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.40446](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.40446)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Jun 15;15(6):e40446. doi: 10.7759/cureus.40446. eCollection 2023 
Jun.

Rare Case of Ludwig's Angina in a Child.

Kakkat S(1), Lohiya S(1), Maheswara Y Jr(1), Vagha JD(1), Taksande A(1), Meshram 
RJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Pediatrics, Jawaharlal Nehru Medical College, Datta Meghe Institute of Higher 
Education and Research, Wardha, IND.

The parents of an 11-month-old infant presented her to the hospital due to her 
persistent fever and the presence of a swollen neck over a period of four days. 
Inflammation and discomfort were observed on both sides of her neck, 
particularly around the parotid glands. Notably, a localized collection of pus 
was identified beneath her left jaw while both sides of her jaw exhibited 
swelling, albeit with less sensitivity. A neck scan revealed an infection in the 
jaw region, accompanied by swelling in the facial skin and underlying tissue. 
The diagnosis rendered was Ludwig's angina, for which the prescribed course of 
treatment involved administering intravenous antibiotics such as amikacin, 
vancomycin, and Meropenem. The patient exhibited improvement after the treatment 
and was subsequently discharged from the hospital.

Copyright © 2023, Kakkat et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.40446
PMCID: PMC10349334
PMID: 37456434

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.