---
reference_id: "PMID:10215516"
title: Protein kinase C in rat brain is altered by developmental lead exposure.
authors:
- Chen HH
- Ma T
- Ho IK
journal: Neurochem Res
year: '1999'
doi: "10.1023/a:1020993802239"
keywords:
- Animals
- "Brain/embryology, enzymology, growth & development"
- Cell Membrane/enzymology
- Cytosol/enzymology
- Female
- Frontal Lobe/enzymology
- Hippocampus/enzymology
- Isoenzymes/metabolism
- Lactation
- "Lead/administration & dosage, toxicity"
- "Phorbol 12,13-Dibutyrate/metabolism, pharmacology"
- Pregnancy
- Protein Kinase C/metabolism
- Rats
- "Rats, Sprague-Dawley"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Protein kinase C in rat brain is altered by developmental lead exposure.
**Authors:** Chen HH, Ma T, Ho IK
**Journal:** Neurochem Res (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1023/a:1020993802239](https://doi.org/10.1023/a:1020993802239)

## Content

1. Neurochem Res. 1999 Mar;24(3):415-21. doi: 10.1023/a:1020993802239.

Protein kinase C in rat brain is altered by developmental lead exposure.

Chen HH(1), Ma T, Ho IK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Mississippi Medical 
Center, Jackson 39216, USA.

The absence of learning-related redistribution of hippocampal protein kinase C 
(PKC) has been correlated with impairment of learning performance induced by 
developmental lead (Pb) exposure. This study was designed to examine whether the 
properties of brain PKC are altered by chronic Pb exposure during development. 
Two-tenth percent Pb acetate was administered to pregnant and lactating dams and 
then administered to weanlings in drinking water until postnatal day (PN) 56. 
Effects of Pb on translocation of PKC were studied in brain slices prepared from 
hippocampus. When the slices were treated with 0.33 microM phorbol-12, 
13-dibutyrate (PDBu) for 15 min, a significant increase in PKC activity was 
observed in the membrane fraction of hippocampal slices from Pb-exposed rats, 
suggesting that chronic Pb exposure potentiates PDBu-activated PKC 
translocation. Data obtained from saturation binding assays in the frontal 
cortices of Pb-exposed rats showed a decrease in the dissociation constant (KD) 
in both membrane and cytosolic PKC. A decrease in the total binding sites (Bmax) 
of [3H]PDBu binding was only observed in membrane PKC. Furthermore, 
developmental Pb exposure decreased PKC-gamma, but not PKC-alpha, -betaII, and 
-epsilon in the membrane fraction of the hippocampus and the frontal cortex. 
These results indicate that chronic Pb exposure during development increases 
phorbol ester binding affinity, enhances phorbol ester-induced translocation of 
PKC, and down-regulates membrane PKC, mainly PKC-gamma.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1020993802239
PMID: 10215516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]