---
reference_id: "PMID:38554024"
title: "Clinical outcomes and medical management of achondroplasia in Japanese children: A retrospective medical record review of clinical data."
authors:
- Saitou H
- Kitaoka T
- Kubota T
- Kanno J
- Mochizuki H
- Michigami T
- Hasegawa K
- Fujiwara I
- Hamajima T
- Harada D
- Seki Y
- Nagasaki K
- Dateki S
- Namba N
- Tokuoka H
- Pimenta JM
- Cohen S
- Ozono K
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63612
keywords:
- Humans
- "Achondroplasia/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Female
- Retrospective Studies
- "Child, Preschool"
- Japan/epidemiology
- Infant
- Human Growth Hormone/therapeutic use
- Treatment Outcome
- Child
- Body Height/drug effects
- Disease Management
- Medical Records
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- East Asian People
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical outcomes and medical management of achondroplasia in Japanese children: A retrospective medical record review of clinical data.
**Authors:** Saitou H, Kitaoka T, Kubota T, Kanno J, Mochizuki H, Michigami T, Hasegawa K, Fujiwara I, Hamajima T, Harada D, Seki Y, Nagasaki K, Dateki S, Namba N, Tokuoka H, Pimenta JM, Cohen S, Ozono K
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.63612](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.63612)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2024 Aug;194(8):e63612. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63612. Epub 2024
 Mar 30.

Clinical outcomes and medical management of achondroplasia in Japanese children: 
A retrospective medical record review of clinical data.

Saitou H(1), Kitaoka T(1), Kubota T(1), Kanno J(2), Mochizuki H(3), Michigami 
T(4), Hasegawa K(5), Fujiwara I(6), Hamajima T(7), Harada D(8), Seki Y(9), 
Nagasaki K(10), Dateki S(11), Namba N(12), Tokuoka H(13), Pimenta JM(14), Cohen 
S(14), Ozono K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Suita, Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Sendai, Japan.
(3)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Saitama Children's Medical Center, 
Saitama, Japan.
(4)Department of Bone and Mineral Research, Research Institute, Osaka Women's 
and Children's Hospital, Izumi, Japan.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Okayama University Hospital, Okayama, Japan.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Sendai City Hospital, Sendai, Japan.
(7)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Aichi Children's Health and 
Medical Center, Aichi, Japan.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Osaka Hospital, Japan Community of Health Care 
Organization (JCHO), Osaka, Japan.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Kagoshima University School of Medicine, Kagoshima, 
Japan.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Niigata University Medical & Dental Hospital, 
Niigata, Japan.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical 
Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan.
(12)Division of Pediatrics and Perinatology, Faculty of Medicine, Tottori 
University, Tottori, Japan.
(13)BioMarin Pharmaceutical Japan K.K., Tokyo, Japan.
(14)BioMarin (U.K.) Limited, London, UK.

Achondroplasia (ACH) is a rare, autosomal dominant skeletal dysplasia 
characterized by short stature, characteristic facial configuration, and trident 
hands. Before vosoritide approval in Japan, patients with ACH could start growth 
hormone (GH) treatment at age 3 years. However, ACH and its treatment in young 
Japanese children have not been studied. This retrospective, longitudinal, 
medical records-based cohort study (before vosoritide approval) summarized 
symptoms, complications, monitoring, surgery/interventions, and height 
with/without GH in Japanese patients with ACH <5 years. Complications were 
observed in 89.2% of all 37 patients; 75.7% required surgery or intervention. 
All patients were monitored by magnetic resonance imaging; 73.0% had foramen 
magnum stenosis, while 54.1% had Achondroplasia Foramen Magnum Score 3 or 4. Of 
28 GH-treated patients, 22 initiating at age 3 years were generally taller after 
12 months versus 9 non-GH-treated patients. Mean annual growth velocity 
significantly increased from age 2 to 3 versus 3 to 4 years in GH-treated 
patients (4.37 vs. 7.23 cm/year; p = 0.0014), but not in non-GH-treated patients 
(4.94 vs. 4.20 cm/year). The mean height at age 4 years with/without GH was 
83.6/79.8 cm. These results improve our understanding of young patients with ACH 
in Japan and confirm that early diagnosis of ACH and monitoring of complications 
help facilitate appropriate interventions.

© 2024 The Authors. American Journal of Medical Genetics Part A published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.63612
PMID: 38554024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]