---
reference_id: "PMID:33462684"
title: "Inhibition of lysyl oxidase stimulates TGF-β signaling and metalloproteinases-2 and -9 expression and contributes to the disruption of ascending aorta in rats: protection by propylthiouracil."
authors:
- Merico V
- Imberti JF
- Zanoni M
- Boriani G
- Garagna S
- Imberti R
journal: Heart Vessels
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00380-020-01750-6
keywords:
- Animals
- Antimetabolites/pharmacology
- "Aorta, Thoracic/metabolism"
- "Aortic Diseases/metabolism, prevention & control"
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Immunohistochemistry
- In Situ Nick-End Labeling
- Male
- Matrix Metalloproteinase 2/biosynthesis
- Matrix Metalloproteinase 9/biosynthesis
- Pilot Projects
- Propylthiouracil/pharmacology
- Protein-Lysine 6-Oxidase/pharmacology
- Rats
- "Rats, Sprague-Dawley"
- Transforming Growth Factor beta/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inhibition of lysyl oxidase stimulates TGF-β signaling and metalloproteinases-2 and -9 expression and contributes to the disruption of ascending aorta in rats: protection by propylthiouracil.
**Authors:** Merico V, Imberti JF, Zanoni M, Boriani G, Garagna S, Imberti R
**Journal:** Heart Vessels (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00380-020-01750-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00380-020-01750-6)

## Content

1. Heart Vessels. 2021 May;36(5):738-747. doi: 10.1007/s00380-020-01750-6. Epub 
2021 Jan 19.

Inhibition of lysyl oxidase stimulates TGF-β signaling and metalloproteinases-2 
and -9 expression and contributes to the disruption of ascending aorta in rats: 
protection by propylthiouracil.

Merico V(1), Imberti JF(2), Zanoni M(1), Boriani G(2), Garagna S(1)(3), Imberti 
R(4).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Biotecnologie "Lazzaro Spallanzani", University of 
Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Department of Biomedical, Metabolic and Neural 
Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Policlinico di Modena, Modena, 
Italy.
(3)Centre for Health Technologies (C.H.T.), University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(4)Phase I Clinical Trials Unit and Experimental Therapy, Fondazione IRCCS 
Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy. r.imbertipsm@gmail.com.

Mutations in lysyl oxidase (LOX) genes cause severe vascular anomalies in mice 
and humans. LOX activity can be irreversibly inhibited by the administration of 
β-aminoproprionitrile (BAPN). We investigated the mechanisms underlying the 
damage to the ascending thoracic aorta induced by LOX deficiency and evaluated 
whether 6-propylthiouracil (PTU) can afford protection in rats. BAPN 
administration caused disruption of the ascending aortic wall, increased the 
number of apoptotic cells, stimulated TGF-β signaling (increase of nuclear 
p-SMAD2 staining), and up-regulated the expression of metalloproteinases-2 and 
-9. In BAPN-treated animals, PTU reduced apoptosis, p-SMAD2 staining, MMP-2, and 
-9 expression, and markedly decreased the damage to the aortic wall. Our results 
suggest that, as in some heritable vascular diseases, enhanced TGF-β signaling 
and upregulation of MMP-2 and -9 can contribute to the pathogenesis of ascending 
aorta damage caused by LOX deficiency. We have also shown that PTU, a drug 
already in clinical use, protects against the effects of LOX inhibition. MMP-2 
and -9 might be potential targets of new therapeutic strategies for the 
treatment of vascular diseases caused by LOX deficiency.

DOI: 10.1007/s00380-020-01750-6
PMID: 33462684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]