---
reference_id: "PMID:23993982"
title: Investigation of common variable immunodeficiency patients and healthy individuals using autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome biomarkers.
authors:
- Roberts CA
- Ayers L
- Bateman EA
- Sadler R
- Magerus-Chatinet A
- Rieux-Laucat F
- Misbah SA
- Ferry BL
journal: Hum Immunol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2013.08.266
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative Syndrome/diagnosis, drug therapy, metabolism"
- "Biomarkers/blood, metabolism"
- Case-Control Studies
- "Common Variable Immunodeficiency/diagnosis, drug therapy, metabolism"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- Immunophenotyping
- Lymphocyte Count
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Receptors, Antigen, T-Cell, alpha-beta/metabolism"
- "T-Lymphocyte Subsets/immunology, metabolism"
- Young Adult
- "fas Receptor/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Investigation of common variable immunodeficiency patients and healthy individuals using autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome biomarkers.
**Authors:** Roberts CA, Ayers L, Bateman EA, Sadler R, Magerus-Chatinet A, Rieux-Laucat F, Misbah SA, Ferry BL
**Journal:** Hum Immunol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.humimm.2013.08.266](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humimm.2013.08.266)

## Content

1. Hum Immunol. 2013 Dec;74(12):1531-5. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2013.08.266. Epub
2013 Aug 28.

Investigation of common variable immunodeficiency patients and healthy
individuals using autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome biomarkers.

Roberts CA(1), Ayers L, Bateman EA, Sadler R, Magerus-Chatinet A, Rieux-Laucat
F, Misbah SA, Ferry BL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Immunology, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, UK.

Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS) is a disorder of dysregulated
lymphocyte homeostasis. Biomarkers including elevated CD3+TCRαβ+CD4-CD8- double
negative T cells (TCRαβ+ DNT), IL-10, sCD95L and vitamin B12 can be used to
differentiate between ALPS and common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) patients
with an overlapping clinical phenotype. We investigated the utility of ALPS
biomarkers in 13 CVID patients with lymphoproliferation and/or autoimmune
cytopaenia with comparison to 33 healthy controls. Vitamin B12 (P < 0.01) and
IL-10 (P < 0.0001), but not sCD95L or TCRαβ+ DNT, were increased in CVID
compared to controls. The 95th percentile for TCRαβ+ DNT in healthy controls was
used to define a normal range up to 2.3% of total lymphocytes or 3.4% of T
cells. These frequencies lie markedly beyond the cut offs used in current ALPS
diagnostic criteria (≥ 1.5% of total lymphocytes or 2.5% of CD3+ lymphocytes),
suggesting these limits may have poor specificity for ALPS.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humimm.2013.08.266
PMID: 23993982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
