---
reference_id: "PMID:29503043"
title: Origins and specificity of auto-antibodies in Sm+ SLE patients.
authors:
- Kalinina O
- Louzoun Y
- Wang Y
- Utset T
- Weigert M
journal: J Autoimmun
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2018.02.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Origins and specificity of auto-antibodies in Sm+ SLE patients.
**Authors:** Kalinina O, Louzoun Y, Wang Y, Utset T, Weigert M
**Journal:** J Autoimmun (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaut.2018.02.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaut.2018.02.008)

## Content

1. J Autoimmun. 2018 Jun;90:94-104. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2018.02.008. Epub 2018
Mar  1.

Origins and specificity of auto-antibodies in Sm+ SLE patients.

Kalinina O(1), Louzoun Y(2), Wang Y(3), Utset T(4), Weigert M(3).

Author information:
(1)Gwen Knapp Center for Lupus and Immunology Research, Department of Pathology, 
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60637, USA. Electronic address: 
olga.kalinina.a@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Mathematics, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, 52900, Israel. 
Electronic address: louzouy@math.biu.ac.il.
(3)Gwen Knapp Center for Lupus and Immunology Research, Department of Pathology, 
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60637, USA.
(4)Department of Rheumatology, University of Chicago Medicine, Chicago, IL, 
60637, USA. Electronic address: tutset1@sbcglobal.net.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex autoimmune disease accompanied 
by production of autoantibodies directed to a variety of self-proteins and 
nucleic acids. The genetic basis of SLE is also complex with at least 40 
susceptibility loci identified. This complexity suggests that there are a 
variety of SLE manifestations; nevertheless, SLE is treated as a single disease 
clinically. One unique SLE target is the Smith antigen (Sm), a nuclear 
ribonucleoprotein complex. Sm response occurs in 25% of patients with SLE. To 
simplify analysis of the disease and its associated autoantibody repertoire, we 
focused on this subset [referred to here as "Sm positive", Sm+]. We analyzed the 
memory B cell repertoire and identified a V region, Vκ4-1, which was 
significantly overrepresented in the Sm+ SLE subset. Antibodies that express 
Vκ4-1 are enriched in antinuclear (ANA) positive specificities and often 
associated with speckled ANA pattern that is a characteristic of Sm binding. In 
healthy individuals Vκ4-1 B cells are enriched in the unswitched memory 
population. Unswitched memory B cells resemble mouse marginal zone B cells and 
this population is decreased in all SLE patients. Moreover, we found a similar 
decrease in healthy African American donors. African Americans have a 
significantly higher prevalence of SLE compared to Caucasians. Thus, reduced 
unswitched memory B cell compartment may represent a new susceptibility marker 
for SLE.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaut.2018.02.008
PMID: 29503043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]