---
reference_id: "PMID:35275351"
title: Epilepsia Partialis Continua a Clinical Feature of a Missense Variant in the ADCK3 Gene and Poor Response to Therapy.
authors:
- Ashrafi MR
- Haghighi R
- Badv RS
- Ghabeli H
- Tavasoli AR
- Pourbakhtyaran E
- Rezaei Z
- Mahdieh N
- Mohammadi P
- Heidari M
journal: J Mol Neurosci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s12031-022-01993-0
keywords:
- Ataxia/genetics
- Child
- Epilepsia Partialis Continua/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Iran
- Mitochondrial Diseases/genetics
- Muscle Weakness
- Ubiquinone/deficiency
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epilepsia Partialis Continua a Clinical Feature of a Missense Variant in the ADCK3 Gene and Poor Response to Therapy.
**Authors:** Ashrafi MR, Haghighi R, Badv RS, Ghabeli H, Tavasoli AR, Pourbakhtyaran E, Rezaei Z, Mahdieh N, Mohammadi P, Heidari M
**Journal:** J Mol Neurosci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12031-022-01993-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12031-022-01993-0)

## Content

1. J Mol Neurosci. 2022 May;72(5):1125-1132. doi: 10.1007/s12031-022-01993-0.
Epub  2022 Mar 11.

Epilepsia Partialis Continua a Clinical Feature of a Missense Variant in the
ADCK3 Gene and Poor Response to Therapy.

Ashrafi MR(#)(1), Haghighi R(#)(2), Badv RS(1), Ghabeli H(2), Tavasoli AR(2),
Pourbakhtyaran E(2), Rezaei Z(1), Mahdieh N(3), Mohammadi P(4), Heidari M(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Pediatrics Center of Excellence,
Children's Medical Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Pediatric Neurology Division, Children's Medical Center, Pediatrics Center of
Excellence, Myelin Disorders Clinic, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran.
(3)Cardiogenetic Research Center, Rajaei Cardiovascular Medical, and Research
Center, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares
University, Tehran, Iran. Pouria.mohammaditmu@gmail.com.
(5)Pediatric Neurology Division, Children's Medical Center, Pediatrics Center of
Excellence, Myelin Disorders Clinic, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,
Tehran, Iran. m-heidari@sina.tums.ac.ir.
(#)Contributed equally

INTRODUCTION: Coenzyme Q10 deficiency can be due to mutations in Coenzyme
Q10-biosynthesis genes (primary) or genes unrelated to biosynthesis (secondary).
Primary Coenzyme Q10 deficiency-4 (COQ10D4), also known as autosomal recessive
spinocerebellar ataxia-9 (SCAR9), is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by
mutations in the ADCK3 gene. This disorder is characterized by several clinical
manifestations such as severe infantile multisystemic illness,
encephalomyopathy, isolated myopathy, cerebellar ataxia, or nephrotic syndrome.
METHODS: In this study, whole-exome sequencing was performed in order to
identify disease-causing variants in an affected girl with developmental
regression and Epilepsia Partialis Continua (EPC). Next, Sanger sequencing
method was used to confirm the identified variant in the patient and segregation
analysis in her parents.
CASE PRESENTATION: The proband is an affected 11-year-old girl with persistent
seizures, EPC, and developmental regression including motor, cognition, and
speech. Seizures were not controlled with various anticonvulsant drugs despite
adequate dosing. Progressive cerebellar atrophy, stroke-like cortical
involvement, multifocal hyperintense bright objects, and restriction in
diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) were seen in the brain magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI).
CONCLUSIONS: A novel homozygous missense variant [NM_020247.5: c.814G>T;
(p.Gly272Cys)] was identified within the ADCK3 gene, which is the first mutation
in this gene in the Iranian population. Bioinformatics analysis showed this
variant is damaging. Based on our patient, clinicians should consider genetic
testing earlier to instant diagnosis and satisfactory treatment based on exact
etiology to prevent further neurologic sequelae.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s12031-022-01993-0
PMCID: PMC8914440
PMID: 35275351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
