---
reference_id: "PMID:30472464"
title: Revisiting autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE) mutations in the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor reveal an increase in efficacy regardless of stochiometry.
authors:
- Indurthi DC
- Qudah T
- Liao VW
- Ahring PK
- Lewis TM
- Balle T
- Chebib M
- Absalom NL
journal: Pharmacol Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2018.11.031
keywords:
- Acetylcholine/pharmacology
- Alkaloids/pharmacology
- Animals
- Azocines/pharmacology
- "Epilepsy, Frontal Lobe/genetics, physiopathology"
- Female
- Mutation
- Nicotine/pharmacology
- Nicotinic Agonists/pharmacology
- Oocytes/physiology
- Quinolizines/pharmacology
- "Receptors, Nicotinic/physiology"
- Varenicline/pharmacology
- Xenopus laevis
- Quinolizidine Alkaloids
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Revisiting autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE) mutations in the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor reveal an increase in efficacy regardless of stochiometry.
**Authors:** Indurthi DC, Qudah T, Liao VW, Ahring PK, Lewis TM, Balle T, Chebib M, Absalom NL
**Journal:** Pharmacol Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.phrs.2018.11.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phrs.2018.11.031)

## Content

1. Pharmacol Res. 2019 Jan;139:215-227. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2018.11.031. Epub
2018  Nov 22.

Revisiting autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE) mutations
in the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor reveal an increase in efficacy
regardless of stochiometry.

Indurthi DC(1), Qudah T(1), Liao VW(1), Ahring PK(1), Lewis TM(2), Balle T(1),
Chebib M(1), Absalom NL(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Sydney, School of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine and Health,
Building (A15) Science Road, Camperdown, NSW, 2006, Australia; Brain and Mind
Centre, 94 Mallett Street, Camperdown, NSW, 2050, Australia.
(2)University of New South Wales, School of Medical Sciences, Wallace Wurth
Building, Kensington, NSW, 2052, Australia.
(3)University of Sydney, School of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine and Health,
Building (A15) Science Road, Camperdown, NSW, 2006, Australia; Brain and Mind
Centre, 94 Mallett Street, Camperdown, NSW, 2050, Australia. Electronic address:
nathan.absalom@sydney.edu.au.

Autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy (ADNFLE) is a genetic form of
epilepsy that is caused by mutations in several genes, including genes encoding
for the α4 and β2 subunits of the nicotinic acetylcholine (nACh) receptor.
Pentameric α4β2 nACh receptors are the most abundant nicotinic receptor in the
mammalian brain and form two stoichiometries, the (α4)3(β2)2 and (α4)2(β2)3
receptors that differ in their physiological and pharmacological properties. The
purpose of this study was to investigate how ADNFLE mutations β2V287M, β2V287L
or α4T293I manifest themselves in different receptor stoichiometries. We
expressed wild-type and mutant receptors in Xenopus oocytes and measured the
response to ACh and other agonists at both receptor stoichiometries. For all
three mutations, the efficacy of ACh at (α4)2(β2)3 receptors was increased. At
(α4)3(β2)2 receptors, the efficacy of activation was increased both when two
molecules of agonist, either ACh or the site-selective agonist sazetidine-A,
were bound at the α4-β2 interfaces, and when a third ACh molecule was bound at
the α4-α4 site. Regardless of stoichiometry, the mutations increased the current
elicited by low concentrations of ACh. Further, the smoking cessation agents,
nicotine, varenicline and cytisine increased activation of mutant (α4)3(β2)2
receptors, while only nicotine increased activation of mutant (α4)2(β2)3
receptors. Chronic exposure of all agonists reduced ACh-activation levels at low
and high ACh concentrations. From this, we concluded that mutations that cause
ADNFLE manifest themselves in a change in efficacy regardless of the
stoichiometry of the receptor.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2018.11.031
PMID: 30472464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
