---
reference_id: "PMID:31267471"
title: "The Relationship Between Hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (hEDS), Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome (POTS), and Mast Cell Activation Syndrome (MCAS)."
authors:
- Kucharik AH
- Chang C
journal: Clin Rev Allergy Immunol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s12016-019-08755-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Relationship Between Hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (hEDS), Postural Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome (POTS), and Mast Cell Activation Syndrome (MCAS).
**Authors:** Kucharik AH, Chang C
**Journal:** Clin Rev Allergy Immunol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12016-019-08755-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12016-019-08755-8)

## Content

1. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2020 Jun;58(3):273-297. doi: 
10.1007/s12016-019-08755-8.

The Relationship Between Hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (hEDS), Postural 
Orthostatic Tachycardia Syndrome (POTS), and Mast Cell Activation Syndrome 
(MCAS).

Kucharik AH(1), Chang C(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL, USA.
(2)Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, FL, USA. chrchang@mhs.net.
(3)Joe DiMaggio Children's Hospital, 1131 North 35th Avenue, Suite 220, 
Hollywood, FL, 33021, USA. chrchang@mhs.net.
(4)University of California, Davis, CA, USA. chrchang@mhs.net.
(5)Florida International University, Miami, FL, USA. chrchang@mhs.net.

In recent years, an association between hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome 
(hEDS), mast cell activation syndrome (MCAS), and postural orthostatic 
tachycardia syndrome (POTS) has garnered attention and patients are increasingly 
presenting with this triad. However, a real relationship between these entities 
is unclear due to a lack of scientific validity. We conducted an extensive 
review of the literature using two different search strategies. A narrower 
strategy included 88 searches of various combinations of terms for each of the 
three conditions, yielding 19 unique papers. A broader search included 136 
searches of various combinations of terms but included all forms of EDS and 
yielded 40 unique papers. Of these, only four and nine papers from the narrower 
and broader search strategies were original research articles. None of these 
papers resulted from a combination of the search terms for the three conditions. 
All three clinical entities are controversial in either existence or 
pathogenesis. MCAS is a poorly defined clinical entity, and many studies do not 
adhere to the proposed criteria when establishing the diagnosis. Patients 
previously diagnosed with EDS hypermobility type may not meet the new, stricter 
criteria for hEDS but may for a less severe hypermobility spectrum disorder 
(HSD). The pathophysiology of POTS is still unclear. An evidence-based, common 
pathophysiologic mechanism between any of the two, much less all three 
conditions, has yet to be described. Our review of the literature shows that 
current evidence is lacking on the existence of MCAS or hEDS as separate or 
significant clinical entities. Studies proposing a relationship between the 
three clinical entities are either biased or based on outdated criteria. The 
reason behind the purported association of these entities stems from an 
overlapping pool of vague, subjective symptoms, which is inadequate evidence to 
conclude that any such relationship exists.

DOI: 10.1007/s12016-019-08755-8
PMID: 31267471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]