---
reference_id: "PMID:35525024"
title: Pharmacological ascorbate improves the response to platinum-based chemotherapy in advanced stage non-small cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Furqan M
- Abu-Hejleh T
- Stephens LM
- Hartwig SM
- Mott SL
- Pulliam CF
- Petronek M
- Henrich JB
- Fath MA
- Houtman JC
- Varga SM
- Bodeker KL
- Bossler AD
- Bellizzi AM
- Zhang J
- Monga V
- Mani H
- Ivanovic M
- Smith BJ
- Byrne MM
- Zeitler W
- Wagner BA
- Buettner GR
- Cullen JJ
- Buatti JM
- Spitz DR
- Allen BG
journal: Redox Biol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2022.102318
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pharmacological ascorbate improves the response to platinum-based chemotherapy in advanced stage non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Furqan M, Abu-Hejleh T, Stephens LM, Hartwig SM, Mott SL, Pulliam CF, Petronek M, Henrich JB, Fath MA, Houtman JC, Varga SM, Bodeker KL, Bossler AD, Bellizzi AM, Zhang J, Monga V, Mani H, Ivanovic M, Smith BJ, Byrne MM, Zeitler W, Wagner BA, Buettner GR, Cullen JJ, Buatti JM, Spitz DR, Allen BG
**Journal:** Redox Biol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.redox.2022.102318](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.redox.2022.102318)

## Content

1. Redox Biol. 2022 Jul;53:102318. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2022.102318. Epub 2022
Apr  20.

Pharmacological ascorbate improves the response to platinum-based chemotherapy 
in advanced stage non-small cell lung cancer.

Furqan M(1), Abu-Hejleh T(2), Stephens LM(3), Hartwig SM(4), Mott SL(5), Pulliam 
CF(6), Petronek M(6), Henrich JB(6), Fath MA(6), Houtman JC(7), Varga SM(8), 
Bodeker KL(6), Bossler AD(9), Bellizzi AM(10), Zhang J(2), Monga V(2), Mani 
H(11), Ivanovic M(10), Smith BJ(12), Byrne MM(2), Zeitler W(2), Wagner BA(6), 
Buettner GR(6), Cullen JJ(6), Buatti JM(6), Spitz DR(6), Allen BG(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa, 200 Hawkins Dr, Iowa 
City, IA, 52242, USA; Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Iowa, 
200 Hawkins Dr, Iowa City, IA, 52242, USA. Electronic address: 
muhammad-furqan@uiowa.edu.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa, 200 Hawkins Dr, Iowa 
City, IA, 52242, USA; Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Iowa, 
200 Hawkins Dr, Iowa City, IA, 52242, USA.
(3)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Immunology, University of Iowa, 200 
Hawkins Dr, Iowa City, IA, 52242, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Iowa, 51 Newton Rd., 
Iowa City, IA, 52242, USA.
(5)Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Iowa, 200 Hawkins Dr, Iowa 
City, IA, 52242, USA.
(6)Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Iowa, 200 Hawkins Dr, Iowa 
City, IA, 52242, USA; Department of Radiation Oncology, Free Radical and 
Radiation Biology Program, University of Iowa, 200 Hawkins Dr, Iowa City, IA, 
52242, USA.
(7)Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Iowa, 200 Hawkins Dr, Iowa 
City, IA, 52242, USA; Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Immunology, 
University of Iowa, 200 Hawkins Dr, Iowa City, IA, 52242, USA; Department of 
Microbiology and Immunology, University of Iowa, 51 Newton Rd., Iowa City, IA, 
52242, USA.
(8)Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Iowa, 200 Hawkins Dr, Iowa 
City, IA, 52242, USA; Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Immunology, 
University of Iowa, 200 Hawkins Dr, Iowa City, IA, 52242, USA; Department of 
Microbiology and Immunology, University of Iowa, 51 Newton Rd., Iowa City, IA, 
52242, USA; Department of Pathology, University of Iowa, 200 Hawkins Dr, Iowa 
City, IA, 52242, USA.
(9)Department of Pathology, University of Iowa, 200 Hawkins Dr, Iowa City, IA, 
52242, USA.
(10)Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Iowa, 200 Hawkins Dr, Iowa 
City, IA, 52242, USA; Department of Pathology, University of Iowa, 200 Hawkins 
Dr, Iowa City, IA, 52242, USA.
(11)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa, 200 Hawkins Dr, Iowa 
City, IA, 52242, USA.
(12)Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Iowa, 200 Hawkins Dr, Iowa 
City, IA, 52242, USA; Department of Biostatistics, College of Public Health, 
University of Iowa, 145 N. Riverside Dr, Iowa City, IA, 52242, USA.

PURPOSE: Platinum-based chemotherapy with or without immunotherapy is the 
mainstay of treatment for advanced stage non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 
lacking a molecular driver alteration. Pre-clinical studies have reported that 
pharmacological ascorbate (P-AscH-) enhances NSCLC response to platinum-based 
therapy. We conducted a phase II clinical trial combining P-AscH- with 
carboplatin-paclitaxel chemotherapy.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Chemotherapy naïve advanced stage NSCLC patients received 
75 g ascorbate twice per week intravenously with carboplatin and paclitaxel 
every three weeks for four cycles. The primary endpoint was to improve tumor 
response per Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) v1.1 compared 
to the historical control of 20%. The trial was conducted as an optimal Simon's 
two-stage design. Blood samples were collected for exploratory analyses.
RESULTS: The study enrolled 38 patients and met its primary endpoint with an 
objective response rate of 34.2% (p = 0.03). All were confirmed partial 
responses (cPR). The disease control rate was 84.2% (stable disease + cPR). 
Median progression-free and overall survival were 5.7 months and 12.8 months, 
respectively. Treatment-related adverse events (TRAE) included one grade 5 
(neutropenic fever) and five grade 4 events (cytopenias). Cytokine and chemokine 
data suggest that the combination elicits an immune response. Immunophenotyping 
of peripheral blood mononuclear cells demonstrated an increase in effector CD8 
T-cells in patients with a progression-free survival (PFS) ≥ 6 months.
CONCLUSIONS: The addition of P-AscH- to platinum-based chemotherapy improved 
tumor response in advanced stage NSCLC. P-AscH- appears to alter the host immune 
response and needs further investigation as a potential adjuvant to 
immunotherapy.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.redox.2022.102318
PMCID: PMC9079696
PMID: 35525024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M Furqan acts as a institutional principal 
investigator/sub-investigator at AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eli Lilly, 
Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, Genmab, Elicio Therapeutics, Mirati, Amgen, 
Replimmune, Checkmate Pharmaceuticals, Gilead, GSK, Tesaro and Abbvie. On 
advisory board for Abbvie, Jazz Pharma, Mirati, Astra Zeneca. DR Spitz and BG 
Allen received research support from Galera and serve as consultant for Galera 
Therapeutics. All authors report no conflicts of interest.