---
reference_id: "PMID:38146508"
title: "The emergence of Fanconi anaemia type S: a phenotypic spectrum of biallelic BRCA1 mutations."
authors:
- Hughes T
- Rose AM
journal: Front Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1278004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The emergence of Fanconi anaemia type S: a phenotypic spectrum of biallelic BRCA1 mutations.
**Authors:** Hughes T, Rose AM
**Journal:** Front Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fonc.2023.1278004](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2023.1278004)

## Content

1. Front Oncol. 2023 Dec 11;13:1278004. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1278004.
eCollection  2023.

The emergence of Fanconi anaemia type S: a phenotypic spectrum of biallelic 
BRCA1 mutations.

Hughes T(1), Rose AM(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Oxford Medical School, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

BRCA1 is involved in the Fanconi anaemia (FA) pathway, which coordinates repair 
of DNA interstrand cross-links. FA is a rare genetic disorder characterised by 
bone marrow failure, cancer predisposition and congenital abnormalities, caused 
by biallelic mutations affecting proteins in the FA pathway. Germline 
monoallelic pathogenic BRCA1 mutations are known to be associated with 
hereditary breast/ovarian cancer, however biallelic mutations of BRCA1 were long 
predicted to be incompatible with embryonic viability, hence BRCA1 was not 
considered to be a canonical FA gene. Despite this, several patients with 
biallelic pathogenic BRCA1 mutations and FA-like phenotypes have been identified 
- defining a new FA type (FA-S) and designating BRCA1 as an FA gene. This report 
presents a scoping review of the cases of biallelic BRCA1 mutations identified 
to date, discusses the functional effects of the mutations identified, and 
proposes a phenotypic spectrum of BRCA1 mutations based upon available clinical 
and genetic data. We report that this FA-S cohort phenotype includes short 
stature, microcephaly, facial dysmorphisms, hypo/hyperpigmented lesions, 
intellectual disability, chromosomal sensitivity to crosslinking agents and 
predisposition to breast/ovarian cancer and/or childhood cancers, with some 
patients exhibiting sensitivity to chemotherapy. Unlike most other types of FA, 
FA-S patients lack bone marrow failure.

Copyright © 2023 Hughes and Rose.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2023.1278004
PMCID: PMC10749362
PMID: 38146508

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.