---
reference_id: "PMID:35996497"
title: Comparison Between Dichloroacetate and Phenylbutyrate Treatment for Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Deficiency.
authors:
- Karissa P
- Simpson T
- Dawson SP
- Low TY
- Tay SH
- Nordin FDA
- Zain SM
- Lee PY
- Pung YF
journal: Br J Biomed Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/bjbs.2022.10382
keywords:
- Humans
- Phenylbutyrates/therapeutic use
- "Pyruvate Dehydrogenase (Lipoamide)/genetics, metabolism"
- "Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex Deficiency Disease/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparison Between Dichloroacetate and Phenylbutyrate Treatment for Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Karissa P, Simpson T, Dawson SP, Low TY, Tay SH, Nordin FDA, Zain SM, Lee PY, Pung YF
**Journal:** Br J Biomed Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/bjbs.2022.10382](https://doi.org/10.3389/bjbs.2022.10382)

## Content

1. Br J Biomed Sci. 2022 May 19;79:10382. doi: 10.3389/bjbs.2022.10382.
eCollection  2022.

Comparison Between Dichloroacetate and Phenylbutyrate Treatment for Pyruvate
Dehydrogenase Deficiency.

Karissa P(1), Simpson T(2), Dawson SP(2), Low TY(3), Tay SH(1), Nordin FDA(4),
Zain SM(5), Lee PY(3), Pung YF(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biomedical Science, Faculty of Science and Engineering,
University of Nottingham Malaysia, Semenyih, Malaysia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Nottingham,
Nottingham, United Kingdom.
(3)UKM Medical Molecular Biology Institute (UMBI), Universiti Kebangsaan
Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(4)Institute for Medical Research (IMR), National Institutes of Health, Shah
Alam, Malaysia.
(5)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University Malaya, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia.

Pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) deficiency is caused by a number of pathogenic
variants and the most common are found in the PDHA1 gene. The PDHA1 gene encodes
one of the subunits of the PDH enzyme found in a carbohydrate metabolism pathway
involved in energy production. Pathogenic variants of PDHA1 gene usually impact
the α-subunit of PDH causing energy reduction. It potentially leads to increased
mortality in sufferers. Potential treatments for this disease include
dichloroacetate and phenylbutyrate, previously used for other diseases such as
cancer and maple syrup urine disease. However, not much is known about their
efficacy in treating PDH deficiency. Effective treatment for PDH deficiency is
crucial as carbohydrate is needed in a healthy diet and rice is the staple food
for a large portion of the Asian population. This review analysed the efficacy
of dichloroacetate and phenylbutyrate as potential treatments for PDH deficiency
caused by PDHA1 pathogenic variants. Based on the findings of this review,
dichloroacetate will have an effect on most PDHA1 pathogenic variant and can act
as a temporary treatment to reduce the lactic acidosis, a common symptom of PDH
deficiency. Phenylbutyrate can only be used on patients with certain pathogenic
variants (p.P221L, p.R234G, p.G249R, p.R349C, p.R349H) on the PDH protein. It is
hoped that the review would provide an insight into these treatments and improve
the quality of lives for patients with PDH deficiency.

Copyright © 2022 Karissa, Simpson, Dawson, Low, Tay, Nordin, Zain, Lee and Pung.

DOI: 10.3389/bjbs.2022.10382
PMCID: PMC9302545
PMID: 35996497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
