---
reference_id: "PMID:39449071"
title: "Human in vitro models for Fabry disease: new paths for unravelling disease mechanisms and therapies."
authors:
- Borisch C
- Thum T
- Bär C
- Hoepfner J
journal: J Transl Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12967-024-05756-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human in vitro models for Fabry disease: new paths for unravelling disease mechanisms and therapies.
**Authors:** Borisch C, Thum T, Bär C, Hoepfner J
**Journal:** J Transl Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12967-024-05756-w](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967-024-05756-w)

## Content

1. J Transl Med. 2024 Oct 24;22(1):965. doi: 10.1186/s12967-024-05756-w.

Human in vitro models for Fabry disease: new paths for unravelling disease 
mechanisms and therapies.

Borisch C(1), Thum T(1)(2), Bär C(1)(2)(3), Hoepfner J(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular and Translational Therapeutic Strategies (IMTTS), 
Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(2)Center for Translational Regenerative Medicine, Hannover Medical School, 
Hannover, Germany.
(3)Fraunhofer Institute for Toxicology and Experimental Medicine ITEM, Hannover, 
Germany.
(4)Institute of Molecular and Translational Therapeutic Strategies (IMTTS), 
Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. hoepfner.jeannine@mh-hannover.de.

Fabry disease is a multi-organ disease, caused by mutations in the GLA gene and 
leading to a progressive accumulation of glycosphingolipids due to enzymatic 
absence or malfunction of the encoded alpha-galactosidase A. Since 
pathomechanisms are not yet fully understood and available treatments are not 
efficient for all mutation types and tissues, further research is highly needed. 
This research involves many different model types, with significant effort 
towards the establishment of an in vivo model. However, these models did not 
replicate the variety of symptoms observed in patients. As an alternative 
strategy, patient-derived somatic cells as well as patient-independent cell 
lines were used to model specific aspects of the disease in vitro. Fabry disease 
patients present different phenotypes according to the mutation and the level of 
residual enzyme activity, pointing to the necessity of personalized disease 
modeling. With the advent of induced pluripotent stem cells, the derivation of a 
multitude of disease-affected cell types became possible, even in a 
patient-specific and mutation-specific manner. Only recently, three-dimensional 
Fabry disease models were established that even more closely resemble the native 
tissue of investigated organs and will bring research closer to the in vivo 
situation. This review provides an overview of human in vitro models and their 
achievements in unravelling the Fabry disease pathomechanism as well as in 
elucidating current and future treatment strategies.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12967-024-05756-w
PMCID: PMC11515389
PMID: 39449071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: TT acknowledges support by Sanofi-Genzyme and 
Amicus Therapeutics (not for this MS).