---
reference_id: "PMID:16736722"
title: "Progress in clinical neurosciences: Frontotemporal dementia-pick's disease."
authors:
- Kertesz A
journal: Can J Neurol Sci
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1017/s0317167100004893
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Progress in clinical neurosciences: Frontotemporal dementia-pick's disease.
**Authors:** Kertesz A
**Journal:** Can J Neurol Sci (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1017/s0317167100004893](https://doi.org/10.1017/s0317167100004893)

## Content

1. Can J Neurol Sci. 2006 May;33(2):141-8. doi: 10.1017/s0317167100004893.

Progress in clinical neurosciences: Frontotemporal dementia-pick's disease.

Kertesz A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurological Sciences, St. Joseph's Hospital, 
University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.

Frontotemporal dementia (clinical Pick's disease) is a relatively common, but 
underdiagnosed degenerative disease in the presenium. Estimated prevalence 
ranges from 6-12% of dementias. The behavioural, aphasic and extrapyramidal 
presentations are labeled FTD-behavioural variant, Primary Progressive Aphasia 
(PPA) and Corticobasal Degeneration/Progressive Supranuclear Palsy (CBD/PSP). 
The diagnostic features and course of each are described and their overlap in 
the evolution of the illness is emphasized. The neuropathology ranges from the 
most common tau negative ubiquitin positive amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) 
type inclusions to the tau positive classical Pick bodies and more or less 
distinct changes of PSP and CBD. The genetics of the relatively frequent tau 
mutations and the yet unsolved problem of tau negative families are discussed. 
The tau negative cases tend to be associated with the behavioural presentation 
and semantic dementia and the tau positive ones with PPA and the CBD/PSP 
syndrome. However the overlap is too great to split the disease. A glossary to 
navigate the proliferating terminology is included.

DOI: 10.1017/s0317167100004893
PMID: 16736722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]