---
reference_id: "PMID:26865513"
title: "STXBP1 encephalopathy: A neurodevelopmental disorder including epilepsy."
authors:
- Stamberger H
- Nikanorova M
- Willemsen MH
- Accorsi P
- Angriman M
- Baier H
- Benkel-Herrenbrueck I
- Benoit V
- Budetta M
- Caliebe A
- Cantalupo G
- Capovilla G
- Casara G
- Courage C
- Deprez M
- Destrée A
- Dilena R
- Erasmus CE
- Fannemel M
- Fjær R
- Giordano L
- Helbig KL
- Heyne HO
- Klepper J
- Kluger GJ
- Lederer D
- Lodi M
- Maier O
- Merkenschlager A
- Michelberger N
- Minetti C
- Muhle H
- Phalin J
- Ramsey K
- Romeo A
- Schallner J
- Schanze I
- Shinawi M
- Sleegers K
- Sterbova K
- Syrbe S
- Traverso M
- Tzschach A
- Uldall P
- Van Coster R
- Verhelst H
- Viri M
- Winter S
- Wolff M
- Zenker M
- Zoccante L
- De Jonghe P
- Helbig I
- Striano P
- Lemke JR
- Møller RS
- Weckhuysen S
journal: Neurology
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002457
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Brain Diseases/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Epilepsy/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Munc18 Proteins/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- "Neurodevelopmental Disorders/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# STXBP1 encephalopathy: A neurodevelopmental disorder including epilepsy.
**Authors:** Stamberger H, Nikanorova M, Willemsen MH, Accorsi P, Angriman M, Baier H, Benkel-Herrenbrueck I, Benoit V, Budetta M, Caliebe A, Cantalupo G, Capovilla G, Casara G, Courage C, Deprez M, Destrée A, Dilena R, Erasmus CE, Fannemel M, Fjær R, Giordano L, Helbig KL, Heyne HO, Klepper J, Kluger GJ, Lederer D, Lodi M, Maier O, Merkenschlager A, Michelberger N, Minetti C, Muhle H, Phalin J, Ramsey K, Romeo A, Schallner J, Schanze I, Shinawi M, Sleegers K, Sterbova K, Syrbe S, Traverso M, Tzschach A, Uldall P, Van Coster R, Verhelst H, Viri M, Winter S, Wolff M, Zenker M, Zoccante L, De Jonghe P, Helbig I, Striano P, Lemke JR, Møller RS, Weckhuysen S
**Journal:** Neurology (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000002457](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000002457)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2016 Mar 8;86(10):954-62. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002457. Epub 
2016 Feb 10.

STXBP1 encephalopathy: A neurodevelopmental disorder including epilepsy.

Stamberger H(1), Nikanorova M(1), Willemsen MH(1), Accorsi P(1), Angriman M(1), 
Baier H(1), Benkel-Herrenbrueck I(1), Benoit V(1), Budetta M(1), Caliebe A(1), 
Cantalupo G(1), Capovilla G(1), Casara G(1), Courage C(1), Deprez M(1), Destrée 
A(1), Dilena R(1), Erasmus CE(1), Fannemel M(1), Fjær R(1), Giordano L(1), 
Helbig KL(1), Heyne HO(1), Klepper J(1), Kluger GJ(1), Lederer D(1), Lodi M(1), 
Maier O(1), Merkenschlager A(1), Michelberger N(1), Minetti C(1), Muhle H(1), 
Phalin J(1), Ramsey K(1), Romeo A(1), Schallner J(1), Schanze I(1), Shinawi 
M(1), Sleegers K(1), Sterbova K(1), Syrbe S(1), Traverso M(1), Tzschach A(1), 
Uldall P(1), Van Coster R(1), Verhelst H(1), Viri M(1), Winter S(1), Wolff M(1), 
Zenker M(1), Zoccante L(1), De Jonghe P(1), Helbig I(1), Striano P(1), Lemke 
JR(1), Møller RS(2), Weckhuysen S(2).

Author information:
(1)Authors' affiliations are listed at the end of the article.
(2)Authors' affiliations are listed at the end of the article. 
sarah.weckhuysen@molgen.vib-ua.be rimo@filadelfia.dk.

Comment in
    Pediatr Neurol Briefs. 2019 Dec 31;33:6. doi: 10.15844/pedneurbriefs-33-6.

OBJECTIVE: To give a comprehensive overview of the phenotypic and genetic 
spectrum of STXBP1 encephalopathy (STXBP1-E) by systematically reviewing newly 
diagnosed and previously reported patients.
METHODS: We recruited newly diagnosed patients with STXBP1 mutations through an 
international network of clinicians and geneticists. Furthermore, we performed a 
systematic literature search to review the phenotypes of all previously reported 
patients.
RESULTS: We describe the phenotypic features of 147 patients with STXBP1-E 
including 45 previously unreported patients with 33 novel STXBP1 mutations. All 
patients have intellectual disability (ID), which is mostly severe to profound 
(88%). Ninety-five percent of patients have epilepsy. While one-third of 
patients presented with Ohtahara syndrome (21%) or West syndrome (9.5%), the 
majority has a nonsyndromic early-onset epilepsy and encephalopathy (53%) with 
epileptic spasms or tonic seizures as main seizure type. We found no correlation 
between severity of seizures and severity of ID or between mutation type and 
seizure characteristics or cognitive outcome. Neurologic comorbidities including 
autistic features and movement disorders are frequent. We also report 2 
previously unreported adult patients with prominent extrapyramidal features.
CONCLUSION: De novo STXBP1 mutations are among the most frequent causes of 
epilepsy and encephalopathy. Most patients have severe to profound ID with 
little correlation among seizure onset, seizure severity, and the degree of ID. 
Accordingly, we hypothesize that seizure severity and ID present 2 independent 
dimensions of the STXBP1-E phenotype. STXBP1-E may be conceptualized as a 
complex neurodevelopmental disorder rather than a primary epileptic 
encephalopathy.

© 2016 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002457
PMID: 26865513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]