---
reference_id: "PMID:24352914"
title: "Anxiety, attention problems, hyperactivity, and the Aberrant Behavior Checklist in fragile X syndrome."
authors:
- Wheeler A
- Raspa M
- Bann C
- Bishop E
- Hessl D
- Sacco P
- Bailey DB Jr
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36232
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Anxiety
- Attention
- Behavior
- Caregivers
- Checklist
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Fragile X Syndrome/epidemiology, psychology"
- Health Surveys
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Psychometrics
- Registries
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anxiety, attention problems, hyperactivity, and the Aberrant Behavior Checklist in fragile X syndrome.
**Authors:** Wheeler A, Raspa M, Bann C, Bishop E, Hessl D, Sacco P, Bailey DB Jr
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.36232](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.36232)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Jan;164A(1):141-55. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36232. Epub
2013  Nov 25.

Anxiety, attention problems, hyperactivity, and the Aberrant Behavior Checklist
in fragile X syndrome.

Wheeler A(1), Raspa M, Bann C, Bishop E, Hessl D, Sacco P, Bailey DB Jr.

Author information:
(1)Carolina Institute for Developmental Disabilities, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.

Behavior problems are a common challenge for individuals with fragile X syndrome
(FXS) and constitute the primary clinical outcome domain in trials testing new
FXS medications. However, little is known about the relationship between
caregiver-reported behavior problems and co-occurring conditions such as anxiety
and attention problems. In this study, 350 caregivers, each with at least one
son or daughter with full-mutation FXS, rated one of their children with FXS
using the Aberrant Behavior Checklist-Community Version (ABC-C); the Anxiety
subscale of the Anxiety, Depression, and Mood Scale; and the
Attention/Hyperactivity Items from the Symptom Inventories. In addition to
examining family consequences of these behaviors, this study also sought to
replicate psychometric findings for the ABC-C in FXS, to provide greater
confidence for its use in clinical trials with this population. Psychometric
properties and baseline ratings of problem behavior were consistent with other
recent studies, further establishing the profile of problem behavior in FXS.
Cross-sectional analyses suggest that selected dimensions of problem behavior,
anxiety, and hyperactivity are age related; thus, age should serve as an
important control in any studies of problem behavior in FXS. Measures of
anxiety, attention, and hyperactivity were highly associated with behavior
problems, suggesting that these factors at least coincide with problem behavior.
However, these problems generally did not add substantially to variance in
caregiver burden predicted by elevated behavior problems. The results provide
further evidence of the incidence of problem behaviors and co-occurring
conditions in FXS and the impact of these behaviors on the family.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36232
PMID: 24352914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
