---
reference_id: "PMID:17087626"
title: "Deactivating germline mutations in LEMD3 cause osteopoikilosis and Buschke-Ollendorff syndrome, but not sporadic melorheostosis."
authors:
- Mumm S
- Wenkert D
- Zhang X
- McAlister WH
- Mier RJ
- Whyte MP
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1359/jbmr.061102
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deactivating germline mutations in LEMD3 cause osteopoikilosis and Buschke-Ollendorff syndrome, but not sporadic melorheostosis.
**Authors:** Mumm S, Wenkert D, Zhang X, McAlister WH, Mier RJ, Whyte MP
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1359/jbmr.061102](https://doi.org/10.1359/jbmr.061102)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2007 Feb;22(2):243-50. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.061102.

Deactivating germline mutations in LEMD3 cause osteopoikilosis and 
Buschke-Ollendorff syndrome, but not sporadic melorheostosis.

Mumm S(1), Wenkert D, Zhang X, McAlister WH, Mier RJ, Whyte MP.

Author information:
(1)Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri 63110, USA. 
smumm@wustl.edu

Autosomal dominant OPK and BOS feature widespread foci of osteosclerotic 
trabeculae without or with skin lesions, respectively. Occasionally, a larger 
area of dense bone in OPK or BOS resembles MEL, a sporadic sclerosing disorder 
primarily involving cortical bone. Others, finding deactivating germline LEMD3 
mutations in OPK or BOS, concluded such defects explain all three conditions. We 
found germline LEMD3 mutations in OPK and BOS but not in sporadic MEL.
INTRODUCTION: In 2004, others discovered that heterozygous, loss-of-function, 
germline mutations in the LEMD3 gene (LEMD3 or MAN1) cause both osteopoikilosis 
(OPK) and Buschke-Ollendorff syndrome (BOS). OPK is an autosomal dominant, 
usually benign, skeletal dysplasia featuring multiple, small, especially 
metaphyseal, oval or round, dense trabecular foci distributed symmetrically 
throughout the skeleton. BOS combines OPK with connective tissue nevi comprised 
of collagen and elastin. In some OPK and BOS families, an individual may have 
relatively large, asymmetric areas of dense cortical bone interpreted as 
melorheostosis (MEL). MEL, however, classically refers to a sporadic, 
troublesome skeletal dysostosis featuring large, asymmetric, "flowing 
hyperostosis" of long bone cortices often with overlying, constricting soft 
tissue abnormalities. However, a heterozygous germline mutation in LEMD3 was 
offered to explain MEL.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We studied 11 unrelated individuals with sclerosing bone 
disorders where LEMD3 mutation was a potential etiology: familial OPK (1), 
familial BOS (2), previously reported familial OPK with MEL (1), sporadic MEL 
(3), sporadic MEL with mixed-sclerosing-bone dystrophy (1), and patients with 
other unusual sclerosing bone disorders (3). All coding exons and adjacent mRNA 
splice sites for LEMD3 were amplified by PCR and sequenced using genomic DNA 
from leukocytes. We did not study lesional tissue from bone or skin.
RESULTS: In the OPK family, a heterozygous nonsense mutation (c.1433T>A, 
p.L478X) was discovered in exon 1. In the two BOS families, a heterozygous 
nonsense mutation (exon 1, c.1323C>A, p.Y441X) and a heterozygous frame-shift 
mutation (exon 1, c.332_333insTC) were identified. In the individual with MEL 
and familial OPK, a heterozygous nonsense mutation (c.1963C>T, p.R655X) was 
detected in exon 7. However, no LEMD3 mutation was found for any other patient, 
including all four with sporadic MEL.
CONCLUSIONS: We confirm that OPK and BOS individuals, including those with 
MEL-like lesions, have heterozygous, deactivating, germline LEMD3 mutations. 
However, MEL remains of unknown etiology.

DOI: 10.1359/jbmr.061102
PMID: 17087626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]