---
reference_id: "PMID:7234865"
title: "Hemolytic anemia in Wilson disease: clinical findings and biochemical mechanisms."
authors:
- Forman SJ
- Kumar KS
- Redeker AG
- Hochstein P
journal: Am J Hematol
year: '1980'
doi: 10.1002/ajh.2830090305
keywords:
- Adult
- "Anemia, Hemolytic/blood, complications, physiopathology"
- Copper/pharmacology
- "Erythrocytes/enzymology, metabolism"
- "Hepatolenticular Degeneration/blood, complications, physiopathology"
- Humans
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hemolytic anemia in Wilson disease: clinical findings and biochemical mechanisms.
**Authors:** Forman SJ, Kumar KS, Redeker AG, Hochstein P
**Journal:** Am J Hematol (1980)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajh.2830090305](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajh.2830090305)

## Content

1. Am J Hematol. 1980;9(3):269-75. doi: 10.1002/ajh.2830090305.

Hemolytic anemia in Wilson disease: clinical findings and biochemical
mechanisms.

Forman SJ, Kumar KS, Redeker AG, Hochstein P.

Two patients with Wilson disease who presented with severe hemolytic anemia are
described. One was noted to have unusually high serum copper levels (369
micrograms/100 ml). A review of similar such patients in the literature suggests
that, rather than having a low serum copper, patients with hemolysis
accompanying Wilson disease have very high serum copper levels. For this reason,
in vitro studies of the toxic effects of copper on erythrocytes were undertaken.
It was found that, although copper does not have a major direct inhibitory
effect on glycolytic enzymes such as hexokinase, the metal does inhibit
hexokinase as a consequence of its interaction with oxyhemoglobin. However, such
inhibition does not appear to be a major factor in copper-induced hemolysis. On
the other hand, the addition of the lipid antioxidant butylated hydroxyanisole
(BHA) suppresses hemolysis in copper-treated cells. These experiments suggest
that the primary toxic effect of copper is mediated through its oxidant actions
on membrane phospholipids rather than through its potential inhibitory effects
on intracellular enzymes.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.2830090305
PMID: 7234865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
