---
reference_id: "PMID:31079202"
title: Observation of novel COX20 mutations related to autosomal recessive axonal neuropathy and static encephalopathy.
authors:
- Xu H
- Ji T
- Lian Y
- Wang S
- Chen X
- Li S
- Yin Y
- Dong X
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-019-02026-4
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Brain Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Electron Transport Complex IV/genetics
- Female
- "Foot Deformities/genetics, pathology"
- "Giant Axonal Neuropathy/genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Observation of novel COX20 mutations related to autosomal recessive axonal neuropathy and static encephalopathy.
**Authors:** Xu H, Ji T, Lian Y, Wang S, Chen X, Li S, Yin Y, Dong X
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-019-02026-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-019-02026-4)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2019 Jul;138(7):749-756. doi: 10.1007/s00439-019-02026-4. Epub 2019
 May 11.

Observation of novel COX20 mutations related to autosomal recessive axonal 
neuropathy and static encephalopathy.

Xu H(1), Ji T(1), Lian Y(2), Wang S(3), Chen X(1), Li S(1), Yin Y(4), Dong X(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, No. 1 Jianshe East Road, Zhengzhou, 450052, Henan Province, People's 
Republic of China.
(2)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, No. 1 Jianshe East Road, Zhengzhou, 450052, Henan Province, People's 
Republic of China. lianyajun369@sina.com.
(3)Department of Blood Transfusion, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, No. 1 Jianshe East Road, Zhengzhou, 450052, Henan Province, People's 
Republic of China.
(4)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, No. 1 Jianshe East Road, Zhengzhou, 450052, Henan Province, People's 
Republic of China.
(5)Electron Microscopy Laboratory of Renal Pathology, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Zhengzhou University, No. 1 Jianshe East Road, Zhengzhou, 450052, 
Henan Province, People's Republic of China.

Cytochrome c oxidase 20 (COX20)/FAM36A encodes a conserved protein that is 
important for the assembly of COX, complex IV of the mitochondrial respiratory 
chain. A homozygous mutation (p.Thr52Pro) in COX20 gene has been previously 
described to cause muscle hypotonia and ataxia. In this study, we describe two 
patients from a non-consanguineous family exhibiting autosomal recessive 
sensory-dominant axonal neuropathy and static encephalopathy. The whole-exome 
sequencing analysis revealed that both patients harbored compound heterozygous 
mutations (p.Lys14Arg and p.Trp74Cys) of COX20 gene. The pathogenicity of the 
variants was further supported by morphological alternations of mitochondria 
observed in sural nerve and decreased COX20 protein level of peripheral blood 
leucocytes derived from the patients. In conclusion, COX20 might be considered 
as a candidate gene for the complex inherited disease. This observation broadens 
the clinical and genetic spectrum of COX20-related disease. However, due to the 
limitation of a single-family study, additional cases and studies are definitely 
needed to further confirm the association.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-019-02026-4
PMID: 31079202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]