---
reference_id: "PMID:21388665"
title: "Contrasting pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis and psoriasis--part I: clinical and pathologic concepts."
authors:
- Guttman-Yassky E
- Nograles KE
- Krueger JG
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2011.01.053
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Contrasting pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis and psoriasis--part I: clinical and pathologic concepts.
**Authors:** Guttman-Yassky E, Nograles KE, Krueger JG
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2011.01.053](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2011.01.053)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011 May;127(5):1110-8. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2011.01.053.  Epub 2011 Mar 8.

Contrasting pathogenesis of atopic dermatitis and psoriasis--part I: clinical 
and pathologic concepts.

Guttman-Yassky E(1), Nograles KE, Krueger JG.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Investigative Dermatology, Rockefeller University, New York, 
NY 10065, USA. eguttman@rockefeller.edu

Atopic dermatitis and psoriasis are 2 of the most common inflammatory skin 
diseases. They are similar in that they are complex inherited diseases involving 
genes that encode immune components and structural proteins that regulate 
differentiation of epidermal cells. Each disease is characterized by 
proliferation of epidermal keratinocytes and abnormal cornification or terminal 
differentiation in the epidermis; skin lesions contain immune infiltrates of T 
cells, dendritic cells, and other types of leukocytes. We review similarities 
between the diseases and differences in epidermal barrier defects and immune 
cells. We also propose mechanisms of pathogenesis based on differences in the 
balance of immune cell subsets that could cause the phenotypes that distinguish 
these diseases. The first part of this 2-part review focuses on the clinical and 
pathologic features of the diseases; the second part discusses differences in 
immune cell subsets between atopic dermatitis and psoriasis and 
recent therapeutic strategies.

Copyright © 2011 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2011.01.053
PMID: 21388665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]