---
reference_id: "PMID:19443624"
title: "Searching for genes that matter in acute kidney injury: a systematic review."
authors:
- Lu JC
- Coca SG
- Patel UD
- Cantley L
- Parikh CR
- Translational Research Investigating Biomarkers and Endpoints for Acute Kidney Injury (TRIBE-AKI) Consortium
journal: Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.2215/CJN.05411008
keywords:
- "Acute Lung Injury/epidemiology, genetics"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/epidemiology
- Genomics
- Humans
- Incidence
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Searching for genes that matter in acute kidney injury: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Lu JC, Coca SG, Patel UD, Cantley L, Parikh CR, Translational Research Investigating Biomarkers and Endpoints for Acute Kidney Injury (TRIBE-AKI) Consortium
**Journal:** Clin J Am Soc Nephrol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.2215/CJN.05411008](https://doi.org/10.2215/CJN.05411008)

## Content

1. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2009 Jun;4(6):1020-31. doi: 10.2215/CJN.05411008. Epub 
2009 May 14.

Searching for genes that matter in acute kidney injury: a systematic review.

Lu JC(1), Coca SG, Patel UD, Cantley L, Parikh CR; Translational Research 
Investigating Biomarkers and Endpoints for Acute Kidney Injury (TRIBE-AKI) 
Consortium.

Collaborators: Edelstein C, Devarajan P, Garg A, Shlipak M, Zappatelli M, Murray 
P, Koyner J, Swaminathan M, Dent C, Wang Z.

Author information:
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Identifying patients who may develop acute kidney 
injury (AKI) remains challenging, as clinical determinants explain only a 
portion of individual risk. Another factor that likely affects risk is intrinsic 
genetic variability. Therefore, a systematic review of studies was performed 
that related the development or prognosis of AKI to genetic variation.
DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, AND MEASUREMENTS: MEDLINE, EMBASE, HuGEnet, 
SCOPUS, and Web of Science were searched for articles from 1950 to Dec 2007. Two 
independent researchers screened articles using predetermined criteria. Studies 
were assessed for methodological quality via an aggregate scoring system.
RESULTS: The 16 included studies were of cohort or case-cohort design and 
investigated 35 polymorphisms in 21 genes in association with AKI. Fifteen 
gene-gene interactions were also investigated in four separate studies. Study 
populations were primarily premature infants or adults who were critically ill 
or postcardiac bypass patients. Among the studies, five different definitions of 
AKI were used. Only one polymorphism, APO E e2/e3/e4, had greater than one study 
showing a significant impact (P < 0.05) on AKI incidence. The mean quality score 
of 5.8/10 (range four to nine), heterogeneity in the studies, and the dearth of 
studies precluded additional meta-analysis of the results.
CONCLUSIONS: Current association studies are unable to provide definitive 
evidence linking genetic variation to AKI. Future success will require a narrow 
consensus definition of AKI, rigorous epidemiologic techniques, and a shift from 
a priori hypothesis-driven to genome-wide association studies.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.05411008
PMCID: PMC2689876
PMID: 19443624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]