---
reference_id: "PMID:41818602"
title: PTDSS1-Related Lenz-Majewski Hyperostotic Dysplasia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Buasri K
- Slavotinek A
- Wattanasirichaigoon D
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PTDSS1-Related Lenz-Majewski Hyperostotic Dysplasia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Buasri K, Slavotinek A, Wattanasirichaigoon D

## Content

1. PTDSS1-Related Lenz-Majewski Hyperostotic Dysplasia.

Buasri K(1), Slavotinek A(1), Wattanasirichaigoon D(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2026 Mar 12.

Author information:
(1)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center;, Division of Human Genetics,
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio
(2)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Mahidol University;,
Faculty of Medicine, Ramathibodi Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: PTDSS1-related Lenz-Majewski hyperostotic dysplasia
(LMHD) is characterized by cutis laxa and progressive bone sclerosis, primarily
affecting the skull and long bones. Individuals with classic PTDSS1-related LMHD
typically presents in infancy with cutis laxa, prominent cutaneous veins,
characteristic craniofacial features (disproportionately large head, broad
forehead, delayed closure of the fontanelles, hypertelorism, large floppy ears,
nasal obstruction / choanal atresia, macrostomia, thin vermilion of the lips,
dental enamel hypoplasia, and prognathism or retrognathia), brachydactyly and
syndactyly of the digits, early-onset osteosclerosis (involving the skull,
spine, diaphyses of the long bones, clavicles, and ribs), severe growth
deficiency, and significant developmental delays. Additional features can
include genitourinary anomalies in males, inguinal hernia, ophthalmologic
manifestations, hearing loss, and hydrocephalus. Attenuated PTDSS1-related LMHD
is characterized by minimal or mild cutis laxa, slower progression of
hyperostosis, preserved or mildly affected development, and normal stature.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of PTDSS1-related LMHD is established in a
proband with characteristic clinical and imaging findings and a heterozygous
pathogenic gain-of-function variant in PTDSS1 identified by molecular genetic
testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment of skeletal manifestations
per orthopedist; consider physical therapy, occupational therapy, and assisted
devices for mobility; decompression of cervical spine stenosis as needed;
treatment of hydrocephalus as needed per neurosurgeon; treatment of respiratory
difficulty and obstructive sleep apnea per otolaryngologist and/or
pulmonologist; careful airway evaluation prior to surgical procedures;
supportive therapies for those with developmental delays; individualized
education plan for learning disorders and school performance issues; treatment
of dental enamel hypoplasia per dentist; standard treatments for genitourinary
anomalies, delayed puberty, inguinal hernia, vision issues, and hearing loss;
consider dermatology referral for cosmetic concerns due to cutis laxa.
Surveillance: Growth assessment and orthopedic evaluation annually or as
determined by the orthopedist to monitor joint and skeletal manifestations;
brain and spine MRI as needed; assess for manifestations of sleep apnea at each
visit; polysomnography as needed; dental evaluation with frequency per dentist;
ophthalmology evaluation with frequency per ophthalmologist; audiology
evaluation as needed; monitor developmental progress, educational needs, and
family needs at each visit. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Activities/procedures
that involve extreme neck extension and flexion in individuals with
craniovertebral junction stenosis.
GENETIC COUNSELING: PTDSS1-related LMHD is an autosomal dominant disorder. All
probands reported to date with PTDSS1-related LMHD whose parents have undergone
molecular genetic testing have had the disorder as the result of a de novo
PTDSS1 pathogenic variant. Risk to the parents of the proband of having another
affected pregnancy is presumed to be low as the proband most likely has a de
novo PTDSS1 pathogenic variant. There is, however, a recurrence risk (~1%) to
sibs based on the possibility of parental gonadal mosaicism. Given this risk,
prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing may be considered.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 41818602
