---
reference_id: "PMID:35622972"
title: The odyssey of pacritinib in myelofibrosis.
authors:
- Venugopal S
- Mascarenhas J
journal: Blood Adv
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2022007524
keywords:
- Anemia/chemically induced
- Bridged-Ring Compounds
- Humans
- Primary Myelofibrosis/etiology
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/adverse effects
- Pyrimidines/therapeutic use
- Thrombocytopenia/chemically induced
- United States
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The odyssey of pacritinib in myelofibrosis.
**Authors:** Venugopal S, Mascarenhas J
**Journal:** Blood Adv (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1182/bloodadvances.2022007524](https://doi.org/10.1182/bloodadvances.2022007524)

## Content

1. Blood Adv. 2022 Aug 23;6(16):4905-4913. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2022007524.

The odyssey of pacritinib in myelofibrosis.

Venugopal S(1), Mascarenhas J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Leukemia, MD Anderson Cancer Center, University of Texas, 
Houston, TX; and.
(2)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Tisch Cancer Institute, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY.

Myelofibrosis (MF) can present with symptomatic splenomegaly and/or cytopenias 
including thrombocytopenia. Disease-related thrombocytopenia is a poor 
prognostic factor with a median overall survival of less than 2 years. Currently 
approved JAK1/2 inhibitors have not been evaluated in patients with platelets ≤ 
50 × 109/L and in fact could potentiate thrombocytopenia because of their 
combined JAK1/2 inhibitory activity. Pacritinib (PAC), a selective JAK2, 
fms-like tyrosine kinase 3, interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase 1 
multikinase inhibitor was developed to meet this unmet need. PAC was evaluated 
in 2 randomized phase 3 trials in the frontline setting (PERSIST-1, PAC 400 mg 
daily vs best available therapy) and second-line setting in patients with MF 
with platelets ≤ 100 × 109/L (PERSIST-2, PAC 400 mg daily or 200 mg twice daily 
vs best available therapy). PERSIST-1 met its primary end point; however, the 
development of PAC hit a brief pause because of a US Food and Drug 
Administration-mandated clinical hold for excess of bleeding and cardiac events 
in the PAC 400 mg daily arm in the PERSIST-1 study. Although the PERSIST-2 study 
was terminated abruptly because of this clinical hold, it met its splenic 
response end point and demonstrated a trend toward symptom improvement. 
Subsequent, diligent review of the PERSIST-1 and PERSIST-2 studies did not 
confirm an excess of severe bleeding or cardiac events on the PAC arm. 
Additionally, the dose finding PAC203 study endorsed the safety and efficacy of 
200 mg twice daily, leading to the approval of PAC for the treatment of patients 
with MF with platelets ≤ 50 × 109/L.

© 2022 by The American Society of Hematology. Licensed under Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), 
permitting only noncommercial, nonderivative use with attribution. All other 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2022007524
PMCID: PMC9631669
PMID: 35622972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]