---
reference_id: "PMID:19935490"
title: "Social anxiety disorder: epidemiology, biology and treatment."
authors:
- Fink M
- Akimova E
- Spindelegger C
- Hahn A
- Lanzenberger R
- Kasper S
journal: Psychiatr Danub
year: '2009'
keywords:
- Amygdala/physiopathology
- Cerebral Cortex/physiopathology
- Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Humans
- "Image Processing, Computer-Assisted"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Neurotransmitter Agents/metabolism
- "Phobic Disorders/epidemiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Positron-Emission Tomography
- Psychotropic Drugs
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Social anxiety disorder: epidemiology, biology and treatment.
**Authors:** Fink M, Akimova E, Spindelegger C, Hahn A, Lanzenberger R, Kasper S
**Journal:** Psychiatr Danub (2009)

## Content

1. Psychiatr Danub. 2009 Dec;21(4):533-42.

Social anxiety disorder: epidemiology, biology and treatment.

Fink M(1), Akimova E, Spindelegger C, Hahn A, Lanzenberger R, Kasper S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Medical University of Vienna,
Wien, Austria.

Social anxiety disorder (SAD) is considered to be one of the most common anxiety
disorders. Despite its high prevalence, the disorder is still considerably
underdiagnosed and undertreated. SAD shows a typically early onset in childhood
or early adolescence and generally becomes chronic. The disease places a massive
burden on patients lives, affecting not only their social interactions but also
their educational and professional activities, thereby constituting a severe
disability. Although substantial progress in the study of the etiology of SAD
has been made, no commonly accepted model has emerged yet. Data from genetic and
neuroimaging studies point towards a contribution of several neurotransmitter
systems (i.e. norepinephrine, dopamine and serotonin) to the pathophysiology of
this disorder. Functional magnetic resonance imaging studies have repeatedly
emphasized the central role of the amygdalae and insula in the neural circuitry
of the disorder. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI) are commonly
accepted as first line therapy, however other substance classes like serotonin
norepineprine reuptake inhibitors (SNRI), monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOI),
benzodiazepines and several other agents have also proved effective. There is
still a substantial lack of data on therapeutic options in cases of
non-responsive SAD as well as on add-on therapy. A combined treatment-approach
including psychotherapy (e.g. cognitive behavioural therapy) may prove useful.

PMID: 19935490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
