---
reference_id: "PMID:39286014"
title: "Global epidemiology and socioeconomic correlates of hypopharyngeal cancer in 2020 and its projection to 2040: findings from GLOBOCAN 2020."
authors:
- Mousavi SE
- Ilaghi M
- Mirzazadeh Y
- Mosavi Jarrahi A
- Nejadghaderi SA
journal: Front Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2024.1398063
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Global epidemiology and socioeconomic correlates of hypopharyngeal cancer in 2020 and its projection to 2040: findings from GLOBOCAN 2020.
**Authors:** Mousavi SE, Ilaghi M, Mirzazadeh Y, Mosavi Jarrahi A, Nejadghaderi SA
**Journal:** Front Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fonc.2024.1398063](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2024.1398063)

## Content

1. Front Oncol. 2024 Sep 2;14:1398063. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2024.1398063.
eCollection  2024.

Global epidemiology and socioeconomic correlates of hypopharyngeal cancer in 
2020 and its projection to 2040: findings from GLOBOCAN 2020.

Mousavi SE(1)(2), Ilaghi M(3), Mirzazadeh Y(4), Mosavi Jarrahi A(5)(6), 
Nejadghaderi SA(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Neurosciences Research Center, Aging Research Institute, Tabriz University of 
Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(2)Department of Community Medicine, Social Determinants of Health Research 
Center, Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, 
Iran.
(3)Institute of Neuropharmacology, Kerman Neuroscience Research Center, Kerman 
University of Medical Sciences, Kerman, Iran.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, Ardabil University of Medical Sciences, Ardabil, Iran.
(5)Cancer Research Centre, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.
(6)West Asia Organization for Cancer Prevention, Sabzevar, Iran.
(7)HIV/STI Surveillance Research Center, and WHO Collaborating Center for HIV 
Surveillance, Institute for Futures Studies in Health, Kerman University of 
Medical Sciences, Kerman, Iran.
(8)Systematic Review and Meta-analysis Expert Group (SRMEG), Universal 
Scientific Education and Research Network (USERN), Tehran, Iran.

Erratum in
    Front Oncol. 2024 Dec 02;14:1520064. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2024.1520064.

BACKGROUND: Hypopharyngeal cancer (HC) comprises less than 5% of all malignant 
tumors in the head and neck. They often present at an advanced stage, thereby 
resulting in high mortalities. We aimed to report the epidemiology of HC 
globally, regionally, and nationally by age, sex, and socioeconomic status in 
2020 and its projection to 2040.
METHODS: Data on HC incidence and mortality were extracted from the GLOBOCAN 
2020. Age-standardized incidence rate (ASIR), age-standardized mortality rate 
(ASMR), and mortality-to-incidence ratios (MIRs) were calculated. We used 
bivariate correlation test, presenting results through Pearson's correlation 
coefficient (r) to investigate the correlation between the metrics, human 
development index (HDI), and current healthcare expenditure (CHE) as a 
percentage of gross domestic product (GDP) (CHE/GDP).
RESULTS: In 2020, there were 84254 new HC cases globally (ASIR: 0.91 per 
100000). Moreover, HC resulted in 38599 mortalities in 2020 (ASMR: 0.41). 
Furthermore, the global MIR of HC was 0.45. The ASIR and ASMR of HC were higher 
in men than women. Also, HDI demonstrated significant correlations with HC ASIR 
(r= 0.249, p<0.01), ASMR (r= 0.185, p<0.05), and MIR (r= -0.449, p<0.001). 
Moreover, a weak significant correlation was also observed between CHE/GDP and 
MIR (r= -0.295, p<0.001). Moreover, a weak significant correlation was also 
observed between CHE/GDP and MIR (r= 0.279, p<0.001). The number of new HC cases 
and mortalities were estimated to increase by 50% and 55% in 2040, respectively.
CONCLUSION: HC is a relatively rare cancer but with a substantial sex and 
geographic divide in distribution. Key priorities should thus include 
establishing high-quality cancer registries worldwide.

Copyright © 2024 Mousavi, Ilaghi, Mirzazadeh, Mosavi Jarrahi and Nejadghaderi.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2024.1398063
PMCID: PMC11402725
PMID: 39286014

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.