---
reference_id: "PMID:25489231"
title: Screening for BEST1 gene mutations in Chinese patients with bestrophinopathy.
authors:
- Tian R
- Yang G
- Wang J
- Chen Y
journal: Mol Vis
year: '2014'
keywords:
- Adult
- Alleles
- Asian People
- Bestrophins
- Child
- Chloride Channels/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Electroretinography
- "Epistasis, Genetic"
- "Eye Diseases, Hereditary/ethnology, genetics, pathology"
- Eye Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Genetic Testing
- Genotype
- Heterozygote
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Retina/metabolism, pathology"
- "Retinal Diseases/ethnology, genetics, pathology"
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- "Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy/ethnology, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Screening for BEST1 gene mutations in Chinese patients with bestrophinopathy.
**Authors:** Tian R, Yang G, Wang J, Chen Y
**Journal:** Mol Vis (2014)

## Content

1. Mol Vis. 2014 Nov 11;20:1594-604. eCollection 2014.

Screening for BEST1 gene mutations in Chinese patients with bestrophinopathy.

Tian R(1), Yang G(2), Wang J(1), Chen Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Peking
Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Science, Beijing, China;
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Xingtai Eye Hospital, Xingtai, Hebei, China.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to analyze BEST1 gene mutations in
Chinese patients with bestrophinopathy and to describe the clinical features of
these patients.
METHODS: Thirteen patients from 12 unrelated Chinese families affected by
bestrophinopathy were recruited and clinically evaluated with best-corrected
visual acuity examination, slit-lamp biomicroscopy, fundus examination and
photography, optical coherence tomography, fundus autofluorescence,
electro-oculography, and electroretinography. Blood samples were collected for
DNA extraction. Mutation analysis was performed by direct sequencing of the
BEST1 gene. One hundred control chromosomes were also screened to exclude
nonpathogenic polymorphisms.
RESULTS: Seven patients showed clinical pictures of Best vitelliform macular
dystrophy (BVMD) and harbored heterozygous mutations compatible with autosomal
dominant inheritance. Two novel mutations (p.T4I and p.A291V) and three reported
mutations (p.R218C, p.Q293H, and p.D301G) were identified. Six patients carried
BEST1 mutations on both alleles compatible with autosomal recessive inheritance.
Compound heterozygous mutations were detected in four patients who presented a
BVMD phenotype, while homozygous mutations were detected in two patients with
autosomal recessive bestrophinopathy. Mutation analysis revealed eight
mutations. Four (p.Y33H, p.R130L, p.M163R, and c.519delA) were novel, and four
(p.R13H, p.A195V, p.R255W, and p.W287*) had previously been reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with biallelic BEST1 mutations were common among Chinese
patients with bestrophinopathy, and the phenotypes varied. The features and
combinations of different BEST1 mutations as well as epistatic effects may
influence phenotype expression. Our results expand the BEST1 mutation spectrum.

PMCID: PMC4225144
PMID: 25489231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
