---
reference_id: "PMID:37415994"
title: "Whipple's Disease: A Case Report."
authors:
- Batista M
- Santos ML
- Silva C
- Pereira G
- Alves G
- Cotter J
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.39963
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whipple's Disease: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Batista M, Santos ML, Silva C, Pereira G, Alves G, Cotter J
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.39963](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.39963)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Jun 5;15(6):e39963. doi: 10.7759/cureus.39963. eCollection 2023 
Jun.

Whipple's Disease: A Case Report.

Batista M(1), Santos ML(1), Silva C(1), Pereira G(1), Alves G(1), Cotter J(1).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine, Hospital da Senhora da Oliveira, Guimarães, PRT.

Whipple's disease (WD) is caused by Tropheryma whipplei, frequently found in 
lamina propria's macrophages in the small intestine. It is a rare and chronic 
systemic infection, and the principal clinical manifestations are diarrhea, 
weight loss, abdominal pain, and arthralgia. The diagnosis is difficult mainly 
because of its rarity and should be considered in patients with arthralgias, 
diarrhea, abdominal pain, and weight loss after more common conditions have been 
excluded. The laboratory diagnosis is established by a duodenal biopsy. The 
treatment involves 14 days of intravenous antibiotics with good penetration in 
the cerebrospinal fluid (i.e., ceftriaxone) and one-year treatment with oral 
co-trimoxazole. Early diagnosis and proper treatment are crucial because it 
improves the prognosis. We report the case of a 58-year-old female with skin 
hyperpigmentation, loss of appetite and weight (16% of body weight in three 
months), nausea, upper abdominal pain, and diarrhea. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy 
and colonoscopy were performed to obtain biopsy samples, which, together with 
laboratory tests and microbiological studies, led to a diagnosis of Whipple's 
disease.

Copyright © 2023, Batista et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.39963
PMCID: PMC10320647
PMID: 37415994

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.