---
reference_id: "PMID:34035041"
title: Monogenic Diabetes and Integrated Stress Response Genes Display Altered Gene Expression in Type 1 Diabetes.
authors:
- Hiller H
- Beachy DE
- Lebowitz JJ
- Engler S
- Mason JR
- Miller DR
- Kusmarteva I
- Jacobsen LM
- Posgai AL
- Khoshbouei H
- Oram RA
- Schatz DA
- Hattersley AT
- Bodenmiller B
- Atkinson MA
- Nick HS
- Wasserfall CH
journal: Diabetes
year: '2021'
doi: 10.2337/db21-0070
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monogenic Diabetes and Integrated Stress Response Genes Display Altered Gene Expression in Type 1 Diabetes.
**Authors:** Hiller H, Beachy DE, Lebowitz JJ, Engler S, Mason JR, Miller DR, Kusmarteva I, Jacobsen LM, Posgai AL, Khoshbouei H, Oram RA, Schatz DA, Hattersley AT, Bodenmiller B, Atkinson MA, Nick HS, Wasserfall CH
**Journal:** Diabetes (2021)
**DOI:** [10.2337/db21-0070](https://doi.org/10.2337/db21-0070)

## Content

1. Diabetes. 2021 Aug;70(8):1885-1897. doi: 10.2337/db21-0070. Epub 2021 May 25.

Monogenic Diabetes and Integrated Stress Response Genes Display Altered Gene 
Expression in Type 1 Diabetes.

Hiller H(1), Beachy DE(2), Lebowitz JJ(2), Engler S(3), Mason JR(4), Miller 
DR(2), Kusmarteva I(1), Jacobsen LM(5), Posgai AL(1), Khoshbouei H(2), Oram 
RA(6), Schatz DA(5), Hattersley AT(6), Bodenmiller B(5), Atkinson MA(1), Nick 
HS(7)(5), Wasserfall CH(8)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology and Laboratory Medicine, University of 
Florida, Gainesville, FL.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
(3)Department of Quantitative Biomedicine, University of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(4)Department of Occupational Therapy, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
(6)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, University of Exeter Medical 
School, Exeter, U.K.
(7)Department of Neuroscience, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 
wasserfa@pathology.ufl.edu hnick@ufl.edu.
(8)Department of Pathology, Immunology and Laboratory Medicine, University of 
Florida, Gainesville, FL wasserfa@pathology.ufl.edu hnick@ufl.edu.

Type 1 diabetes (T1D) has a multifactorial autoimmune etiology, involving 
environmental prompts and polygenic predisposition. We hypothesized that 
pancreata from individuals with and at risk for T1D would exhibit dysregulated 
expression of genes associated with monogenic forms of diabetes caused by 
nonredundant single-gene mutations. Using a "monogenetic transcriptomic 
strategy," we measured the expression of these genes in human T1D, 
autoantibody-positive (autoantibody+), and control pancreas tissues with 
real-time quantitative PCR in accordance with the Minimum Information for 
Publication of Quantitative Real-Time PCR Experiments (MIQE) guidelines. Gene 
and protein expression was visualized in situ with use of immunofluorescence, 
RNAscope, and confocal microscopy. Two dozen monogenic diabetes genes showed 
altered expression in human pancreata from individuals with T1D versus 
unaffected control subjects. Six of these genes also saw dysregulation in 
pancreata from autoantibody+ individuals at increased risk for T1D. As a subset 
of these genes are related to cellular stress responses, we measured integrated 
stress response (ISR) genes and identified 20 with altered expression in T1D 
pancreata, including three of the four eIF2α-dependent kinases. Equally 
intriguing, we observed significant repression of the three arms of the ISR in 
autoantibody+ pancreata. Collectively, these efforts suggest monogenic diabetes 
and ISR genes are dysregulated early in the T1D disease process and likely 
contribute to the disorder's pathogenesis.

© 2021 by the American Diabetes Association.

DOI: 10.2337/db21-0070
PMCID: PMC8385619
PMID: 34035041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]