---
reference_id: "PMID:30902251"
title: "BMPs, TGFβ, and border security at the interzone."
authors:
- Lyons KM
- Rosen V
journal: Curr Top Dev Biol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/bs.ctdb.2019.02.001
keywords:
- Animals
- Bone Morphogenetic Proteins/metabolism
- Growth Differentiation Factor 5/genetics
- Humans
- "Joints/embryology, metabolism"
- "Models, Biological"
- Signal Transduction
- Transforming Growth Factor beta/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BMPs, TGFβ, and border security at the interzone.
**Authors:** Lyons KM, Rosen V
**Journal:** Curr Top Dev Biol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/bs.ctdb.2019.02.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.ctdb.2019.02.001)

## Content

1. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2019;133:153-170. doi: 10.1016/bs.ctdb.2019.02.001. Epub
2019  Mar 1.

BMPs, TGFβ, and border security at the interzone.

Lyons KM(1), Rosen V(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, Los 
Angeles, CA, United States.
(2)Department of Developmental Biology, Harvard School of Dental Medicine, 
Boston, MA, United States. Electronic address: Vicki_rosen@hsdm.harvard.edu.

Synovial joints enable movement and protect the integrity of the articular 
cartilage. Joints form within skeletal condensations destined to undergo 
chondrogenesis. The suppression of this chondrogenic program in the interzone is 
the first morphological sign of joint formation. While we have a fairly good 
understanding of the essential roles of BMP and TGFβ family members in promoting 
chondrogenic differentiation in developing skeletal elements, we know very 
little about how BMP activity is suppressed specifically within the interzone, a 
crucial step in joint development. The function of the BMP ligand Gdf5 has been 
especially difficult to decipher. On the one hand, Gdf5 is required to promote 
chondrogenesis of articular elements. On the other hand, Gdf5 is highly 
expressed in the joint interzone where chondrogenesis must be suppressed for the 
formation of many joints. Here we review the evidence that BMP signaling must be 
suppressed within the joint interzone for joint morphogenesis to progress, and 
consider how Gdf5 exerts its divergent effects on chondrogenesis and joint 
formation. We also consider how TGFβ signaling impacts formation of the 
interzone. Finally, we propose a model whereby Gdf5 exerts distinct effects in 
the interzone vs. surrounding cartilage based on the repertoire of BMP receptors 
available in these tissues. Understanding how BMP antagonists and counteracting 
TGFβ signals intersect with Gdf5 to sculpt the joint interzone is essential for 
understanding the origin of osteoarthritis and other diseases of joint tissues.

© 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.ctdb.2019.02.001
PMID: 30902251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]