---
reference_id: "PMID:20880828"
title: "Cognitive behavior therapy for schizophrenia and psychosis: current status and future directions."
authors:
- Tarrier N
journal: Clin Schizophr Relat Psychoses
year: '2010'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cognitive behavior therapy for schizophrenia and psychosis: current status and future directions.
**Authors:** Tarrier N
**Journal:** Clin Schizophr Relat Psychoses (2010)

## Content

1. Clin Schizophr Relat Psychoses. 2010 Oct;4(3):176-84.

Cognitive behavior therapy for schizophrenia and psychosis: current status and 
future directions.

Tarrier N(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Psychology, School of Psychological Sciences, University 
of Manchester, Manchester, UK. nicholas.tarrier@manchester.ac.uk

Cognitive behavior therapy (CBT) is an empirically based psychological 
treatment, which has a strong evidence base in a range of psychological 
disorders and, more recently, has also been applied to more serious disorders 
such as schizophrenia and psychoses (CBTp). This review outlines the background 
to this development and the theoretical bases to CBTp. There is good evidence 
from a considerable number of clinical trials that CBTp has a consistent 
clinical benefit when used in addition to standard care. There is, however, some 
variation in the outcomes of these clinical trials which may be due, in part, to 
the variation in methodological rigor of the trials. There is evidence that 
smaller, albeit still significant, effect sizes are found in methodologically 
more robust clinical trials. This is consistent with results found in other 
branches of medicine and healthcare. The different clinical strategies and 
outcomes found with various phases of the illness are outlined. There are 
considerable clinical and research challenges posed by issues of: 1) risk; 2) 
treating serious comorbidity; and, 3) treating conditions that limit recovery. 
These clinical problems are being addressed by a second wave of clinical 
developments. Lastly, the perennial problem of dissemination and translation of 
research into clinical practice is discussed.

PMID: 20880828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]