---
reference_id: "PMID:17525176"
title: A novel CACNA1F gene mutation causes Aland Island eye disease.
authors:
- Jalkanen R
- Bech-Hansen NT
- Tobias R
- Sankila EM
- Mäntyjärvi M
- Forsius H
- de la Chapelle A
- Alitalo T
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1167/iovs.06-1103
keywords:
- "Calcium Channels, L-Type/genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics"
- Humans
- Introns/genetics
- Male
- Mutation
- Night Blindness/genetics
- Pedigree
- "RNA, Messenger/analysis"
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Sequence Deletion
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel CACNA1F gene mutation causes Aland Island eye disease.
**Authors:** Jalkanen R, Bech-Hansen NT, Tobias R, Sankila EM, Mäntyjärvi M, Forsius H, de la Chapelle A, Alitalo T
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1167/iovs.06-1103](https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.06-1103)

## Content

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2007 Jun;48(6):2498-502. doi: 10.1167/iovs.06-1103.

A novel CACNA1F gene mutation causes Aland Island eye disease.

Jalkanen R(1), Bech-Hansen NT, Tobias R, Sankila EM, Mäntyjärvi M, Forsius H, de
la Chapelle A, Alitalo T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Helsinki University Central
Hospital, Biomedicum Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

PURPOSE: Aland Island eye disease (AIED), also known as Forsius-Eriksson
syndrome, is an X-linked recessive retinal disease characterized by a
combination of fundus hypopigmentation, decreased visual acuity, nystagmus,
astigmatism, protan color vision defect, progressive myopia, and defective dark
adaptation. Electroretinography reveals abnormalities in both photopic and
scotopic functions. The gene locus for AIED has been mapped to the
pericentromeric region of the X-chromosome, but the causative gene is unknown.
The purpose of this study was to identify the mutated gene underlying the
disease phenotype in the original AIED-affected family.
METHODS: All exons of the CACNA1F gene were studied by DNA sequencing. CACNA1F
mRNA from cultured lymphoblasts was analyzed by RT-PCR and cDNA sequencing.
RESULTS: A novel deletion covering exon 30 and portions of flanking introns of
the CACNA1F gene was identified in patients with AIED. Results from expression
studies were consistent with the DNA studies and showed that mRNA lacked exon
30. The identified in-frame deletion mutation is predicted to cause a deletion
of a transmembrane segment and an extracellular loop within repeat domain IV,
and consequently an altered membrane topology of the encoded alpha1-subunit of
the Ca(v)1.4 calcium channel.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in CACNA1F are known to cause the incomplete form of
X-linked congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB2). Since the clinical
picture of AIED is quite similar to CSNB2, it has long been discussed whether
these disorders are allelic or form a single entity. The present study clearly
indicates that AIED is also caused by a novel CACNA1F gene mutation.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.06-1103
PMID: 17525176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
