---
reference_id: "PMID:36066514"
title: "Diagnosis and Treatment of Myelodysplastic Syndromes: A Review."
authors:
- Sekeres MA
- Taylor J
journal: JAMA
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1001/jama.2022.14578
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Azacitidine/therapeutic use
- Decitabine/therapeutic use
- Erythropoietin/therapeutic use
- Female
- Hematinics/therapeutic use
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute/drug therapy, etiology, therapy"
- Male
- "Myelodysplastic Syndromes/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy, therapy"
- Neutropenia/etiology
- Prognosis
- Thrombocytopenia/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and Treatment of Myelodysplastic Syndromes: A Review.
**Authors:** Sekeres MA, Taylor J
**Journal:** JAMA (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.2022.14578](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2022.14578)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2022 Sep 6;328(9):872-880. doi: 10.1001/jama.2022.14578.

Diagnosis and Treatment of Myelodysplastic Syndromes: A Review.

Sekeres MA(1), Taylor J(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Sylvester Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida.

IMPORTANCE: Myelodysplastic neoplasms (MDS), formerly known as myelodysplastic 
syndromes, are clonal hematopoietic malignancies that cause morphologic bone 
marrow dysplasia along with anemia, neutropenia, or thrombocytopenia. MDS are 
associated with an increased risk of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The yearly 
incidence of MDS is approximately 4 per 100 000 people in the United States and 
is higher among patients with advanced age.
OBSERVATIONS: MDS are characterized by reduced numbers of peripheral blood 
cells, an increased risk of acute myeloid leukemia transformation, and reduced 
survival. The median age at diagnosis is approximately 70 years, and the yearly 
incidence rate increases to 25 per 100 000 in people aged 65 years and older. 
Risk factors associated with MDS include older age and prior exposures to toxins 
such as chemotherapy or radiation therapy. MDS are more common in men compared 
with women (with yearly incidence rates of approximately 5.4 vs 2.9 per 
100 000). MDS typically has an insidious presentation, consisting of signs and 
symptoms associated with anemia, thrombocytopenia, and neutropenia. MDS can be 
categorized into subtypes that are associated with lower or higher risk for 
acute myeloid leukemia transformation and that help with therapy selection. 
Patients with lower-risk MDS have a median survival of approximately 3 to 10 
years, whereas patients with higher-risk disease have a median survival of less 
than 3 years. Therapy for lower-risk MDS is selected based on whether the 
primary clinical characteristic is anemia, thrombocytopenia, or neutropenia. 
Management focuses on treating symptoms and reducing the number of required 
transfusions in patients with low-risk disease. For patients with lower-risk 
MDS, erythropoiesis stimulating agents, such as recombinant humanized 
erythropoietin or the longer-acting erythropoietin, darbepoetin alfa, can 
improve anemia in 15% to 40% of patients for a median of 8 to 23 months. For 
those with higher-risk MDS, hypomethylating agents such as azacitidine, 
decitabine, or decitabine/cedazuridine are first-line therapy. Hematopoietic 
cell transplantation is considered for higher-risk patients and represents the 
only potential cure.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: MDS are diagnosed in approximately 4 per 100 000 
people in the United States and are associated with a 5-year survival rate of 
approximately 37%. Treatments are tailored to the patient's disease 
characteristics and comorbidities and range from supportive care with or without 
erythropoiesis-stimulating agents for patients with low-risk MDS to 
hypomethylating agents, such as azacitidine or decitabine, for patients with 
higher-risk MDS. Hematopoietic cell transplantation is potentially curative and 
should be considered for patients with higher-risk MDS at the time of diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2022.14578
PMID: 36066514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]