---
reference_id: "PMID:27486690"
title: Proliferative Nodules vs Melanoma Arising in Giant Congenital Melanocytic Nevi During Childhood.
authors:
- Vergier B
- Laharanne E
- Prochazkova-Carlotti M
- de la Fouchardière A
- Merlio JP
- Kadlub N
- Avril MF
- Bodemer C
- Lacoste C
- Boralevi F
- Taieb A
- Ezzedine K
- Fraitag S
journal: JAMA Dermatol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2016.2667
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Proliferative Nodules vs Melanoma Arising in Giant Congenital Melanocytic Nevi During Childhood.
**Authors:** Vergier B, Laharanne E, Prochazkova-Carlotti M, de la Fouchardière A, Merlio JP, Kadlub N, Avril MF, Bodemer C, Lacoste C, Boralevi F, Taieb A, Ezzedine K, Fraitag S
**Journal:** JAMA Dermatol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamadermatol.2016.2667](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamadermatol.2016.2667)

## Content

1. JAMA Dermatol. 2016 Oct 1;152(10):1147-1151. doi: 
10.1001/jamadermatol.2016.2667.

Proliferative Nodules vs Melanoma Arising in Giant Congenital Melanocytic Nevi 
During Childhood.

Vergier B(1), Laharanne E(1), Prochazkova-Carlotti M(1), de la Fouchardière 
A(2), Merlio JP(1), Kadlub N(3), Avril MF(4), Bodemer C(5), Lacoste C(6), 
Boralevi F(7), Taieb A(7), Ezzedine K(7), Fraitag S(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Pathology, Hôpital Haut-Lévêque, Centre 
Hospitalier Universitaire Bordeaux, Pessac, France2Institut National de la Santé 
et de la Récherche Médicale U1053-UMR, Bordeaux Research In Translational 
Oncology, Bordeaux University, Bordeaux, France.
(2)Department of Pathology, Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France.
(3)Unit of Maxillofacial and Plastic Surgery, Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, 
Paris, France.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Cochin Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de 
Paris, Paris-Descartes-Sorbonne University, Paris, France.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Cochin Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de 
Paris, Paris-Descartes-Sorbonne University, Paris, France6Department of 
Dermatology, Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, France.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Cochin Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de 
Paris, Paris-Descartes-Sorbonne University, Paris, France7Department of 
Pathology, Necker-Enfants Malades Hospital, Paris, France.
(7)Department of Dermatology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Bordeaux, 
Bordeaux University, Pessac, France.

IMPORTANCE: The differential diagnosis between proliferative nodules (PNs) and 
melanoma arising in congenital melanocytic nevi (CMN) is crucial, as patients 
with PNs most often experience no increased risk of melanoma with metastases and 
death.
OBJECTIVE: To analyze the utility of immunohistochemistry and fluorescence in 
situ hybridization (FISH) in distinguishing PNs from childhood and adult-onset 
melanoma arising in CMN.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: A case series was conducted from June 29, 
1989, to November 12, 2009, of 13 children with PNs arising in CMN in childhood 
and 5 children with melanomas arising in CMN in childhood. Five patients with 
giant CMN with no nodules were included as negative controls, and 6 patients 
with melanomas arising in CMN in adulthood were included as positive controls. 
Follow-up ranged from 3 to 21 years in all children (mean, 9.9 years) and from 3 
months to 7 years in adults. Specimens were selected for immunohistochemistry 
and FISH. All histopathologic sections were reviewed by 2 dermatopathologists 
who examined all nodules arising at different ages in the same patient and, in 
the case of melanoma, all locations. Data analysis was performed from January 1, 
2013, to January 31, 2015.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The ability to distinguish melanoma from PN using 
immunohistochemistry and/or FISH.
RESULTS: Of the 13 patients (5 boys and 8 girls) with PNs present at birth, all 
PNs were stable (mean follow-up, 9 years). Eight patients with PNs and 4 of 5 
patients with childhood-onset melanoma showed homogeneous staining for HMB45, 
while heterogeneous staining for HMB45 was seen in 3 of 6 patients with 
adult-onset melanoma. Expression of p16 was strongly positive in most patients 
with childhood-onset PNs (10 of 11 patients) and melanoma (all patients) but 
negative in 4 patients with adult-onset melanoma. Patients with PNs and the 5 
patients with childhood-onset melanoma had numerical chromosomal aberrations 
never observed in the adjacent CMN. The 2 children with FISH-positive PNs are 
melanoma free after 7 and 4 years. Only 1 patient with childhood-onset melanoma 
had a FISH aberration compared with 4 patients with adult-onset melanoma.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Immunohistochemistry and the 4-probe FISH melanoma 
analysis are not useful for distinguishing PN from childhood-onset melanoma as 
opposed to adult-onset melanoma. Numerical anomalies seen in PNs but not in the 
adjacent CMN could be the result of a chromosomal segregation malfunction 
resulting in the development of nodules.

DOI: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2016.2667
PMID: 27486690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]