---
reference_id: "PMID:30299356"
title: "Neuraminidase inhibitor resistance in influenza: a clinical perspective."
authors:
- Lee N
- Hurt AC
journal: Curr Opin Infect Dis
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1097/QCO.0000000000000498
keywords:
- "Antiviral Agents/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Drug Resistance, Viral"
- "Enzyme Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Humans
- Influenza A virus/drug effects
- Influenza B virus/drug effects
- "Influenza, Human/drug therapy"
- "Neuraminidase/antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Viral Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuraminidase inhibitor resistance in influenza: a clinical perspective.
**Authors:** Lee N, Hurt AC
**Journal:** Curr Opin Infect Dis (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1097/QCO.0000000000000498](https://doi.org/10.1097/QCO.0000000000000498)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Infect Dis. 2018 Dec;31(6):520-526. doi:
10.1097/QCO.0000000000000498.

Neuraminidase inhibitor resistance in influenza: a clinical perspective.

Lee N(1), Hurt AC(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine 
and Dentistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
(2)WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on Influenza, VIDRL, 
Peter Doherty Institute, Melbourne, Australia.
(3)University of Melbourne, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Peter 
Doherty Institute, Melbourne, Australia.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Neuraminidase inhibitors (NAIs), including oseltamivir, 
zanamivir, and peramivir, is the main class of antiviral available for clinical 
use. As such, development of resistance toward these agents is of great clinical 
and public health concern.
RECENT FINDINGS: At present, NAI resistance remains uncommon among the 
circulating viruses (oseltamivir <3.5%, zanamivir <1%). Resistance risk is 
slightly higher in A(H1N1) than A(H3N2) and B viruses. Resistance may emerge 
during drug exposure, particularly among young children (<5 years), the 
immunocompromised, and individuals receiving prophylactic regimens. H275Y 
A(H1N1) variant, showing high-level oseltamivir resistance, is capable of 
causing outbreaks. R294K A(H7N9) variant shows reduced inhibition across NAIs. 
Multi-NAI resistance has been reported in the immunocompromised.
SUMMARY: These findings highlight the importance of continuous surveillance, and 
assessment of viral fitness and transmissibility of resistant virus strains. 
Detection can be challenging, especially in a mix of resistant and wild-type 
viruses. Recent advances in molecular techniques (e.g. targeted mutation PCR, 
iART, ddPCR, pyrosequencing, next-generation sequencing) have improved detection 
and our understanding of viral dynamics. Treatment options available for 
oseltamivir-resistant viruses are limited, and susceptibility testing of other 
NAIs may be required, but non-NAI antivirals (e.g. polymerase inhibitors) that 
are active against these resistant viruses are in late-stage clinical 
development.

DOI: 10.1097/QCO.0000000000000498
PMID: 30299356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]