---
reference_id: "PMID:28931574"
title: Enhanced Nociception in Angelman Syndrome Model Mice.
authors:
- McCoy ES
- Taylor-Blake B
- Aita M
- Simon JM
- Philpot BD
- Zylka MJ
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1018-17.2017
keywords:
- "Angelman Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- "Ganglia, Spinal/pathology, physiology"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Pain Measurement/methods
- "Spinal Cord/pathology, physiology"
- "Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/deficiency, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Enhanced Nociception in Angelman Syndrome Model Mice.
**Authors:** McCoy ES, Taylor-Blake B, Aita M, Simon JM, Philpot BD, Zylka MJ
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1018-17.2017](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1018-17.2017)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2017 Oct 18;37(42):10230-10239. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1018-17.2017.  Epub 2017 Sep 20.

Enhanced Nociception in Angelman Syndrome Model Mice.

McCoy ES(1), Taylor-Blake B(1), Aita M(1), Simon JM(1)(2)(3), Philpot BD(1)(2),
Zylka MJ(4)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology and University of North Carolina
Neuroscience Center.
(2)Carolina Institute for Developmental Disabilities, and.
(3)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina 27599.
(4)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology and University of North Carolina
Neuroscience Center, zylka@med.unc.edu.

Angelman syndrome (AS) is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder caused by
mutation or deletion of the maternal UBE3A allele. The maternal UBE3A allele is
expressed in nearly all neurons of the brain and spinal cord, whereas the
paternal UBE3A allele is repressed by an extremely long antisense transcript
(UBE3A-ATS). Little is known about expression of UBE3A in the peripheral nervous
system, where loss of maternal UBE3A might contribute to AS phenotypes. Here we
sought to examine maternal and paternal Ube3a expression in DRGs neurons and to
evaluate whether nociceptive responses were affected in AS model mice (global
deletion of maternal Ube3a allele; Ube3am-/p+). We found that most
large-diameter proprioceptive and mechanosensitive DRG neurons expressed
maternal Ube3a and paternal Ube3a-ATS In contrast, most small-diameter neurons
expressed Ube3a biallelically and had low to undetectable levels of Ube3a-ATS
Analysis of single-cell DRG transcriptomes further suggested that Ube3a is
expressed monoallelically in myelinated large-diameter neurons and biallelically
in unmyelinated small-diameter neurons. Behavioral responses to some noxious
thermal and mechanical stimuli were enhanced in male and female AS model mice;
however, nociceptive responses were not altered by the conditional deletion of
maternal Ube3a in the DRG. These data suggest that the enhanced nociceptive
responses in AS model mice are due to loss of maternal Ube3a in the central, but
not peripheral, nervous system. Our study provides new insights into sensory
processing deficits associated with AS.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT Angelman syndrome
(AS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder caused by loss or mutation of the maternal
UBE3A allele. While sensory processing deficits are frequently associated with
AS, it is currently unknown whether Ube3a is expressed in peripheral sensory
neurons or whether maternal deletion of Ube3a affects somatosensory responses.
Here, we found that Ube3a is primarily expressed from the maternally inherited
allele in myelinated large-diameter sensory neurons and biallelically expressed
in unmyelinated small-diameter neurons. Nociceptive responses to select noxious
thermal and mechanical stimuli were enhanced following global, but not sensory
neuron-specific, deletion of maternal Ube3a in mice. These data suggest that
maternal loss of Ube3a affects nociception via a central, but not peripheral
mechanism, with implications for AS.

Copyright © 2017 the authors 0270-6474/17/3710230-10$15.00/0.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1018-17.2017
PMCID: PMC5647775
PMID: 28931574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
