---
reference_id: "PMID:38336172"
title: "Multiple Genes Core to ERAD, Macroautophagy and Lysosomal Degradation Pathways Participate in the Proteostasis Response in α1-Antitrypsin Deficiency."
authors:
- Li J
- Moretti F
- Hidvegi T
- Sviben S
- Fitzpatrick JAJ
- Sundaramoorthi H
- Pak SC
- Silverman GA
- Knapp B
- Filipuzzi I
- Alford J
- Reece-Hoyes J
- Nigsch F
- Murphy LO
- Nyfeler B
- Perlmutter DH
journal: Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jcmgh.2024.02.006
keywords:
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin Deficiency/pathology, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Proteostasis
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- "alpha 1-Antitrypsin/metabolism, genetics"
- Endoplasmic Reticulum-Associated Degradation
- Macroautophagy
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
- CRISPR-Cas Systems
- Autophagy/genetics
- Gene Editing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multiple Genes Core to ERAD, Macroautophagy and Lysosomal Degradation Pathways Participate in the Proteostasis Response in α1-Antitrypsin Deficiency.
**Authors:** Li J, Moretti F, Hidvegi T, Sviben S, Fitzpatrick JAJ, Sundaramoorthi H, Pak SC, Silverman GA, Knapp B, Filipuzzi I, Alford J, Reece-Hoyes J, Nigsch F, Murphy LO, Nyfeler B, Perlmutter DH
**Journal:** Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jcmgh.2024.02.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcmgh.2024.02.006)

## Content

1. Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2024;17(6):1007-1024. doi:
10.1016/j.jcmgh.2024.02.006. Epub 2024 Feb 7.

Multiple Genes Core to ERAD, Macroautophagy and Lysosomal Degradation Pathways
Participate in the Proteostasis Response in α1-Antitrypsin Deficiency.

Li J(1), Moretti F(2), Hidvegi T(1), Sviben S(3), Fitzpatrick JAJ(4),
Sundaramoorthi H(1), Pak SC(1), Silverman GA(1), Knapp B(2), Filipuzzi I(2),
Alford J(5), Reece-Hoyes J(5), Nigsch F(2), Murphy LO(5), Nyfeler B(2),
Perlmutter DH(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri.
(2)Novartis Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Center for Cellular Imaging, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri.
(4)Center for Cellular Imaging, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri; Department of Cell Biology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri; Department of Neuroscience, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri.
(5)Novartis Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri. Electronic address: perlmutterd@wustl.edu.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: In the classic form of α1-antitrypsin deficiency (ATD), the
misfolded α1-antitrypsin Z (ATZ) variant accumulates in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) of liver cells. A gain-of-function proteotoxic mechanism is
responsible for chronic liver disease in a subgroup of homozygotes. Proteostatic
response pathways, including conventional endoplasmic reticulum-associated
degradation and autophagy, have been proposed as the mechanisms that allow
cellular adaptation and presumably protection from the liver disease phenotype.
Recent studies have concluded that a distinct lysosomal pathway called
endoplasmic reticulum-to-lysosome completely supplants the role of the
conventional macroautophagy pathway in degradation of ATZ. Here, we used several
state-of-the-art approaches to characterize the proteostatic responses more
fully in cellular systems that model ATD.
METHODS: We used clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats
(CRISPR)-mediated genome editing coupled to a cell selection step by
fluorescence-activated cell sorter to perform screening for proteostasis genes
that regulate ATZ accumulation and combined that with selective genome editing
in 2 other model systems.
RESULTS: Endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation genes are key early
regulators and multiple autophagy genes, from classic as well as from
ER-to-lysosome and other newly described ER-phagy pathways, participate in
degradation of ATZ in a manner that is temporally regulated and evolves as ATZ
accumulation persists. Time-dependent changes in gene expression are accompanied
by specific ultrastructural changes including dilation of the ER, formation of
globular inclusions, budding of autophagic vesicles, and alterations in the
overall shape and component parts of mitochondria.
CONCLUSIONS: Macroautophagy is a critical component of the proteostasis response
to cellular ATZ accumulation and it becomes more important over time as ATZ
synthesis continues unabated. Multiple subtypes of macroautophagy and
nonautophagic lysosomal degradative pathways are needed to respond to the high
concentrations of misfolded protein that characterizes ATD and these pathways
are attractive candidates for genetic variants that predispose to the hepatic
phenotype.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcmgh.2024.02.006
PMCID: PMC11053228
PMID: 38336172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
