---
reference_id: "PMID:7488367"
title: Management of posterior laryngeal and laryngotracheoesophageal clefts.
authors:
- Evans KL
- Courteney-Harris R
- Bailey CM
- Evans JN
- Parsons DS
journal: Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1001/archotol.1995.01890120038007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of posterior laryngeal and laryngotracheoesophageal clefts.
**Authors:** Evans KL, Courteney-Harris R, Bailey CM, Evans JN, Parsons DS
**Journal:** Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1001/archotol.1995.01890120038007](https://doi.org/10.1001/archotol.1995.01890120038007)

## Content

1. Arch Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 1995 Dec;121(12):1380-5. doi: 
10.1001/archotol.1995.01890120038007.

Management of posterior laryngeal and laryngotracheoesophageal clefts.

Evans KL(1), Courteney-Harris R, Bailey CM, Evans JN, Parsons DS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Otolaryngology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for 
Sick Children NHS Trust, London, England.

OBJECTIVE: To review the clinical features, associated congenital abnormalities, 
management, and morbidity of infants presenting with posterior laryngeal and 
laryngotracheal clefts.
DESIGN: Case series.
SETTING: Great Ormond Street Hospital for Sick Children NHS Trust, London, 
England.
PATIENTS: Consecutive sample of 44 patients presenting with posterior laryngeal 
and laryngotracheal clefts between December 10, 1979, and January 30, 1992.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Clinical features, incidence of surgery, and associated 
morbidity and mortality related to different types of airway cleft.
RESULTS: The main presenting features were stridor and aspiration, which were 
more evident with the more extensive clefts. Twenty-five patients (56%) had 
associated congenital abnormalities. Fourteen patients (32%) were treated 
conservatively. Sixteen patients (36%) underwent primary endoscopic surgical 
repair. Eight patients (18%) underwent primary repair via an anterior 
laryngofissure; and six patients (14%) underwent primary repair via a lateral 
pharyngotomy. Eight patients (18%) required revision surgery, two (4%) of them 
on more than one occasion. Ten patients (23%) required fundoplication to control 
gastroesophageal reflux. Six patients (14%) died.
CONCLUSIONS: The identification of an airway cleft requires a high index of 
suspicion. Morbidity and mortality are reduced by securing the airway, 
controlling gastroesophageal reflux, and using a multidisciplinary pediatric 
team. We recommend the anterior laryngofissure because of the ease of surgical 
access.

DOI: 10.1001/archotol.1995.01890120038007
PMID: 7488367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]