---
reference_id: "PMID:15126988"
title: Effective treatment of alpha-mannosidosis by allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
authors:
- Grewal SS
- Shapiro EG
- Krivit W
- Charnas L
- Lockman LA
- Delaney KA
- Davies SM
- Wenger DA
- Rimell FL
- Abel S
- Grovas AC
- Orchard PJ
- Wagner JE
- Peters C
journal: J Pediatr
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2004.01.025
keywords:
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Developmental Disabilities/etiology, prevention & control"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/etiology, prevention & control"
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Humans
- Male
- "alpha-Mannosidosis/complications, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effective treatment of alpha-mannosidosis by allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
**Authors:** Grewal SS, Shapiro EG, Krivit W, Charnas L, Lockman LA, Delaney KA, Davies SM, Wenger DA, Rimell FL, Abel S, Grovas AC, Orchard PJ, Wagner JE, Peters C
**Journal:** J Pediatr (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpeds.2004.01.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpeds.2004.01.025)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 2004 May;144(5):569-73. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2004.01.025.

Effective treatment of alpha-mannosidosis by allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation.

Grewal SS(1), Shapiro EG, Krivit W, Charnas L, Lockman LA, Delaney KA, Davies
SM, Wenger DA, Rimell FL, Abel S, Grovas AC, Orchard PJ, Wagner JE, Peters C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Blood and Marrow Transplantation, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. grewa002@umn.edu

OBJECTIVES: To study the efficacy of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
(HCT) for ameliorating the clinical manifestations of alpha-mannosidosis.
STUDY DESIGN: Four patients with alpha-mannosidosis underwent allogeneic HCT at
the University of Minnesota. Diagnosis was established by assay of leukocyte
alpha-mannosidase activity level. Physical features, donor engraftment,
leukocyte alpha-mannosidase activity, neuropsychologic function, and hearing
were monitored before and after transplantation, with follow-up ranging from 1
to 6 years.
RESULTS: All 4 patients showed slowing of their neurocognitive development and
sensorineural hearing loss before HCT. All patients are alive, with
normalization of leukocyte enzyme activity after HCT. Intellectual function has
stabilized, with improvement in adaptive skills and verbal memory function in 3
of 4 patients. Hearing has improved to normal or near normal for speech
frequencies in 3 patients. No new skeletal abnormalities have developed.
CONCLUSIONS: HCT can halt the progressive cognitive loss in patients with
alpha-mannosidosis. Early diagnosis and treatment with HCT is critical for
optimal results.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2004.01.025
PMID: 15126988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
