---
reference_id: "PMID:38123563"
title: Atypical cell death and insufficient matrix organization in long-bone growth plates from Tric-b-knockout mice.
authors:
- Ichimura A
- Miyazaki Y
- Nagatomo H
- Kawabe T
- Nakajima N
- Kim GE
- Tomizawa M
- Okamoto N
- Komazaki S
- Kakizawa S
- Nishi M
- Takeshima H
journal: Cell Death Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41419-023-06285-y
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- Growth Plate/metabolism
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Cell Death
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
- Signal Transduction
- Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress/genetics
- Ion Channels/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atypical cell death and insufficient matrix organization in long-bone growth plates from Tric-b-knockout mice.
**Authors:** Ichimura A, Miyazaki Y, Nagatomo H, Kawabe T, Nakajima N, Kim GE, Tomizawa M, Okamoto N, Komazaki S, Kakizawa S, Nishi M, Takeshima H
**Journal:** Cell Death Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41419-023-06285-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41419-023-06285-y)

## Content

1. Cell Death Dis. 2023 Dec 20;14(12):848. doi: 10.1038/s41419-023-06285-y.

Atypical cell death and insufficient matrix organization in long-bone growth 
plates from Tric-b-knockout mice.

Ichimura A(#)(1), Miyazaki Y(#)(1), Nagatomo H(1), Kawabe T(1), Nakajima N(1), 
Kim GE(1), Tomizawa M(1), Okamoto N(1), Komazaki S(2), Kakizawa S(1), Nishi 
M(1), Takeshima H(3).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto, 
606-8501, Japan.
(2)Saitama Medical University, Saitama, 350-0495, Japan.
(3)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto, 
606-8501, Japan. takeshim@pharm.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(#)Contributed equally

TRIC-A and TRIC-B proteins form homotrimeric cation-permeable channels in the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and nuclear membranes and are thought to contribute 
to counterionic flux coupled with store Ca2+ release in various cell types. 
Serious mutations in the TRIC-B (also referred to as TMEM38B) locus cause 
autosomal recessive osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), which is characterized by 
insufficient bone mineralization. We have reported that Tric-b-knockout mice can 
be used as an OI model; Tric-b deficiency deranges ER Ca2+ handling and thus 
reduces extracellular matrix (ECM) synthesis in osteoblasts, leading to poor 
mineralization. Here we report irregular cell death and insufficient ECM in 
long-bone growth plates from Tric-b-knockout embryos. In the knockout growth 
plate chondrocytes, excess pro-collagen fibers were occasionally accumulated in 
severely dilated ER elements. Of the major ER stress pathways, activated 
PERK/eIF2α (PKR-like ER kinase/ eukaryotic initiation factor 2α) signaling 
seemed to inordinately alter gene expression to induce apoptosis-related 
proteins including CHOP (CCAAT/enhancer binding protein homologous protein) and 
caspase 12 in the knockout chondrocytes. Ca2+ imaging detected aberrant Ca2+ 
handling in the knockout chondrocytes; ER Ca2+ release was impaired, while 
cytoplasmic Ca2+ level was elevated. Our observations suggest that Tric-b 
deficiency directs growth plate chondrocytes to pro-apoptotic states by 
compromising cellular Ca2+-handling and exacerbating ER stress response, leading 
to impaired ECM synthesis and accidental cell death.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-023-06285-y
PMCID: PMC10733378
PMID: 38123563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.