---
reference_id: "PMID:22173295"
title: Brain imaging in the study of Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Reiman EM
- Jagust WJ
journal: Neuroimage
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.11.075
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brain imaging in the study of Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Reiman EM, Jagust WJ
**Journal:** Neuroimage (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.11.075](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.11.075)

## Content

1. Neuroimage. 2012 Jun;61(2):505-16. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.11.075. Epub
 2011 Dec 7.

Brain imaging in the study of Alzheimer's disease.

Reiman EM(1), Jagust WJ.

Author information:
(1)Banner Alzheimer's Institute, 901 East Willetta Street, Phoenix, AZ 85006, 
USA. eric.reiman@bannerhealth.com

Over the last 20 years, there has been extraordinary progress in brain imaging 
research and its application to the study of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Brain 
imaging researchers have contributed to the scientific understanding, early 
detection and tracking of AD. They have set the stage for imaging techniques to 
play growing roles in the clinical setting, the evaluation of disease-modifying 
treatments, and the identification of demonstrably effective prevention 
therapies. They have developed ground-breaking methods, including positron 
emission tomography (PET) ligands to measure fibrillar amyloid-β (Aβ) 
deposition, new magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) pulse sequences, and powerful 
image analysis techniques, to help in these endeavors. Additional work is needed 
to develop even more powerful imaging methods, to further clarify the 
relationship and time course of Aβ and other disease processes in the 
predisposition to AD, to establish the role of brain imaging methods in the 
clinical setting, and to provide the scientific means and regulatory approval 
pathway needed to evaluate the range of promising disease-modifying and 
prevention therapies as quickly as possible. Twenty years from now, AD may not 
yet be a distant memory, but the best is yet to come.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.11.075
PMCID: PMC3351556
PMID: 22173295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]