---
reference_id: "PMID:31445300"
title: "Development of measures of polyneuropathy impairment in hATTR amyloidosis: From NIS to mNIS + 7."
authors:
- Dyck PJB
- González-Duarte A
- Obici L
- Polydefkis M
- Wiesman JF
- Antonino I
- Litchy WJ
- Dyck PJ
journal: J Neurol Sci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2019.116424
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Development of measures of polyneuropathy impairment in hATTR amyloidosis: From NIS to mNIS + 7.
**Authors:** Dyck PJB, González-Duarte A, Obici L, Polydefkis M, Wiesman JF, Antonino I, Litchy WJ, Dyck PJ
**Journal:** J Neurol Sci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jns.2019.116424](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2019.116424)

## Content

1. J Neurol Sci. 2019 Oct 15;405:116424. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2019.116424. Epub
2019  Aug 8.

Development of measures of polyneuropathy impairment in hATTR amyloidosis: From 
NIS to mNIS + 7.

Dyck PJB(1), González-Duarte A(2), Obici L(3), Polydefkis M(4), Wiesman JF(5), 
Antonino I(6), Litchy WJ(7), Dyck PJ(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. Electronic address: 
Dyck.PJames@mayo.edu.
(2)Department of Neurology, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición 
Salvador Zubirán, México D.F., Mexico.
(3)Amyloidosis Research and Treatment Center, Foundation IRCCS Policlinico San 
Matteo, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
(4)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, 
USA.
(6)Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(7)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.

Hereditary transthyretin-mediated amyloidosis (hATTR amyloidosis) is a rare, 
life-threatening disease, caused by point mutations in the transthyretin gene. 
It is a heterogeneous, multisystem disease with rapidly progressing 
polyneuropathy (including sensory, motor, and autonomic impairments) and cardiac 
dysfunction. Measures used to assess polyneuropathy in other diseases have been 
tested as endpoints in hATTR amyloidosis clinical trials (i.e. Neuropathy 
Impairment Score [NIS], NIS-lower limb, and NIS + 7), yet the unique nature of 
the polyneuropathy in this disease has necessitated modifications to these 
scales. In particular, the heterogeneous impairment and the aggressive disease 
course have been key drivers in developing scales that better capture the 
disease burden and progression of polyneuropathy in hATTR amyloidosis. The 
modified NIS + 7 (mNIS + 7) scale was specifically designed to assess 
polyneuropathy impairment in patients with hATTR amyloidosis, and has been the 
primary endpoint in two recent, phase III studies in this disease. The mNIS + 7 
uses highly standardized, quantitative, and referenced assessments to quantify 
decreased muscle weakness, muscle stretch reflexes, sensory loss, and autonomic 
impairment. Physicians using this scale in clinical trials should be 
specifically trained and monitored to minimize variability. This article 
discusses the different scales that have been/are being used to assess 
polyneuropathy in patients with hATTR amyloidosis, their correlation with other 
disease assessments, and reflects on how and why scales have evolved to the 
latest iteration of mNIS + 7.

Copyright © 2019 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2019.116424
PMID: 31445300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]