---
reference_id: "PMID:35993498"
title: Interdisciplinary in silico studies to understand in-depth molecular level mechanism of drug resistance involving NS3-4A protease of HCV.
authors:
- Hazra M
- Dubey RC
journal: J Biomol Struct Dyn
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1080/07391102.2022.2113823
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interdisciplinary in silico studies to understand in-depth molecular level mechanism of drug resistance involving NS3-4A protease of HCV.
**Authors:** Hazra M, Dubey RC
**Journal:** J Biomol Struct Dyn (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1080/07391102.2022.2113823](https://doi.org/10.1080/07391102.2022.2113823)

## Content

1. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2023 Aug-Sep;41(14):6937-6956. doi: 
10.1080/07391102.2022.2113823. Epub 2022 Aug 22.

Interdisciplinary in silico studies to understand in-depth molecular level 
mechanism of drug resistance involving NS3-4A protease of HCV.

Hazra M(1), Dubey RC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Botany and Microbiology, Gurukula Kangri (Deemed to be 
University), Haridwar, Uttarakhand, India.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) causes hepatitis, a life-threatening disease responsible 
for liver cirrhosis. Urgent measures have been taken to develop therapeutics 
against this deadly pathogen. NS3/4A protease is an extremely important target. 
A series of inhibitors have been developed against this viral protease including 
Faldaprevir. Unfortunately, the error-prone viral RNA polymerase causes the 
emergence of resistance, thereby causing reduced effectiveness of those 
peptidomimetic inhibitors. Among the drug resistant variants, three single amino 
acid residues (R155, A156 and D168) are notable for their presence in clinical 
isolates and also their effectivity against most of the known inhibitors in 
clinical development. Therefore, it is crucial to understand the mechanistic 
role of those drug resistant variants while designing potent novel inhibitors. 
In this communication, we have deeply analyzed through using in silico studies 
to understand the molecular mechanism of alteration of inhibitor binding between 
wild type and its R155K, A156V and D168V variants. Principal component analysis 
was carried to identify the backbone fluctuations of important residues in HCV 
NS3/4A responsible for the inhibitor binding and maintaining drug resistance. 
Free energy landscape as a function of the principal components has been used to 
identify the stability and conformation of the key residues that regulate 
inhibitor binding and their impact in developing drug resistance. Our findings 
are consistent with the trend of experimental results. The observations are also 
true in case of other Faldaprevir-like peptidomimetic inhibitors. Understanding 
this binding mechanism would be significant for the development of novel 
inhibitors with less susceptibility towards drug resistance.Communicated by 
Ramaswamy H. Sarma.

DOI: 10.1080/07391102.2022.2113823
PMID: 35993498