---
reference_id: "PMID:16849186"
title: Perspectives on the basic reproductive ratio.
authors:
- Heffernan JM
- Smith RJ
- Wahl LM
journal: J R Soc Interface
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1098/rsif.2005.0042
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Perspectives on the basic reproductive ratio.
**Authors:** Heffernan JM, Smith RJ, Wahl LM
**Journal:** J R Soc Interface (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1098/rsif.2005.0042](https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2005.0042)

## Content

1. J R Soc Interface. 2005 Sep 22;2(4):281-93. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2005.0042.

Perspectives on the basic reproductive ratio.

Heffernan JM(1), Smith RJ, Wahl LM.

Author information:
(1)The Department of Applied Mathematics, The University of Western Ontario, 
London, Ontario N6A 5B7, Canada.

The basic reproductive ratio, R0, is defined as the expected number of secondary 
infections arising from a single individual during his or her entire infectious 
period, in a population of susceptibles. This concept is fundamental to the 
study of epidemiology and within-host pathogen dynamics. Most importantly, R0 
often serves as a threshold parameter that predicts whether an infection will 
spread. Related parameters which share this threshold behaviour, however, may or 
may not give the true value of R0. In this paper we give a brief overview of 
common methods of formulating R0 and surrogate threshold parameters from 
deterministic, non-structured models. We also review common means of estimating 
R0 from epidemiological data. Finally, we survey the recent use of R0 in 
assessing emerging diseases, such as severe acute respiratory syndrome and avian 
influenza, a number of recent livestock diseases, and vector-borne diseases 
malaria, dengue and West Nile virus.

DOI: 10.1098/rsif.2005.0042
PMCID: PMC1578275
PMID: 16849186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]