---
reference_id: "PMID:36853810"
title: "Hyperthyroidism and depression: a clinical case of atypical thyrotoxicosis manifestation."
authors:
- Chiera M
- Draghetti S
- De Ronchi D
- Scaramelli AR
- Fabbri C
- Fanelli G
- Serretti A
journal: Int Clin Psychopharmacol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/YIC.0000000000000438
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hyperthyroidism and depression: a clinical case of atypical thyrotoxicosis manifestation.
**Authors:** Chiera M, Draghetti S, De Ronchi D, Scaramelli AR, Fabbri C, Fanelli G, Serretti A
**Journal:** Int Clin Psychopharmacol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/YIC.0000000000000438](https://doi.org/10.1097/YIC.0000000000000438)

## Content

1. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 2023 Jul 1;38(4):269-272. doi: 
10.1097/YIC.0000000000000438. Epub 2023 Feb 8.

Hyperthyroidism and depression: a clinical case of atypical thyrotoxicosis 
manifestation.

Chiera M(1), Draghetti S(1), De Ronchi D(1), Scaramelli AR(2), Fabbri C(1)(3), 
Fanelli G(1)(4), Serretti A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, University of Bologna.
(2)Department of Mental Health - Pathological Addictions, Local Health Unit of 
Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(3)Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, 
London, UK.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Radboud University Medical Center, Donders 
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

The relationship between psychiatric symptoms and thyroid function has been well 
known and studied since antiquity. The common view is that clinical 
hypothyroidism is associated with depressive symptoms, whereas the psychiatric 
manifestations of hyperthyroidism are agitation, emotional lability, 
hyperexcitability, occasionally accompanied by angry outbursts, and euphoria. 
The case here reported overturns this conventional medical knowledge. A 
73-year-old Italian woman experienced a severe major depressive episode with 
psychotic and melancholic features during laboratory thyrotoxicosis. No 
classical clinical signs and symptoms of thyrotoxicosis were present. 
Psychiatric symptoms improved together with the resolution of the hyperthyroid 
state. Historically, different cases of so-called 'apathetic hyperthyroidism' 
have been described. Recent neuroimaging and animal studies provided possible 
neurobiological explanations, showing how the excess thyroid hormones could 
affect brain structures involved in the regulation of mood, leading to 
depression. A direct link between hyperthyroidism and depression seems to be 
likely. This insight may be relevant in facilitating early diagnosis of thyroid 
disease and the planning of therapeutic strategies.

Copyright © 2023 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/YIC.0000000000000438
PMID: 36853810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]