---
reference_id: "PMID:38728377"
title: Mitral annular disjunction and its progression during childhood in Marfan syndrome.
authors:
- Doan TT
- Iturralde Chavez A
- Valdes SO
- Weigand JD
- Wilkinson JC
- Parthiban A
- Stephens SB
- Pignatelli RH
- Morris SA
journal: Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/ehjci/jeae125
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitral annular disjunction and its progression during childhood in Marfan syndrome.
**Authors:** Doan TT, Iturralde Chavez A, Valdes SO, Weigand JD, Wilkinson JC, Parthiban A, Stephens SB, Pignatelli RH, Morris SA
**Journal:** Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ehjci/jeae125](https://doi.org/10.1093/ehjci/jeae125)

## Content

1. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2024 Aug 26;25(9):1306-1314. doi: 
10.1093/ehjci/jeae125.

Mitral annular disjunction and its progression during childhood in Marfan 
syndrome.

Doan TT(1)(2), Iturralde Chavez A(1)(2), Valdes SO(1)(2), Weigand JD(1)(2), 
Wilkinson JC(1)(2), Parthiban A(1)(2), Stephens SB(1)(2), Pignatelli RH(1)(2), 
Morris SA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Texas Children's Hospital, 6651 Main Street MC-E1920, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

AIMS: Data on mitral annular disjunction (MAD) in children with Marfan syndrome 
(MFS) are sparse. To investigate the diagnostic yield of MAD by echocardiography 
and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR), its prevalence and progression 
during childhood.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We included patients <21 years old with MFS, defined by 
2010 Ghent criteria and a pathogenic FBN1 variant or ectopia lentis. Two readers 
measured systolic separation between the mitral valve (MV) posterior hinge point 
and left ventricular (LV) myocardium on initial and subsequent imaging. MAD was 
defined as MV-LV separation ≥2 mm, MV prolapse (MVP) as atrial displacement 
≥2 mm. Kappa coefficients evaluated echocardiogram-CMR agreement. Bland-Altman 
and intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs) assessed inter-rater and 
inter-modality reliability. Univariable mixed-effects linear regression was used 
to evaluate longitudinal changes of MAD. MAD was detected in 60% (110/185) 
eligible patients. MVP was present in 48% (53/110) of MAD and MAD in 90% (53/59) 
of MVP. MAD detection by CMR and echocardiography had 96% overall agreement 
(Kappa = 0.89, P < 0.001) and a 0.32 mm estimate bias (95% CI 0.00, 0.65). ICC 
by echocardiography, CMR, and between modalities were 0.97 (95% CI 0.93, 0.98), 
0.92 (95% CI 0.79, 0.97), and 0.91 (95% CI 0.85, 0.94), respectively. MAD was 
associated with aortic root dilation (P < 0.001). MAD was found in children of 
all ages, increased +0.18 mm/year (95% CI +0.14, +0.22) during a median duration 
of 5.5 years (IQR 3.1, 7.5 years). MAD indexed by height yielded a constant 
value +0.0002 mm/m/year (95% CI -0.0002, +0.0005 mm/m/year).
CONCLUSION: MAD was common in pediatric MFS and was associated with aortic root 
dilation. MAD detection by echocardiography and CMR was highly reliable, 
suggesting that routine assessment in MFS is feasible. MAD was present in 
neonates and progressed over time but remained constant when indexing by height. 
Further studies are needed to evaluate MAD as a biomarker for clinical outcomes 
in pediatric MFS.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
European Society of Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1093/ehjci/jeae125
PMCID: PMC11346360
PMID: 38728377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None declared.