---
reference_id: "PMID:23296249"
title: Diagnosis and management of polycystic liver disease.
authors:
- Gevers TJ
- Drenth JP
journal: Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1038/nrgastro.2012.254
keywords:
- "Cysts/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
- Disease Management
- Hepatectomy
- Humans
- "Liver Diseases/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
- Liver Transplantation
- "Somatostatin/analogs & derivatives"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and management of polycystic liver disease.
**Authors:** Gevers TJ, Drenth JP
**Journal:** Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrgastro.2012.254](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrgastro.2012.254)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2013 Feb;10(2):101-8. doi:
10.1038/nrgastro.2012.254. Epub 2013 Jan 8.

Diagnosis and management of polycystic liver disease.

Gevers TJ(1), Drenth JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Radboud University Nijmegen
Medical Centre, Nijmegen, P. O. Box 9101, Code 455, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.

Polycystic liver disease (PLD) is arbitrarily defined as a liver that contains
>20 cysts. The condition is associated with two genetically distinct diseases:
as a primary phenotype in isolated polycystic liver disease (PCLD) and as an
extrarenal manifestation in autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease
(ADPKD). Processes involved in hepatic cystogenesis include ductal plate
malformation with concomitant abnormal fluid secretion, altered cell-matrix
interaction and cholangiocyte hyperproliferation. PLD is usually a benign
disease, but can cause debilitating abdominal symptoms in some patients. The
main risk factors for growth of liver cysts are female sex, exogenous oestrogen
use and multiple pregnancies. Ultrasonography is very useful for achieving a
correct diagnosis of a polycystic liver and to differentiate between ADPKD and
PCLD. Current radiological and surgical therapies for symptomatic patients
include aspiration-sclerotherapy, fenestration, segmental hepatic resection and
liver transplantation. Medical therapies that interact with regulatory
mechanisms controlling expansion and growth of liver cysts are under
investigation. Somatostatin analogues are promising; several clinical trials
have shown that these drugs can reduce the volume of polycystic livers. The
purpose of this Review is to provide an update on the diagnosis and management
of PLD with a focus on literature published in the past 4 years.

DOI: 10.1038/nrgastro.2012.254
PMID: 23296249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
