---
reference_id: "PMID:22454413"
title: PAX3/FOXO1 fusion gene status is the key prognostic molecular marker in rhabdomyosarcoma and significantly improves current risk stratification.
authors:
- Missiaglia E
- Williamson D
- Chisholm J
- Wirapati P
- Pierron G
- Petel F
- Concordet JP
- Thway K
- Oberlin O
- Pritchard-Jones K
- Delattre O
- Delorenzi M
- Shipley J
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.38.5591
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- "Databases, Factual"
- Female
- Forkhead Box Protein O1
- "Forkhead Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Expression Profiling
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Gene Fusion/genetics
- Humans
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Male
- Multivariate Analysis
- Neoplasm Invasiveness/pathology
- Neoplasm Staging
- PAX3 Transcription Factor
- "Paired Box Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- Prognosis
- Proportional Hazards Models
- Retrospective Studies
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma/genetics, mortality, therapy"
- Risk Management
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- Survival Analysis
- "Translocation, Genetic"
- United Kingdom
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PAX3/FOXO1 fusion gene status is the key prognostic molecular marker in rhabdomyosarcoma and significantly improves current risk stratification.
**Authors:** Missiaglia E, Williamson D, Chisholm J, Wirapati P, Pierron G, Petel F, Concordet JP, Thway K, Oberlin O, Pritchard-Jones K, Delattre O, Delorenzi M, Shipley J
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2011.38.5591](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2011.38.5591)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2012 May 10;30(14):1670-7. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.38.5591. Epub
2012 Mar 26.

PAX3/FOXO1 fusion gene status is the key prognostic molecular marker in
rhabdomyosarcoma and significantly improves current risk stratification.

Missiaglia E(1), Williamson D, Chisholm J, Wirapati P, Pierron G, Petel F,
Concordet JP, Thway K, Oberlin O, Pritchard-Jones K, Delattre O, Delorenzi M,
Shipley J.

Author information:
(1)The Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, Surrey, UK.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2012 Nov 10;30(32):4039-40; author reply 4040-1. doi:
10.1200/JCO.2012.43.5628.

PURPOSE: To improve the risk stratification of patients with rhabdomyosarcoma
(RMS) through the use of clinical and molecular biologic data.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Two independent data sets of gene-expression profiling for
124 and 101 patients with RMS were used to derive prognostic gene signatures by
using a meta-analysis. These and a previously published metagene signature were
evaluated by using cross validation analyses. A combined clinical and molecular
risk-stratification scheme that incorporated the PAX3/FOXO1 fusion gene status
was derived from 287 patients with RMS and evaluated.
RESULTS: We showed that our prognostic gene-expression signature and the one
previously published performed well with reproducible and significant effects.
However, their effect was reduced when cross validated or tested in independent
data and did not add new prognostic information over the fusion gene status,
which is simpler to assay. Among nonmetastatic patients, patients who were
PAX3/FOXO1 positive had a significantly poorer outcome compared with both
alveolar-negative and PAX7/FOXO1-positive patients. Furthermore, a new
clinicomolecular risk score that incorporated fusion gene status (negative and
PAX3/FOXO1 and PAX7/FOXO1 positive), Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study TNM
stage, and age showed a significant increase in performance over the current
risk-stratification scheme.
CONCLUSION: Gene signatures can improve current stratification of patients with
RMS but will require complex assays to be developed and extensive validation
before clinical application. A significant majority of their prognostic value
was encapsulated by the fusion gene status. A continuous risk score derived from
the combination of clinical parameters with the presence or absence of
PAX3/FOXO1 represents a robust approach to improving current risk-adapted
therapy for RMS.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2011.38.5591
PMID: 22454413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
