---
reference_id: "PMID:36319738"
title: Spinocerebellar ataxia type 31 (SCA31).
authors:
- Ishikawa K
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s10038-022-01091-4
keywords:
- Humans
- Introns
- Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics
- RNA/genetics
- Nucleotides
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinocerebellar ataxia type 31 (SCA31).
**Authors:** Ishikawa K
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s10038-022-01091-4](https://doi.org/10.1038/s10038-022-01091-4)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2023 Mar;68(3):153-156. doi: 10.1038/s10038-022-01091-4. Epub
2022  Nov 1.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 31 (SCA31).

Ishikawa K(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)The Center for Personalized Medicine for Healthy Aging, Tokyo Medical and
Dental University, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. pico.nuro@tmd.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Neurology and Neurological Science, Graduate School of Medical
and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo,
Japan. pico.nuro@tmd.ac.jp.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 31 (SCA31) is one of the most common forms of
autosomal-dominant cerebellar ataxia in Japan. SCA31 has a strong founder
effect, which is consistent with the fact that this disease is basically absent
in other ethnicities. After searching the entire founder region of a 2-megabase
(Mb), we finally identified a 2.5 to 3.8 kb-long complex penta-nucleotide repeat
containing (TGGAA)n, (TAGAA)n, (TAAAA)n and (TAAAATAGAA)n as the only genetic
change segregating SCA31 individuals from normal people. Furthermore, (TGGAA)n
was isolated as the only repeat explaining the pathogenesis because other
repeats were encountered in control Japanese. From the genomic point of view,
the complex penta-nucleotide repeat lies in an intronic segment shared by two
genes, BEAN1 (brain expressed, associated with Nedd4) and TK2 (thymidine kinase
2) transcribed in mutually opposite directions. While TK2 is ubiquitously
expressed, BEAN1 is transcribed only in the brain. Thus, the complex repeat is
bi-directionally transcribed exclusively in the brain, as two independent
non-coding repeats. Furthermore, the complex repeat containing (UGGAA)n was
found to form abnormal RNA structures, called RNA foci, in cerebellar Purkinje
cell nuclei of SCA31 patients' brains. Subsequent investigation by
over-expressing (UGGAA)n in Drosophila revealed that the RNA containing (UGGAA)n
exerts toxicity in a length- and expression level-dependent manner, whereas its
toxicity could be dampened by (UGGAA)n-binding proteins, TDP-43, FUS and hnRNP
A2/B1. It seems rational to formulate a treatment strategy through enhancing the
role of RNA-binding proteins against (UGGAA)n-toxicity in SCA31.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s10038-022-01091-4
PMCID: PMC9968654
PMID: 36319738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
