---
reference_id: "PMID:20034074"
title: Review of the recently defined molecular mechanisms underlying thanatophoric dysplasia and their potential therapeutic implications for achondroplasia.
authors:
- Martínez-Frías ML
- de Frutos CA
- Bermejo E
- Nieto MA
- ECEMC Working Group
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33188
keywords:
- Achondroplasia/genetics
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Thanatophoric Dysplasia/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Review of the recently defined molecular mechanisms underlying thanatophoric dysplasia and their potential therapeutic implications for achondroplasia.
**Authors:** Martínez-Frías ML, de Frutos CA, Bermejo E, Nieto MA, ECEMC Working Group
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.33188](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.33188)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Jan;152A(1):245-55. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33188.

Review of the recently defined molecular mechanisms underlying thanatophoric 
dysplasia and their potential therapeutic implications for achondroplasia.

Martínez-Frías ML(1), de Frutos CA, Bermejo E, Nieto MA; ECEMC Working Group.

Collaborators: Gomar JL, Nieto C, Aparicio P, Centeno F, Félix V, Rodríguez F, 
Arroyo I, Blanco M.

Author information:
(1)ECEMC, Centro de Investigación sobre Anomalías Congénitas (CIAC), Instituto 
de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), Sinesio Delgado 6, 28029 Madrid, Spain. 
mlmartinez.frias@isciii.es

Achondroplasia (ACH), thanatophoric dysplasia (TD) types I and II, 
hypochondroplasia (HCH), and severe achondroplasia with developmental delay and 
acanthosis nigricans (SADDAN) are all due to activating mutations in the 
fibroblast growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) gene. We review the clinical, 
epidemiological, radiological, molecular aspects, and signaling pathways 
involved in these conditions. It is known that FGFR3 signaling is essential to 
regulate bone growth. The signal transducers and activators of transcription 
(STAT1) pathway is involved in the inhibition of chondrocyte proliferation, and 
the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways are involved in chondrocyte 
differentiation. Hence, FGFR3 signaling is pivotal in chondrocyte 
differentiation and proliferation through these two different active pathways. 
Recent studies on the molecular mechanisms involved in chondrocyte 
differentiation and proliferation, demonstrated that Snail1 participates in the 
control of longitudinal bone growth and appears to be essential to transduce 
FGFR3 signaling during chondrogenesis. This result was confirmed in a newborn 
infant with TD, and suggests new non-surgical therapeutic approaches, that is, 
Snail1 as a new encouraging therapeutic target.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33188
PMID: 20034074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]