---
reference_id: "PMID:36890292"
title: "Fertility and prognosis assessment between bleomycin/etoposide/cisplatin and paclitaxel/carboplatin chemotherapy regimens in the conservative treatment of malignant ovarian germ cell tumors: a multicenter and retrospective study."
authors:
- Chu R
- Liu P
- Chen J
- Cheng X
- Li K
- Che Y
- Wang J
- Li L
- Zhang X
- Yao S
- Song L
- Zhao Y
- Huang C
- Xue Y
- Pan X
- Li J
- Chen Z
- Jiang J
- Kong B
- Song K
journal: J Gynecol Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3802/jgo.2023.34.e12
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Pregnancy
- Young Adult
- Adult
- Cisplatin
- Etoposide
- Carboplatin
- Retrospective Studies
- Conservative Treatment
- Ovarian Neoplasms/surgery
- Bleomycin/adverse effects
- Prognosis
- "Neoplasms, Germ Cell and Embryonal/drug therapy, chemically induced"
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols
- Paclitaxel/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fertility and prognosis assessment between bleomycin/etoposide/cisplatin and paclitaxel/carboplatin chemotherapy regimens in the conservative treatment of malignant ovarian germ cell tumors: a multicenter and retrospective study.
**Authors:** Chu R, Liu P, Chen J, Cheng X, Li K, Che Y, Wang J, Li L, Zhang X, Yao S, Song L, Zhao Y, Huang C, Xue Y, Pan X, Li J, Chen Z, Jiang J, Kong B, Song K
**Journal:** J Gynecol Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3802/jgo.2023.34.e12](https://doi.org/10.3802/jgo.2023.34.e12)

## Content

1. J Gynecol Oncol. 2023 Mar;34(2):e12. doi: 10.3802/jgo.2023.34.e12.

Fertility and prognosis assessment between bleomycin/etoposide/cisplatin and 
paclitaxel/carboplatin chemotherapy regimens in the conservative treatment of 
malignant ovarian germ cell tumors: a multicenter and retrospective study.

Chu R(#)(1)(2), Liu P(#)(1), Chen J(#)(1)(2), Cheng X(#)(3), Li K(#)(4), Che 
Y(#)(5), Wang J(6), Li L(1), Zhang X(1), Yao S(1), Song L(1), Zhao Y(1), Huang 
C(1), Xue Y(1), Pan X(1), Li J(1), Chen Z(1), Jiang J(1)(2), Kong B(1)(2), Song 
K(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Qilu Hospital of Shandong 
University, Jinan, P.R. China.
(2)Gynecology Oncology Key Laboratory, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, 
Jinan, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Gynecologic Oncology, Women's Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical 
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, P.R. China.
(5)Department of Gynecology, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, 
Qingdao, P.R. China.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Peking University People's Hospital, 
Beijing, P.R. China.
(7)Gynecology Oncology Key Laboratory, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, 
Jinan, P.R. China. songkun2001226@sdu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the impact of bleomycin/etoposide/cisplatin (BEP) and 
paclitaxel/carboplatin (PC) chemotherapy regimens on the fertility and 
prognostic outcomes in malignant ovarian germ cell tumor (MOGCT) patients who 
underwent fertility-sparing surgery (FSS).
METHODS: A propensity score matching algorithm was performed between the BEP and 
PC groups. The χ² test and the Kaplan-Meier method were used to compare the 
fertility outcome, disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS). The 
Cox proportional hazards regression analysis was used to identify risk factor of 
DFS.
RESULTS: We included 213 patients, 185 (86.9%) underwent BEP chemotherapy, and 
28 (13.1%) underwent PC chemotherapy. The median age was 22 years (range, 8-44 
years), and the median follow-up period was 63 months (range, 2-191 months). 
Fifty-one (29.3%) patients had a pregnancy plan, and 35 (85.4%) delivered 
successfully. In the before and after propensity score matching cohorts, there 
were no significant differences in spontaneous abortion, selective termination 
of pregnancy, during-pregnancy status, and live birth between the BEP and PC 
groups (p>0.05). Fourteen (6.6%) patients experienced recurrence, including 11 
(5.9%) in the BEP group and 3 (10.7%) in the PC group. Four (1.9%) patients in 
the BEP group died. Kaplan-Meier analysis revealed no significant differences in 
DFS (p=0.328) and OS (p=0.446) between the BEP and PC groups, and the same 
survival results were observed in the after matching cohort.
CONCLUSION: The PC regimen is as safe as the BEP regimen for MOGCT patients with 
fertility preservation treatment, and no differences were observed in fertility 
and clinical prognosis.

© 2023. Asian Society of Gynecologic Oncology, Korean Society of Gynecologic 
Oncology, and Japan Society of Gynecologic Oncology.

DOI: 10.3802/jgo.2023.34.e12
PMCID: PMC9995871
PMID: 36890292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest relevant to 
this article was reported.