---
reference_id: "PMID:17149968"
title: Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor with rhabdomyosarcomatous differentiation (malignant triton tumor).
authors:
- Stasik CJ
- Tawfik O
journal: Arch Pathol Lab Med
year: '2006'
doi: 10.5858/2006-130-1878-MPNSTW
keywords:
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis"
- CD57 Antigens/analysis
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Myelin Basic Protein/analysis
- "Nerve Sheath Neoplasms/chemistry, pathology, surgery"
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma/chemistry, pathology, surgery"
- S100 Proteins/analysis
- "Soft Tissue Neoplasms/chemistry, pathology, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor with rhabdomyosarcomatous differentiation (malignant triton tumor).
**Authors:** Stasik CJ, Tawfik O
**Journal:** Arch Pathol Lab Med (2006)
**DOI:** [10.5858/2006-130-1878-MPNSTW](https://doi.org/10.5858/2006-130-1878-MPNSTW)

## Content

1. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2006 Dec;130(12):1878-81. doi:
10.5858/2006-130-1878-MPNSTW.

Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor with rhabdomyosarcomatous
differentiation (malignant triton tumor).

Stasik CJ(1), Tawfik O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Kansas Medical
Center, 3901 Rainbow Blvd, Kansas City, KS 66160-7410, USA. cstasik@kumc.edu

Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors arise from Schwann cells or within
existing neurofibromas and have a strong association with type 1
neurofibromatosis. These tumors are histologically diverse and may contain
malignant areas of divergent mesenchymal differentiation, the most common of
which is skeletal muscle (rhabdomyosarcoma). Malignant peripheral nerve sheath
tumor with rhabdomyosarcomatous differentiation is also known as malignant
triton tumor. Malignant triton tumor has a worse prognosis than classic
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor does, and the correct diagnosis requires
attention to the clinical history and knowledge of the complexities regarding
its differential diagnosis. In this review we discuss the clinical,
histopathological, immunohistochemical, and prognostic features of this rare
neoplasm.

DOI: 10.5858/2006-130-1878-MPNSTW
PMID: 17149968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
