---
reference_id: "PMID:28186390"
title: Pain management in the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes.
authors:
- Chopra P
- Tinkle B
- Hamonet C
- Brock I
- Gompel A
- Bulbena A
- Francomano C
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31554
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pain management in the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes.
**Authors:** Chopra P, Tinkle B, Hamonet C, Brock I, Gompel A, Bulbena A, Francomano C
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.31554](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.31554)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2017 Mar;175(1):212-219. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.c.31554. Epub 2017 Feb 10.

Pain management in the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes.

Chopra P, Tinkle B, Hamonet C, Brock I, Gompel A, Bulbena A, Francomano C.

Chronic pain in the Ehlers-Danlos syndromes (EDS) is common and may be severe. 
According to one study, nearly 90% of patients report some form of chronic pain. 
Pain, which is often one of the first symptoms to occur, may be widespread or 
localized to one region such as an arm or a leg. Studies on treatment modalities 
are few and insufficient to guide management. The following is a discussion of 
the evidence regarding the underlying mechanisms of pain in EDS. The causes of 
pain in this condition are multifactorial and include joint subluxations and 
dislocations, previous surgery, muscle weakness, proprioceptive disorders, and 
vertebral instability. Affected persons may also present with generalized body 
pain, fatigue, headaches, gastrointestinal pain, temporomandibular joint pain, 
dysmenorrhea, and vulvodynia. Pain management strategies may be focused around 
treating the cause of the pain (e.g., dislocation of a joint, proprioceptive 
disorder) and minimizing the sensation of pain. Management strategies for 
chronic pain in EDS includes physical therapy, medications, as well as durable 
medical equipment such as cushions, compressive garments, and braces. The 
different modalities are discussed in this paper. © 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31554
PMID: 28186390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]