---
reference_id: "PMID:40038803"
title: "Management of anophthalmia, microphthalmia and coloboma in the newborn, shared care between neonatologist and ophthalmologist: a literature review."
authors:
- Russo M
- Palmeri S
- Zucconi A
- Vagge A
- Arioni C
journal: Ital J Pediatr
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s13052-025-01882-3
keywords:
- Humans
- "Coloboma/therapy, diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- "Microphthalmos/therapy, diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- "Anophthalmos/therapy, diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Ophthalmology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of anophthalmia, microphthalmia and coloboma in the newborn, shared care between neonatologist and ophthalmologist: a literature review.
**Authors:** Russo M, Palmeri S, Zucconi A, Vagge A, Arioni C
**Journal:** Ital J Pediatr (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13052-025-01882-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13052-025-01882-3)

## Content

1. Ital J Pediatr. 2025 Mar 5;51(1):65. doi: 10.1186/s13052-025-01882-3.

Management of anophthalmia, microphthalmia and coloboma in the newborn, shared 
care between neonatologist and ophthalmologist: a literature review.

Russo M(1), Palmeri S(2), Zucconi A(2), Vagge A(3)(4)(5), Arioni C(6).

Author information:
(1)Operative Unit of Neonatology, IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Genoa, 
16132, Italy. monica.russo@hsanmartino.it.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics and 
Maternal and Child Sciences (DINOGMI), University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy.
(3)IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Genoa, Italy. aldo.vagge@unige.it.
(4)Clinica Oculistica, DINOGMI, Università di Genova, Genoa, Italy. 
aldo.vagge@unige.it.
(5)Fondazione Chiossone, Genoa, Italy. aldo.vagge@unige.it.
(6)Operative Unit of Neonatology, IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, Genoa, 
16132, Italy.

Congenital ocular anomalies significantly contribute to global disability, with 
15-20% of infant blindness attributed to these anomalies. This study examined 
anophthalmia, microphthalmia, and coloboma (AMC) through collaborative 
neonatology and ophthalmology care.The global prevalence of AMC varies: 
anophthalmia at 0.6-4.2 per 100,000 births and microphthalmia at 2-17 per 
100,000 births, with a combined prevalence of up to 30 per 100,000. The 
prevalence of coloboma, alone or associate with other eye defects is 2-19 per 
100,000 live births. Anophthalmia and microphthalmia may present as isolated or 
genetic syndromes, necessitating comprehensive evaluation. AMC etiology 
encompasses genetic and environmental factors. Chromosomal aberrations and 
mutations in genes such as PAX6, SOX2, OTX2, and CHD7 are contributors. 
Syndromic associations, such as CHARGE (heart defect, atresia choanae, retarded 
growth and development, genital hypoplasia, ear anomalies/deafness) syndrome, 
underscore the complexity of this syndrome. Early AMC diagnosis is pivotal for 
timely intervention. This work provides a literature review offering insights 
for effective management and genetic counseling in a pediatric context.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13052-025-01882-3
PMCID: PMC11881466
PMID: 40038803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: Ethical clearance for the publication of this review was obtained 
from the Regional Ethical Commitee at the data 20/12/2024. Registration Number 
CET - Liguria: 447/2024 - DB id 14236. Consent for publication: not applicable. 
Competing interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.