---
reference_id: "PMID:40898469"
title: "Clinical efficacy of selenium supplementation in patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Zhang H
- Yang Y
- Liu S
- Yang Y
- Liu Z
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000044043
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical efficacy of selenium supplementation in patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Zhang H, Yang Y, Liu S, Yang Y, Liu Z
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000044043](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000044043)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2025 Aug 29;104(35):e44043. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000044043.

Clinical efficacy of selenium supplementation in patients with Hashimoto 
thyroiditis: A systematic review and meta-analysis.

Zhang H(1), Yang Y(2), Liu S(3), Yang Y(4), Liu Z(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, General Hospital of The Yangtze 
River Shipping, Wuhan Brain Hospital, Wuhan, China.
(2)Eight-year Program of Clinical Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical 
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, Tianyou Hospital Affiliated to Wuhan University 
of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

BACKGROUND: To assess the clinical benefits of Selenium (Se) supplementation in 
patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis (HT).
METHODS: Eight databases were searched for randomized controlled trials. The 
outcomes of interest were thyroid peroxidase antibody (TPOAb), thyroglobulin 
antibody (TgAb), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), free triiodothyronine (FT3), 
and free thyroxine (FT4). The study protocol is registered on INPLASY, DOI 
number is 10.37766/inplasy2022.10.0085.
RESULTS: Twenty-one studies with a total of 1610 subjects were included. Serum 
TPOAb was significantly reduced after Se supplementation after 3 months 
(standardized mean difference [SMD] = -0.46, 95% confidence interval [CI]: -0.74 
to -0.18, P = .001) and 6 months (SMD = -0.80, 95%CI: -1.38 to -0.21, P = .008). 
The serum TgAb levels decreased at 3 months (SMD = -0.46, 95%CI: -0.79 to -0.12, 
P = .007) but not at 6 months. Significant effects on declining the TSH titers 
were found after 6 months (SMD = -0.18, 95%CI = -0.35 to -0.01; P = .03).
CONCLUSION: Se supplementation help reduce TPOAb and TSH levels in HT patients, 
leading to improvements in well-being or mood. Selenomethionine is more 
effective than NaSe and Se-yeast in the teatment of Hashimoto thyroid.

Copyright © 2025 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000044043
PMCID: PMC12401265
PMID: 40898469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.