---
reference_id: "PMID:40721285"
title: "Mycosis fungoides: a review."
authors:
- Sheern C
- Levell NJ
- Craig PJ
- Jeffrey P
- Mistry K
- Scorer MJ
- Venables ZC
journal: Clin Exp Dermatol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/ced/llaf341
keywords:
- Humans
- "Mycosis Fungoides/therapy, diagnosis, pathology, epidemiology"
- "Skin Neoplasms/therapy, diagnosis, pathology, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mycosis fungoides: a review.
**Authors:** Sheern C, Levell NJ, Craig PJ, Jeffrey P, Mistry K, Scorer MJ, Venables ZC
**Journal:** Clin Exp Dermatol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ced/llaf341](https://doi.org/10.1093/ced/llaf341)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Dermatol. 2025 Nov 25;50(12):2365-2375. doi: 10.1093/ced/llaf341.

Mycosis fungoides: a review.

Sheern C(1), Levell NJ(1)(2), Craig PJ(3), Jeffrey P(4), Mistry K(1)(2), Scorer
MJ(5), Venables ZC(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia, Norwich, UK.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital, Norwich,
UK.
(3)Cellular Pathology, North Bristol NHS Trust, Bristol, UK.
(4)National Disease Registration Service, NHS Digital, Leeds, UK.
(5)University Hospitals of Leicester, Leicester, UK.

Mycosis fungoides (MF) is the commonest subtype of cutaneous lymphoma,
characterized by the infiltration of malignant T-cell clones into the skin. It
accounts for approximately 60% of all cutaneous T-cell lymphoma diagnoses. MF
has three distinct clinical stages - patch, plaque and tumour - presenting most
commonly on the buttocks, trunk and breast. The presentation often mimics common
inflammatory dermatoses such as eczema and psoriasis. Despite numerous theories,
the aetiology of MF remains mostly unknown. Since its first description in 1806,
diagnosis has remained a challenge and requires careful clinicopathological
correlation. Patients may require multiple skin biopsies, especially at the
patch stage, to identify the characteristic epidermotropic infiltrates of
small-to-medium-sized lymphocytes. First-line management involves skin-directed
therapies such as topical corticosteroids and phototherapy. If these are
unsuccessful, systemic medications such as interferon-α, oral bexarotene,
methotrexate and novel antibody therapies are trialled. MF can also respond to
localized radiotherapy, total skin electron beam therapy and haematopoietic stem
cell transplantation. Despite being primarily a cutaneous lymphoma, MF can
progress to involve other organs. This review provides a comprehensive overview
of the epidemiology, clinical features, diagnosis and management of MF.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of British
Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1093/ced/llaf341
PMID: 40721285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: K.M. is Deputy Editor of
Clinical Experimental Dermatology. N.J.L. is a trustee of the British
Association of Dermatologists. The remaining authors declare no conflicts of
interest.
