---
reference_id: "PMID:11445803"
title: Inversion of the circadian rhythm of melatonin in the Smith-Magenis syndrome.
authors:
- De Leersnyder H
- De Blois MC
- Claustrat B
- Romana S
- Albrecht U
- Von Kleist-Retzow JC
- Delobel B
- Viot G
- Lyonnet S
- Vekemans M
- Munnich A
journal: J Pediatr
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1067/mpd.2001.115018
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Adolescent
- Case-Control Studies
- Child
- Child Behavior Disorders/genetics
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17"
- Circadian Rhythm
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Humans
- Male
- Melatonin/metabolism
- Mutation
- Sleep Wake Disorders/genetics
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inversion of the circadian rhythm of melatonin in the Smith-Magenis syndrome.
**Authors:** De Leersnyder H, De Blois MC, Claustrat B, Romana S, Albrecht U, Von Kleist-Retzow JC, Delobel B, Viot G, Lyonnet S, Vekemans M, Munnich A
**Journal:** J Pediatr (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1067/mpd.2001.115018](https://doi.org/10.1067/mpd.2001.115018)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 2001 Jul;139(1):111-6. doi: 10.1067/mpd.2001.115018.

Inversion of the circadian rhythm of melatonin in the Smith-Magenis syndrome.

De Leersnyder H(1), De Blois MC, Claustrat B, Romana S, Albrecht U, Von 
Kleist-Retzow JC, Delobel B, Viot G, Lyonnet S, Vekemans M, Munnich A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Unité INSERM 393, Hôpital des Enfants-Malades, 
Paris, France.

OBJECTIVE: The objective was to determine the circadian rhythm of melatonin in 
the Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS), which causes behavioral problems and sleep 
disturbance.
STUDY DESIGN: Questionnaires, sleep consultations, and sleep diaries were 
obtained in 20 children with SMS (9 girls, 11 boys aged 4 to 17 years). 
Actigraphy, electroencephalography, and the circadian variations of plasma 
melatonin, cortisol, and growth hormone were recorded in 8 patients. Early sleep 
onset, early sleep offset, and sleep attack indicated sleep disturbance.
RESULTS: All children with SMS had a phase shift of their circadian rhythm of 
melatonin. Time at onset of melatonin secretion was 6 AM +/- 2 (control group: 9 
P.M. +/- 2). Peak time was 12 PM +/- 1 (control group: 3:30 AM +/- 1:30), and 
melatonin offset was at 8 PM +/- 1 (control group: 6 AM +/- 1). Behavioral 
problems correlated with the inverted circadian rhythm of melatonin.
CONCLUSION: Considering that clock genes mediate the generation of circadian 
rhythms, we suggest that haploinsufficiency for a circadian system gene mapping 
to chromosome 17p11.2 may cause the inversion of the circadian rhythm of 
melatonin in SMS.

DOI: 10.1067/mpd.2001.115018
PMID: 11445803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]