---
reference_id: "PMID:38346808"
title: Advances in diagnosis and treatment of bladder cancer.
authors:
- Lopez-Beltran A
- Cookson MS
- Guercio BJ
- Cheng L
journal: BMJ
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1136/bmj-2023-076743
keywords:
- Humans
- Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors
- Quality of Life
- Non-Muscle Invasive Bladder Neoplasms
- "Urinary Bladder Neoplasms/diagnosis, therapy"
- Immunotherapy
- Cystectomy
- Neoplasm Invasiveness
- BCG Vaccine
- Tumor Microenvironment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Advances in diagnosis and treatment of bladder cancer.
**Authors:** Lopez-Beltran A, Cookson MS, Guercio BJ, Cheng L
**Journal:** BMJ (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bmj-2023-076743](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj-2023-076743)

## Content

1. BMJ. 2024 Feb 12;384:e076743. doi: 10.1136/bmj-2023-076743.

Advances in diagnosis and treatment of bladder cancer.

Lopez-Beltran A(1), Cookson MS(2), Guercio BJ(3), Cheng L(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Morphological Sciences, Unit of Anatomic Pathology, University 
of Cordoba Medical School, Cordoba, Spain em1lobea@gmail.com 
liang_cheng@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Urology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center and the 
Stephenson Cancer Center, Oklahoma City, OK, US.
(3)Department of Medicine, James P. Wilmot Cancer Institute, University of 
Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, US.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Department of Surgery 
(Urology), Brown University, Providence, RI, US em1lobea@gmail.com 
liang_cheng@yahoo.com.
(5)Legorreta Cancer Center, Brown University.
(6)Lifespan Health Care System, Brown University.

Bladder cancer remains a leading cause of cancer death worldwide and is 
associated with substantial impacts on patient quality of life, morbidity, 
mortality, and cost to the healthcare system. Gross hematuria frequently 
precedes the diagnosis of bladder cancer. Non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer 
(NMIBC) is managed initially with transurethral resection of a bladder tumor 
(TURBT), followed by a risk stratified approach to adjuvant intravesical therapy 
(IVe), and is associated with an overall survival of 90%. However, cure rates 
remain lower for muscle invasive bladder cancer (MIBC) owing to a variety of 
factors. NMIBC and MIBC groupings are heterogeneous and have unique pathological 
and molecular characteristics. Indeed, The Cancer Genome Atlas project 
identified genetic drivers and luminal and basal molecular subtypes of MIBC with 
distinct treatment responses. For NMIBC, IVe immunotherapy (primarily BCG) is 
the gold standard treatment for high grade and high risk NMIBC to reduce or 
prevent both recurrence and progression after initial TURBT; novel trials 
incorporate immune checkpoint inhibitors. IVe gene therapy and combination IVe 
chemotherapy have recently been completed, with promising results. For localized 
MIBC, essential goals are improving care and reducing morbidity following 
cystectomy or bladder preserving strategies. In metastatic disease, advances in 
understanding of the genomic landscape and tumor microenvironment have led to 
the implementation of immune checkpoint inhibitors, targeted treatments, and 
antibody-drug conjugates. Defining better selection criteria to identify the 
patients most likely to benefit from a specific treatment is an urgent need.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj-2023-076743
PMID: 38346808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: We have read and understood 
the BMJ policy on declaration of interests and declare the following interests: 
None.