---
reference_id: "PMID:10987711"
title: "Cutaneous larva migrans in travelers: a prospective study, with assessment of therapy with ivermectin."
authors:
- Bouchaud O
- Houzé S
- Schiemann R
- Durand R
- Ralaimazava P
- Ruggeri C
- Coulaud JP
journal: Clin Infect Dis
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1086/313942
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Ancylostomiasis/drug therapy, epidemiology, parasitology"
- Animals
- Antinematodal Agents/therapeutic use
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Ivermectin/therapeutic use
- "Larva Migrans/drug therapy, epidemiology, parasitology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prospective Studies
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- Travel
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cutaneous larva migrans in travelers: a prospective study, with assessment of therapy with ivermectin.
**Authors:** Bouchaud O, Houzé S, Schiemann R, Durand R, Ralaimazava P, Ruggeri C, Coulaud JP
**Journal:** Clin Infect Dis (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1086/313942](https://doi.org/10.1086/313942)

## Content

1. Clin Infect Dis. 2000 Aug;31(2):493-8. doi: 10.1086/313942. Epub 2000 Sep 7.

Cutaneous larva migrans in travelers: a prospective study, with assessment of 
therapy with ivermectin.

Bouchaud O(1), Houzé S, Schiemann R, Durand R, Ralaimazava P, Ruggeri C, Coulaud 
JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, Hôpital Bichat Claude 
Bernard, Paris, France. olivier.bouchaud@bch.ap-hop-paris.fr

Erratum in
    Clin Infect Dis 2001 Feb 1;32(3):523.

The purpose of this prospective study was to update epidemiological data on 
cutaneous larva migrans (CLM) and to assess the therapeutic efficacy of 
ivermectin. We performed the study between June 1994 and December 1998 at our 
travel clinic. Ivermectin (a single dose of 200 microg/kg) was offered to all 
the patients with CLM, and its efficacy and tolerability were assessed by a 
questionnaire. Sixty-four patients were enrolled. All were European and had 
stayed in tropical areas. After the patients had returned from their 
destinations, 55% had lesions occur within a mean of 16 days (range, 1-120 days; 
>1 month in 7 patients). The initial diagnosis was wrong in 55% of patients. The 
mean number of lesions was 3 (range, 1-15), and the main sites were the feet 
(48%) and buttocks (23%). The cure rate after a single dose of ivermectin was 
77%. In 14 patients, 1 or 2 supplementary doses were necessary, and the overall 
cure rate was 97%. The median time required for pruritus and lesions to 
disappear was 3 and 7 days, respectively. No systemic adverse effects were 
reported. Physicians' knowledge of CLM, which can have a long incubation period, 
is poor. Single-dose ivermectin therapy appears to be effective and well 
tolerated, even if several treatments are sometimes necessary.

DOI: 10.1086/313942
PMID: 10987711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]