---
reference_id: "PMID:1571812"
title: Asthma, inflammation, eosinophils and bronchial hyperresponsiveness.
authors:
- Smith H
journal: Clin Exp Allergy
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.1992.tb03072.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Asthma, inflammation, eosinophils and bronchial hyperresponsiveness.
**Authors:** Smith H
**Journal:** Clin Exp Allergy (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2222.1992.tb03072.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2222.1992.tb03072.x)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Allergy. 1992 Feb;22(2):187-97. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2222.1992.tb03072.x.

Asthma, inflammation, eosinophils and bronchial hyperresponsiveness.

Smith H(1).

Author information:
(1)SmithKline Beecham Pharmaceuticals, Epsom, Surrey, U.K.

Asthmatics can have a blood eosinophilia which in some studies correlates with 
the severity of the disease. However, an increased number and percentage of 
activated eosinophils can be present in the blood without asthma. The 
eosinophils that contribute to asthma will be those in the lung. In the BAL 
fluids collected from asthmatics there is usually no change in total cell 
number, but there are changes in the differential cell count. A consistent 
finding is an increase in percentage of mast cells and eosinophils with a 
tendency for an increase in lymphocytes and epithelial cells and a decrease in 
percentage of macrophages. As with the blood eosinophilia, an increase in number 
of eosinophils can be present in BAL fluids without asthma. The site of 
localization and activation of the eosinophils in the lung may be critical. In 
bronchial biopsies, taken from asthmatics, increased number of mast cells, 
eosinophils and lymphocytes have been demonstrated in the bronchial mucosa 
together with shedding of columnar epithelial cells. However these changes have 
not been found, or have not reached significance, in all studies. An increase in 
number of activated eosinophils and T-lymphocytes has been demonstrated but an 
increase in number of degranulating mast cells has been disputed. A consistent 
finding has been thickening below the basement membrane. Attempts to correlate 
the changes in the BAL or lung biopsies with the severity of asthma, lung 
airways function or bronchial responsiveness have given inconsistent results. 
Treatment of asthmatics with inhaled steroids can reduce the cellular 
infiltration in the bronchial biopsies to normal levels but this produces a 
trivial reduction in bronchial responsiveness. It is possible that infiltration 
of inflammatory cells into the bronchial mucosa is intermittent, at least in 
mild asthma, but this produces changes leading to a long lasting bronchial 
hyperresponsiveness.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2222.1992.tb03072.x
PMID: 1571812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]