---
reference_id: "PMID:34880079"
title: Comprehensive Genomic Profiling of Neuroendocrine Carcinomas of the Gastrointestinal System.
authors:
- Yachida S
- Totoki Y
- Noë M
- Nakatani Y
- Horie M
- Kawasaki K
- Nakamura H
- Saito-Adachi M
- Suzuki M
- Takai E
- Hama N
- Higuchi R
- Hirono S
- Shiba S
- Kato M
- Furukawa E
- Arai Y
- Rokutan H
- Hashimoto T
- Mitsunaga S
- Kanda M
- Tanaka H
- Takata S
- Shimomura A
- Oshima M
- Hackeng WM
- Okumura T
- Okano K
- Yamamoto M
- Yamaue H
- Morizane C
- Arihiro K
- Furukawa T
- Sato T
- Kiyono T
- Brosens LAA
- Wood LD
- Hruban RH
- Shibata T
journal: Cancer Discov
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-21-0669
keywords:
- "Carcinoma, Neuroendocrine/genetics"
- Exome
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Neuroendocrine Tumors/genetics, pathology"
- Pancreas/pathology
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comprehensive Genomic Profiling of Neuroendocrine Carcinomas of the Gastrointestinal System.
**Authors:** Yachida S, Totoki Y, Noë M, Nakatani Y, Horie M, Kawasaki K, Nakamura H, Saito-Adachi M, Suzuki M, Takai E, Hama N, Higuchi R, Hirono S, Shiba S, Kato M, Furukawa E, Arai Y, Rokutan H, Hashimoto T, Mitsunaga S, Kanda M, Tanaka H, Takata S, Shimomura A, Oshima M, Hackeng WM, Okumura T, Okano K, Yamamoto M, Yamaue H, Morizane C, Arihiro K, Furukawa T, Sato T, Kiyono T, Brosens LAA, Wood LD, Hruban RH, Shibata T
**Journal:** Cancer Discov (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1158/2159-8290.CD-21-0669](https://doi.org/10.1158/2159-8290.CD-21-0669)

## Content

1. Cancer Discov. 2022 Mar 1;12(3):692-711. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-21-0669.

Comprehensive Genomic Profiling of Neuroendocrine Carcinomas of the 
Gastrointestinal System.

Yachida S(#)(1)(2)(3), Totoki Y(#)(4), Noë M(#)(5)(6), Nakatani Y(#)(1), Horie 
M(#)(1), Kawasaki K(7), Nakamura H(4), Saito-Adachi M(4), Suzuki M(1), Takai 
E(1), Hama N(4), Higuchi R(8), Hirono S(9), Shiba S(4), Kato M(10), Furukawa 
E(10), Arai Y(4), Rokutan H(4), Hashimoto T(11), Mitsunaga S(12), Kanda M(13), 
Tanaka H(1), Takata S(1), Shimomura A(14), Oshima M(14), Hackeng WM(15), Okumura 
T(16), Okano K(14), Yamamoto M(8), Yamaue H(9), Morizane C(17), Arihiro K(18), 
Furukawa T(19), Sato T(7), Kiyono T(20), Brosens LAA(15), Wood LD(5)(6), Hruban 
RH(5)(6), Shibata T(4)(21).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Genome Informatics, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 
University, Osaka, Japan.
(2)Integrated Frontier Research for Medical Science Division, Institute for Open 
and Transdisciplinary Research Initiatives (OTRI), Osaka University, Osaka, 
Japan.
(3)Division of Genomic Medicine, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Division of Cancer Genomics, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Sol Goldman Pancreatic Cancer Research Center, Department of Pathology, Johns 
Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland.
(6)Sol Goldman Pancreatic Cancer Research Center, Department of Oncology, Johns 
Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland.
(7)Department of Organoid Medicine, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(8)Department of Surgery, Institute of Gastroenterology, Tokyo Women's Medical 
University, Tokyo, Japan.
(9)Second Department of Surgery, Wakayama Medical University, Wakayama, Japan.
(10)Department of Bioinformatics, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(11)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(12)Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Oncology, National Cancer Center 
Hospital East, Chiba, Japan.
(13)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery (Surgery II), Nagoya University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Aichi, Japan.
(14)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Kagawa 
University, Kagawa, Japan.
(15)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht 
University, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(16)Department of Surgery and Science, Faculty of Medicine, Academic Assembly, 
University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan.
(17)Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Oncology, National Cancer Center 
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(18)Department of Anatomical Pathology, Hiroshima University Hospital, 
Hiroshima, Japan.
(19)Department of Investigative Pathology, Tohoku University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Miyagi, Japan.
(20)Project for Prevention of HPV-Related Cancer, Exploratory Oncology Research 
and Clinical Trial Center, National Cancer Center, Chiba, Japan.
(21)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical 
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(#)Contributed equally

Comment in
    Cancer Discov. 12:587.
    Cancer Discov. 12:587.

The neuroendocrine carcinoma of the gastrointestinal system (GIS-NEC) is a rare 
but highly malignant neoplasm. We analyzed 115 cases using whole-genome/exome 
sequencing, transcriptome sequencing, DNA methylation assays, and/or ATAC-seq 
and found GIS-NECs to be genetically distinct from neuroendocrine tumors 
(GIS-NET) in the same location. Clear genomic differences were also evident 
between pancreatic NECs (Panc-NEC) and nonpancreatic GIS-NECs (Nonpanc-NEC). 
Panc-NECs could be classified into two subgroups (i.e., "ductal-type" and 
"acinar-type") based on genomic features. Alterations in TP53 and RB1 proved 
common in GIS-NECs, and most Nonpanc-NECs with intact RB1 demonstrated mutually 
exclusive amplification of CCNE1 or MYC. Alterations of the Notch gene family 
were characteristic of Nonpanc-NECs. Transcription factors for neuroendocrine 
differentiation, especially the SOX2 gene, appeared overexpressed in most 
GIS-NECs due to hypermethylation of the promoter region. This first 
comprehensive study of genomic alterations in GIS-NECs uncovered several key 
biological processes underlying genesis of this very lethal form of cancer.
SIGNIFICANCE: GIS-NECs are genetically distinct from GIS-NETs. GIS-NECs arising 
in different organs show similar histopathologic features and share some genomic 
features, but considerable differences exist between Panc-NECs and Nonpanc-NECs. 
In addition, Panc-NECs could be classified into two subgroups (i.e., 
"ductal-type" and "acinar-type") based on genomic and epigenomic features. This 
article is highlighted in the In This Issue feature, p. 587.

©2021 The Authors; Published by the American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-21-0669
PMCID: PMC9394397
PMID: 34880079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]