---
reference_id: "PMID:38294851"
title: The p24-family and COPII subunit SEC24C facilitate the clearance of alpha1-antitrypsin Z from the endoplasmic reticulum to lysosomes.
authors:
- Roberts BS
- Mitra D
- Abishek S
- Beher R
- Satpute-Krishnan P
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1091/mbc.E23-06-0257
keywords:
- Calnexin/metabolism
- Endoplasmic Reticulum-Associated Degradation
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The p24-family and COPII subunit SEC24C facilitate the clearance of alpha1-antitrypsin Z from the endoplasmic reticulum to lysosomes.
**Authors:** Roberts BS, Mitra D, Abishek S, Beher R, Satpute-Krishnan P
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.E23-06-0257](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.E23-06-0257)

## Content

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2024 Mar 1;35(3):ar45. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E23-06-0257. Epub 2024
Jan 31.

The p24-family and COPII subunit SEC24C facilitate the clearance of
alpha1-antitrypsin Z from the endoplasmic reticulum to lysosomes.

Roberts BS(1), Mitra D(1), Abishek S(1), Beher R(1), Satpute-Krishnan P(1).

Author information:
(1)Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD 20814.

A subpopulation of the alpha-1-antitrypsin misfolding Z mutant (ATZ) is cleared
from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) via an ER-to-lysosome-associated degradation
(ERLAD) pathway. Here, we report that the COPII subunit SEC24C and the
p24-family of proteins facilitate the clearance of ATZ via ERLAD. In addition to
the previously reported ERLAD components calnexin and FAM134B, we discovered
that ATZ coimmunoprecipitates with the p24-family members TMP21 and TMED9. This
contrasts with wild type alpha1-antitrypsin, which did not coimmunoprecipitate
with FAM134B, calnexin or the p24-family members. Live-cell imaging revealed
that ATZ and the p24-family members traffic together from the ER to lysosomes.
Using chemical inhibitors to block ER exit or autophagy, we demonstrated that
p24-family members and ATZ co-accumulate at SEC24C marked ER-exit sites or in
ER-derived compartments, respectively. Furthermore, depletion of SEC24C, TMP21,
or TMED9 inhibited lysosomal trafficking of ATZ and resulted in the increase of
intracellular ATZ levels. Conversely, overexpression of these p24-family members
resulted in the reduction of ATZ levels. Intriguingly, the p24-family members
coimmunoprecipitate with ATZ, FAM134B, and SEC24C. Thus, we propose a model in
which the p24-family functions in an adaptor complex linking SEC24C with the
ERLAD machinery for the clearance of ATZ.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E23-06-0257
PMCID: PMC10916869
PMID: 38294851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
