---
reference_id: "PMID:38441807"
title: "Adult-Onset Still's Disease (AOSD): Advances in Understanding Pathophysiology, Genetics and Emerging Treatment Options."
authors:
- Bindoli S
- Baggio C
- Doria A
- Sfriso P
journal: Drugs
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s40265-024-01993-x
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- Humans
- "Still's Disease, Adult-Onset/drug therapy"
- Antirheumatic Agents/therapeutic use
- Cytokines
- Interleukin-1/therapeutic use
- Fever/drug therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adult-Onset Still's Disease (AOSD): Advances in Understanding Pathophysiology, Genetics and Emerging Treatment Options.
**Authors:** Bindoli S, Baggio C, Doria A, Sfriso P
**Journal:** Drugs (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40265-024-01993-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40265-024-01993-x)

## Content

1. Drugs. 2024 Mar;84(3):257-274. doi: 10.1007/s40265-024-01993-x. Epub 2024 Mar
5.

Adult-Onset Still's Disease (AOSD): Advances in Understanding Pathophysiology, 
Genetics and Emerging Treatment Options.

Bindoli S(1), Baggio C(1), Doria A(1), Sfriso P(2).

Author information:
(1)Rheumatology Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Padova, Via 
Giustiniani, 2, 35128, Padua, Italy.
(2)Rheumatology Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Padova, Via 
Giustiniani, 2, 35128, Padua, Italy. paolo.sfriso@unipd.it.

Adult-onset Still's disease (AOSD) is a multisystemic complex disorder 
clinically characterised by episodes of spiking fever, evanescent rash, 
polyarthritis or diffuse arthralgias; multiorgan involvement may develop 
according to the hyper-inflammatory extent. The pathogenesis of AOSD is not 
completely recognised. The central role of macrophage activation, which results 
in T helper 1 (Th1) cell cytokine activation, is well established. 
Pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin (IL)-1, IL-6 and IL-18 play a 
fundamental role in disease onset and progression. The disease may develop in 
both children and adults with overlapping clinical features, and although 
several subsets depending on the clinical manifestations and the cytokines 
expressed have been identified, the dichotomy between systemic juvenile 
idiopathic arthritis (sJIA) and AOSD nowadays has been overcome, and the 
pathology is considered a disease continuum between ages. Various therapeutic 
approaches have been evaluated thus far, and different compounds are under 
assessment for AOSD treatment. Historically, glucocorticoids have been employed 
for treating systemic manifestations of Still's disease, while conventional 
synthetic disease modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (csDMARDs) demonstrated 
efficacy in controlling the articular manifestations. Currently, biological (b) 
DMARDs are widely employed; IL-1 inhibitors such as anakinra and canakinumab 
have proven to have high efficacy and an excellent safety profile and the 
anti-IL-6 tocilizumab is approved for sJIA, with several trials and longitudinal 
studies confirming its efficacy and safety. Moreover, in the light of the 
'window of opportunity', new evidence showed that the earlier these treatments 
are initiated, the sooner clinical inactivity can be achieved. Other treatment 
options are being considered since several molecules involved in the disease 
pathophysiology can be targeted through various mechanisms. This review will 
provide a broad overview of AOSD pathophysiology, insights into specific organ 
manifestations and the currently available treatments with the identification of 
potential therapeutic targets involved in AOSD pathogenesis will be outlined.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-024-01993-x
PMCID: PMC10982104
PMID: 38441807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We have no conflicts of interest to declare.