---
reference_id: "PMID:36654005"
title: The backward bifurcation of an age-structured cholera transmission model with saturation incidence.
authors:
- Liu Z
- Jin Z
- Yang J
- Zhang J
journal: Math Biosci Eng
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3934/mbe.2022580
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The backward bifurcation of an age-structured cholera transmission model with saturation incidence.
**Authors:** Liu Z, Jin Z, Yang J, Zhang J
**Journal:** Math Biosci Eng (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3934/mbe.2022580](https://doi.org/10.3934/mbe.2022580)

## Content

1. Math Biosci Eng. 2022 Aug 25;19(12):12427-12447. doi: 10.3934/mbe.2022580.

The backward bifurcation of an age-structured cholera transmission model with 
saturation incidence.

Liu Z(1)(2), Jin Z(2)(3), Yang J(2)(3), Zhang J(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Data Science and Technology, North University of China, Taiyuan 
030051, Shanxi, China.
(2)Complex Systems Research Center, Shanxi University, Taiyuan 030006, Shanxi, 
China.
(3)Shanxi Key Laboratory of Mathematical Techniques and Big Data Analysis on 
Disease Control and Prevention, Shanxi University, Taiyuan 030006, China.

In this paper, we consider an age-structured cholera model with saturation 
incidence, vaccination age of vaccinated individuals, infection age of infected 
individuals, and biological age of pathogens. First, the basic reproduction 
number is calculated. When the basic reproduction number is less than one, the 
disease-free equilibrium is locally stable. Further, the existence of backward 
bifurcation of the model is obtained. Numerically, we also compared the effects 
of various control measures, including basic control measures and vaccination, 
on the number of infected individuals.

DOI: 10.3934/mbe.2022580
PMID: 36654005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]