---
reference_id: "PMID:34539327"
title: "Identification of Phonology-Related Genes and Functional Characterization of Broca's and Wernicke's Regions in Language and Learning Disorders."
authors:
- Unger N
- Heim S
- Hilger DI
- Bludau S
- Pieperhoff P
- Cichon S
- Amunts K
- Mühleisen TW
journal: Front Neurosci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2021.680762
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of Phonology-Related Genes and Functional Characterization of Broca's and Wernicke's Regions in Language and Learning Disorders.
**Authors:** Unger N, Heim S, Hilger DI, Bludau S, Pieperhoff P, Cichon S, Amunts K, Mühleisen TW
**Journal:** Front Neurosci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnins.2021.680762](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2021.680762)

## Content

1. Front Neurosci. 2021 Sep 3;15:680762. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2021.680762. 
eCollection 2021.

Identification of Phonology-Related Genes and Functional Characterization of 
Broca's and Wernicke's Regions in Language and Learning Disorders.

Unger N(1)(2)(3), Heim S(2)(4)(5), Hilger DI(2), Bludau S(2), Pieperhoff P(2), 
Cichon S(2)(6)(7), Amunts K(1)(2)(5), Mühleisen TW(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Cécile and Oskar Vogt Institute for Brain Research, Medical Faculty, 
University Hospital Düsseldorf, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, 
Düsseldorf, Germany.
(2)Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Research Centre Jülich, 
Jülich, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, Medical Faculty, 
RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.
(5)JARA-Brain, Jülich-Aachen Research Alliance, Jülich, Germany.
(6)Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(7)Institute of Medical Genetics and Pathology, University Hospital Basel, 
Basel, Switzerland.

Impaired phonological processing is a leading symptom of multifactorial language 
and learning disorders suggesting a common biological basis. Here we evaluated 
studies of dyslexia, dyscalculia, specific language impairment (SLI), and the 
logopenic variant of primary progressive aphasia (lvPPA) seeking for shared risk 
genes in Broca's and Wernicke's regions, being key for phonological processing 
within the complex language network. The identified "phonology-related genes" 
from literature were functionally characterized using Atlas-based expression 
mapping (JuGEx) and gene set enrichment. Out of 643 publications from the last 
decade until now, we extracted 21 candidate genes of which 13 overlapped with 
dyslexia and SLI, six with dyslexia and dyscalculia, and two with dyslexia, 
dyscalculia, and SLI. No overlap was observed between the childhood disorders 
and the late-onset lvPPA often showing symptoms of learning disorders earlier in 
life. Multiple genes were enriched in Gene Ontology terms of the topics learning 
(CNTNAP2, CYFIP1, DCDC2, DNAAF4, FOXP2) and neuronal development (CCDC136, 
CNTNAP2, CYFIP1, DCDC2, KIAA0319, RBFOX2, ROBO1). Twelve genes showed 
above-average expression across both regions indicating moderate-to-high gene 
activity in the investigated cortical part of the language network. Of these, 
three genes were differentially expressed suggesting potential regional 
specializations: ATP2C2 was upregulated in Broca's region, while DNAAF4 and 
FOXP2 were upregulated in Wernicke's region. ATP2C2 encodes a 
magnesium-dependent calcium transporter which fits with reports about disturbed 
calcium and magnesium levels for dyslexia and other communication disorders. 
DNAAF4 (formerly known as DYX1C1) is involved in neuronal migration supporting 
the hypothesis of disturbed migration in dyslexia. FOXP2 is a transcription 
factor that regulates a number of genes involved in development of speech and 
language. Overall, our interdisciplinary and multi-tiered approach provided 
evidence that genetic and transcriptional variation of ATP2C2, DNAAF4, and FOXP2 
may play a role in physiological and pathological aspects of phonological 
processing.

Copyright © 2021 Unger, Heim, Hilger, Bludau, Pieperhoff, Cichon, Amunts and 
Mühleisen.

DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2021.680762
PMCID: PMC8446646
PMID: 34539327

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.