---
reference_id: "PMID:11869818"
title: Chronic arsenic poisoning.
authors:
- Hall AH
journal: Toxicol Lett
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/s0378-4274(01)00534-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic arsenic poisoning.
**Authors:** Hall AH
**Journal:** Toxicol Lett (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0378-4274(01)00534-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0378-4274(01)00534-3)

## Content

1. Toxicol Lett. 2002 Mar 10;128(1-3):69-72. doi: 10.1016/s0378-4274(01)00534-3.

Chronic arsenic poisoning.

Hall AH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Division of Toxicology, Texas Tech 
University Health Sciences Center-El Paso, El Paso, TX, USA. ahall@elp.rr.com

Symptomatic arsenic poisoning is not often seen in occupational exposure 
settings. Attempted homicide and deliberate long-term poisoning have resulted in 
chronic toxicity. Skin pigmentation changes, palmar and plantar hyperkeratoses, 
gastrointestinal symptoms, anemia, and liver disease are common. Noncirrhotic 
portal hypertension with bleeding esophageal varices, splenomegaly, and 
hypersplenism may occur. A metallic taste, gastrointestinal disturbances, and 
Mee's lines may be seen. Bone marrow depression is common. 'Blackfoot disease' 
has been associated with arsenic-contaminated drinking water in Taiwan; 
Raynaud's phenomenon and acrocyanosis also may occur. Large numbers of persons 
in areas of India, Pakistan, and several other countries have been chronically 
poisoned from naturally occurring arsenic in ground water. Toxic delirium and 
encephalopathy can be present. CCA-treated wood (chromated copper arsenate) is 
not a health risk unless burned in fireplaces or woodstoves. Peripheral 
neuropathy may also occur. Workplace exposure or chronic ingestion of 
arsenic-contaminated water or arsenical medications is associated with 
development of skin, lung, and other cancers. Treatment may incklude the use of 
chelating agents such as dimercaprol (BAL), dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA), and 
dimercaptopanesulfonic acid (DMPS).

DOI: 10.1016/s0378-4274(01)00534-3
PMID: 11869818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]