---
reference_id: "PMID:24582715"
title: "New insights into the mechanism of neurolathyrism: L-β-ODAP triggers [Ca2+]i accumulation and cell death in primary motor neurons through transient receptor potential channels and metabotropic glutamate receptors."
authors:
- Kusama-Eguchi K
- Miyano T
- Yamamoto M
- Suda A
- Ito Y
- Ishige K
- Ishii M
- Ogawa Y
- Watanabe K
- Ikegami F
- Kusama T
journal: Food Chem Toxicol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2014.02.021
keywords:
- Animals
- Calcium/metabolism
- Cell Death/drug effects
- Female
- "Lathyrism/chemically induced, metabolism, pathology"
- "Motor Neurons/cytology, drug effects"
- Pregnancy
- Rats
- "Rats, Wistar"
- "Receptors, Metabotropic Glutamate/metabolism"
- Transient Receptor Potential Channels/metabolism
- "beta-Alanine/analogs & derivatives, toxicity"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New insights into the mechanism of neurolathyrism: L-β-ODAP triggers [Ca2+]i accumulation and cell death in primary motor neurons through transient receptor potential channels and metabotropic glutamate receptors.
**Authors:** Kusama-Eguchi K, Miyano T, Yamamoto M, Suda A, Ito Y, Ishige K, Ishii M, Ogawa Y, Watanabe K, Ikegami F, Kusama T
**Journal:** Food Chem Toxicol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.fct.2014.02.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fct.2014.02.021)

## Content

1. Food Chem Toxicol. 2014 May;67:113-22. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2014.02.021. Epub
2014  Feb 25.

New insights into the mechanism of neurolathyrism: L-β-ODAP triggers [Ca2+]i 
accumulation and cell death in primary motor neurons through transient receptor 
potential channels and metabotropic glutamate receptors.

Kusama-Eguchi K(1), Miyano T(2), Yamamoto M(3), Suda A(2), Ito Y(4), Ishige 
K(4), Ishii M(5), Ogawa Y(2), Watanabe K(2), Ikegami F(6), Kusama T(7).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, School of Pharmacy, Nihon University, 
Narashinodai 7-7-1, Funabashi 274-8555, Japan; Laboratory of Molecular Cell 
Biology, School of Pharmacy, Nihon University, Narashinodai 7-7-1, Funabashi 
274-8555, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, School of Pharmacy, Nihon University, 
Narashinodai 7-7-1, Funabashi 274-8555, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, School of Pharmacy, Nihon University, 
Narashinodai 7-7-1, Funabashi 274-8555, Japan; Laboratory of Pharmacology, 
School of Pharmacy, Nihon University, Narashinodai 7-7-1, Funabashi 274-8555, 
Japan.
(4)Laboratory of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Nihon University, 
Narashinodai 7-7-1, Funabashi 274-8555, Japan.
(5)Laboratory of Biochemistry, School of Pharmacy, Nihon University, 
Narashinodai 7-7-1, Funabashi 274-8555, Japan.
(6)Center for Environment, Health and Field Sciences, Chiba University, 
Kashiwanoha 6-2-1, Kashiwa 277-0822, Japan.
(7)Laboratory of Physiology and Anatomy, School of Pharmacy, Nihon University, 
Narashinodai 7-7-1, Funabashi 274-8555, Japan.

Neurolathyrism is a motor neuron (MN) disease caused by 
β-N-oxalyl-L-α,β-diaminopropionic acid (L-β-ODAP), an AMPA receptor agonist. 
L-β-ODAP caused a prolonged rise of intracellular Ca(2+) ([Ca(2+)]i) in rat 
spinal cord MNs, and the [Ca(2+)]i accumulation was inversely proportional to 
the MN's life span. The [Ca(2+)]i rise induced by L-β-ODAP or (S)-AMPA was 
antagonized completely by NBQX, an AMPA-receptor blocker. However, blocking the 
L-type Ca(2+) channel with nifedipine significantly lowered [Ca(2+)]i induced by 
(S)-AMPA, but not that by L-β-ODAP. Tetrodotoxin completely extinguished the 
[Ca(2+)]i rise induced by (S)-AMPA or kainic acid, whereas that induced by 
L-β-ODAP was only attenuated by 65.6±6% indicating the prominent involvement of 
voltage-independent Ca(2+) entry. The tetrodotoxin-resistant [Ca(2+)]i induced 
by L-β-ODAP was blocked by 2-APB, Gd(3+), La(3+), 
1-(β-[3-(4-methoxy-phenyl)propoxy]-4-methoxyphenethyl)-1H-imidazole 
hydrochloride (SKF-96365) and flufenamic acid, which all are blockers of the 
transient receptor potential (TRP) channels. Blockers of group I metabotropic 
glutamate receptors (mGluR I), 
7-(hydroxyiminocyclopropan[b]chromen-1α-carboxylate ethyl ester (CPCCPEt) and 
2-methyl-6-(phenylethynyl)-pyridine (MPEP) also lowered the [Ca(2+)]i rise by 
L-β-ODAP. MN cell death induced by L-β-ODAP was prolonged significantly with 
SKF-96365 as well as NBQX. The results show the involvement of TRPs and mGluR I 
in L-β-ODAP-induced MN toxicity through prolonged [Ca(2+)]i mobilization, a 
unique characteristic of this neurotoxin.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.fct.2014.02.021
PMID: 24582715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]