---
reference_id: "PMID:32107995"
title: "Association between Regional Cerebral Blood Flow and Mini-Mental State Examination Score in Patients with Alzheimer's Disease."
authors:
- Saito H
- Kashiwakura I
- Tsushima M
- Mariya Y
journal: Curr Med Imaging
year: '2020'
doi: 10.2174/1573405616666200124125130
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association between Regional Cerebral Blood Flow and Mini-Mental State Examination Score in Patients with Alzheimer's Disease.
**Authors:** Saito H, Kashiwakura I, Tsushima M, Mariya Y
**Journal:** Curr Med Imaging (2020)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1573405616666200124125130](https://doi.org/10.2174/1573405616666200124125130)

## Content

1. Curr Med Imaging. 2020;16(10):1290-1299. doi:
10.2174/1573405616666200124125130.

Association between Regional Cerebral Blood Flow and Mini-Mental State 
Examination Score in Patients with Alzheimer's Disease.

Saito H(1), Kashiwakura I(2), Tsushima M(2), Mariya Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Akita Kousei Medical Center, Akita, Japan.
(2)Department of Radiological Life Science, Hirosaki University Graduate School 
of Health Science, Hirosaki, Aomori, Japan.
(3)Depatrment of Radiology, Mutsu General Hospital, Mutsu, Aomori, Japan.

BACKGROUND: In patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD), cerebral blood flow (CBF) 
is decreased from the early stages. CBF in AD is currently estimated from 
Z-scores using statistical analysis. However, the Z-score is not considered the 
impaired area ratio.
METHODS: In the present study, a novel indicator, ΣzS, associated with brain 
surface area and Zscores, is defined and the association with regional CBF has 
been estimated using Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores, which indicate 
the severity of cognitive impairment in patients with AD.
RESULTS: A negative correlation was detected between ΣzS in the posterior 
cingulate gyrus and the subset numbers 1, 2, and 5 of the total MMSE scores. 
Furthermore, a negative correlation was detected between the total MMSE score 
and ΣzS in Brodmann area 30, which is a subdivided area of the brain.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that ΣzS may be a useful indicator of CBF 
metabolism, and thus may improve the current understanding of cognitive function 
in patients with AD.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1573405616666200124125130
PMID: 32107995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]