---
reference_id: "PMID:41714267"
title: "Targeted Prostate Cancer Screening in Carriers of BRCA1 or BRCA2 Pathogenic Germline Variants Detects Clinically Relevant Disease: 5-year Results from the IMPACT Study."
authors:
- Bancroft EK
- Page EC
- McHugh J
- Thomas S
- Taylor N
- Pope J
- Evans DG
- Rothwell J
- Grindedal EM
- Maehle L
- James P
- McKinley J
- Mascarenhas L
- Side L
- Thomas T
- van Leerdam ME
- van Asperen CJ
- Kiemeney LALM
- Ringelberg J
- Vlaming M
- Rønlund K
- Osther PJS
- Helfand BT
- Hutten CG
- Oldenburg RA
- Cybulski C
- Wokolorczyk D
- Ong KR
- Huber C
- Salinas M
- Feliubadaló L
- Oosterwijk JC
- van Zelst-Stams WAG
- Cook J
- Rosario DJ
- Maxwell K
- Powers J
- Buys S
- Lyman J
- Ausems MGEM
- Schmutzler RK
- Rhiem K
- Izatt L
- Tripathi V
- Teixeira MR
- Cardoso M
- Foulkes WD
- Aprikian A
- Davidson R
- Longmuir M
- Ruijs MWG
- Blom EW
- van Engelen K
- Williams R
- Andrews L
- Murphy DG
- Saya S
- Halliday D
- Walker L
- Liljegren A
- Carlsson S
- Azzabi A
- Jobson I
- Snape K
- Gowie M
- Harris M
- Tischkowitz M
- Taylor A
- Kirk J
- Susman R
- Chen-Shtoyerman R
- Spigelman A
- Pachter N
- Ahmed M
- Cajal TRY
- Krajc M
- Cleaver R
- Cruellas M
- Perez-Ballestero E
- Brady AF
- Gallagher D
- Donaldson A
- Barwell J
- Nicolai N
- Friedman E
- Hall MJ
- Greenhalgh L
- Murthy V
- Copakova L
- McGrath JS
- Cooke P
- Arun B
- Myhill K
- Hogben M
- Hussain S
- Aaronson NK
- Ardern-Jones A
- Bangma CH
- Castro E
- Dearnaley D
- Eccles DM
- Tricker K
- Falconer A
- Gronberg H
- Hamdy FC
- Khoo V
- Lilja H
- Lindeman GJ
- Lubinski J
- Axcrona K
- Mikropoulos C
- Mitra A
- Offman J
- Rennert G
- Suri M
- Dudderidge T
- IMPACT Study Collaborators
- Brook MN
- Kote-Jarai Z
- Eeles RA
journal: Eur Urol
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2026.01.031
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeted Prostate Cancer Screening in Carriers of BRCA1 or BRCA2 Pathogenic Germline Variants Detects Clinically Relevant Disease: 5-year Results from the IMPACT Study.
**Authors:** Bancroft EK, Page EC, McHugh J, Thomas S, Taylor N, Pope J, Evans DG, Rothwell J, Grindedal EM, Maehle L, James P, McKinley J, Mascarenhas L, Side L, Thomas T, van Leerdam ME, van Asperen CJ, Kiemeney LALM, Ringelberg J, Vlaming M, Rønlund K, Osther PJS, Helfand BT, Hutten CG, Oldenburg RA, Cybulski C, Wokolorczyk D, Ong KR, Huber C, Salinas M, Feliubadaló L, Oosterwijk JC, van Zelst-Stams WAG, Cook J, Rosario DJ, Maxwell K, Powers J, Buys S, Lyman J, Ausems MGEM, Schmutzler RK, Rhiem K, Izatt L, Tripathi V, Teixeira MR, Cardoso M, Foulkes WD, Aprikian A, Davidson R, Longmuir M, Ruijs MWG, Blom EW, van Engelen K, Williams R, Andrews L, Murphy DG, Saya S, Halliday D, Walker L, Liljegren A, Carlsson S, Azzabi A, Jobson I, Snape K, Gowie M, Harris M, Tischkowitz M, Taylor A, Kirk J, Susman R, Chen-Shtoyerman R, Spigelman A, Pachter N, Ahmed M, Cajal TRY, Krajc M, Cleaver R, Cruellas M, Perez-Ballestero E, Brady AF, Gallagher D, Donaldson A, Barwell J, Nicolai N, Friedman E, Hall MJ, Greenhalgh L, Murthy V, Copakova L, McGrath JS, Cooke P, Arun B, Myhill K, Hogben M, Hussain S, Aaronson NK, Ardern-Jones A, Bangma CH, Castro E, Dearnaley D, Eccles DM, Tricker K, Falconer A, Gronberg H, Hamdy FC, Khoo V, Lilja H, Lindeman GJ, Lubinski J, Axcrona K, Mikropoulos C, Mitra A, Offman J, Rennert G, Suri M, Dudderidge T, IMPACT Study Collaborators, Brook MN, Kote-Jarai Z, Eeles RA
**Journal:** Eur Urol (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.eururo.2026.01.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eururo.2026.01.031)

## Content

1. Eur Urol. 2026 Feb 18:S0302-2838(26)00057-6. doi:
10.1016/j.eururo.2026.01.031.  Online ahead of print.

Targeted Prostate Cancer Screening in Carriers of BRCA1 or BRCA2 Pathogenic
Germline Variants Detects Clinically Relevant Disease: 5-year Results from the
IMPACT Study.

Bancroft EK(1), Page EC(2), McHugh J(2), Thomas S(3), Taylor N(3), Pope J(2),
Evans DG(4), Rothwell J(5), Grindedal EM(6), Maehle L(6), James P(7), McKinley
J(8), Mascarenhas L(8), Side L(9), Thomas T(9), van Leerdam ME(10), van Asperen
CJ(11), Kiemeney LALM(12), Ringelberg J(13), Vlaming M(14), Rønlund K(15),
Osther PJS(16), Helfand BT(17), Hutten CG(18), Oldenburg RA(19), Cybulski C(20),
Wokolorczyk D(20), Ong KR(21), Huber C(21), Salinas M(22), Feliubadaló L(22),
Oosterwijk JC(23), van Zelst-Stams WAG(24), Cook J(25), Rosario DJ(26), Maxwell
K(27), Powers J(27), Buys S(28), Lyman J(28), Ausems MGEM(14), Schmutzler
RK(29), Rhiem K(29), Izatt L(30), Tripathi V(30), Teixeira MR(31), Cardoso
M(32), Foulkes WD(33), Aprikian A(34), Davidson R(35), Longmuir M(35), Ruijs
MWG(36), Blom EW(37), van Engelen K(38), Williams R(39), Andrews L(40), Murphy
DG(41), Saya S(42), Halliday D(43), Walker L(43), Liljegren A(44), Carlsson
S(44), Azzabi A(45), Jobson I(45), Snape K(46), Gowie M(46), Harris M(47),
Tischkowitz M(48), Taylor A(49), Kirk J(50), Susman R(51), Chen-Shtoyerman
R(52), Spigelman A(53), Pachter N(54), Ahmed M(55), Cajal TRY(56), Krajc M(57),
Cleaver R(58), Cruellas M(59), Perez-Ballestero E(60), Brady AF(61), Gallagher
D(62), Donaldson A(63), Barwell J(64), Nicolai N(65), Friedman E(66), Hall
MJ(67), Greenhalgh L(68), Murthy V(69), Copakova L(70), McGrath JS(71), Cooke
P(72), Arun B(73), Myhill K(3), Hogben M(3), Hussain S(2), Aaronson NK(74),
Ardern-Jones A(3), Bangma CH(75), Castro E(76), Dearnaley D(77), Eccles DM(78),
Tricker K(5), Falconer A(79), Gronberg H(80), Hamdy FC(81), Khoo V(82), Lilja
H(83), Lindeman GJ(84), Lubinski J(20), Axcrona K(85), Mikropoulos C(86), Mitra
A(87), Offman J(88), Rennert G(89), Suri M(90), Dudderidge T(91); IMPACT Study
Collaborators; Brook MN(2), Kote-Jarai Z(2), Eeles RA(92).

Author information:
(1)Oncogenetics Team, Genetics and Epidemiology, The Institute of Cancer
Research, London, UK; Cancer Genetics Unit and Academic Urology Unit, The Royal
Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(2)Oncogenetics Team, Genetics and Epidemiology, The Institute of Cancer
Research, London, UK.
(3)Cancer Genetics Unit and Academic Urology Unit, The Royal Marsden NHS
Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(4)Department of Genomic Medicine, Division of Evolution, Infection and Genomic
Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(5)Genetic Medicine, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, Central
Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
(6)Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
(7)Parkville Familial Cancer Centre, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre and Royal
Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Australia; The Sir Peter MacCallum Department of
Oncology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia; Department of Genetic
Medicine, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Australia.
(8)Parkville Familial Cancer Centre, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre and Royal
Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Australia.
(9)Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Princess Anne Hospital, Southampton, UK.
(10)Dutch Foundation for Detection of Hereditary Tumors, Leiden, The
Netherlands; Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.
(11)Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
The Netherlands.
(12)Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(13)Dutch Foundation for Detection of Hereditary Tumors, Leiden, The
Netherlands.
(14)Department of Genetics, Division Laboratories, Pharmacy and Biomedical
Genetics, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(15)Department of Clinical Genetics, Vejle Hospital, University Hospital of
Southern Denmark, Vejle, Denmark.
(16)Department of Urology, Vejle Hospital, University Hospital of Southern
Denmark, Vejle, Denmark.
(17)John and Carol Walter Center for Urological Health, Division of Urology,
Endeavor Health NorthShore University HealthSystem, Evanston, IL, USA.
(18)Internal Medicine Epidemiology, Rush Institute for Healthy Aging, Rush
University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA.
(19)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(20)Department of Genetics and Pathology, International Hereditary Cancer
Center, Pomeranian Medical University in Szczecin, Szczecin, Poland.
(21)Department of Clinical Genetics, Birmingham Women's Hospital, Birmingham,
UK.
(22)Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology, Bellvitge
Biomedical Research Institute, Barcelona, Spain.
(23)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands.
(24)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands; Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical
Center, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(25)Sheffield Clinical Genetics Service, Sheffield Children's NHS Foundation
Trust, Sheffield, UK.
(26)Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield, UK.
(27)Basser Research Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(28)Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(29)Center for Familial Breast and Ovarian Cancer and Center for Integrated
Oncology (CIO), Faculty of Medicine, University Hospital Cologne, Cologne,
Germany.
(30)Clinical Genetics Service, Guy's and St. Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust,
London, UK.
(31)Department of Laboratory Genetics and IPO Porto Research Center, Portuguese
Oncology Institute (IPO Porto), Porto, Portugal; School of Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences (ICBAS), University of Porto, Porto, Portugal.
(32)Department of Laboratory Genetics and IPO Porto Research Center, Portuguese
Oncology Institute (IPO Porto), Porto, Portugal.
(33)Cancer Research Program, Research Institute of McGill University Health
Centre, Montreal, Canada; Lady Davis Institute and Division of Medical Genetics,
Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.
(34)Cancer Research Program, Research Institute of McGill University Health
Centre, Montreal, Canada; Departments of Surgery and Oncology, McGill
University, Montreal, Canada.
(35)West of Scotland Genetic Service, Queen Elizabeth University Hospital,
Glasgow, UK.
(36)Department of Clinical Genetics, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.
(37)Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Center,
Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(38)Department of Human Genetics, Amsterdam University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(39)School of Clinical Medicine, UNSW Medicine & Health, University of New South
Wales, Sydney, Australia; Hereditary Cancer Centre, Prince of Wales Hospital,
Randwick, Australia.
(40)Prince of Wales Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine, University of New
South Wales, Sydney, Australia; Hereditary Cancer Centre, Prince of Wales
Hospital, Randwick, Australia.
(41)The Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Australia; Division of Cancer Surgery, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre,
Melbourne, Australia.
(42)Department of General Practice and Primary Care, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Australia.
(43)Oxford Centre for Genomic Medicine, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust,
Oxford, UK.
(44)Karolinska University Hospital and Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(45)Northern Genetics Service, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals, Newcastle upon
Tyne, UK.
(46)St. George's Hospital, London, UK.
(47)Familial Cancer Centre, Monash Health, Clayton, Australia.
(48)East Anglian Medical Genetics Service, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS
Trust, Cambridge, UK; Department of Genomic Medicine, NIHR Cambridge Biomedical
Research Centre, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(49)East Anglian Medical Genetics Service, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS
Trust, Cambridge, UK.
(50)Familial Cancer Service, Crown Princess Mary Cancer Centre, Westmead
Hospital, Sydney, Australia; Centre for Cancer Research, Westmead Institute for
Medical Research, Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney,
Australia.
(51)Genetic Health Queensland, Royal Brisbane & Women's Hospital, Herston,
Australia.
(52)The Adelson School of Medicine and Department of Molecular Biology, Ariel
University, Ariel, Israel; The Genetic Institute, Kaplan Medical Center,
Rehovot, Israel.
(53)Hunter Family Cancer Service, Waratah, Australia; St. Vincent's Clinical
School, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia; Cancer Genetics
Clinic, The Kinghorn Cancer Centre, St. Vincent's Hospital, Sydney, Australia.
(54)Genetic Services of Western Australia, King Edward Memorial Hospital,
Subiaco, Australia; Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of
Western Australia, Perth, Australia.
(55)North East Thames Regional Genetics Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital
NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(56)Hospital de Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.
(57)Institute of Oncology, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(58)Department of Clinical Genetics, Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, Exeter,
UK.
(59)Hereditary Cancer Genetics Group, Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Vall
d'Hebron, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain; Medical
Oncology Department, Hospital Clínico Univesitario Lozano Blesa, Zaragoza,
Spain.
(60)Hereditary Cancer Genetics Group, Medical Oncology Department, Hospital Vall
d'Hebron, Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain.
(61)North West Thames Regional Genetics Service, Northwick Park Hospital, London
North West University Healthcare NHS Trust, Harrow, UK.
(62)St. James's Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(63)St. Michael's Hospital, Bristol, UK.
(64)University of Leicester, Leicester, UK; University Hospitals Leicester,
Leicester, UK.
(65)Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy.
(66)Chaim Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel.
(67)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(68)Clinical Genetics Service, Liverpool Women's Hospital, Liverpool, UK.
(69)Radiation Oncology, Advanced Centre for Treatment Research and Education in
Cancer (ACTREC), Tata Memorial Centre, Homi Bhabha National Institute, Mumbai,
India.
(70)National Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia.
(71)North Bristol NHS Trust, Bristol, UK; University of Exeter Medical School,
Exeter, UK.
(72)New Cross Hospital, Wolverhampton, UK.
(73)MD Anderson Cancer Center, University of Texas, Houston, TX, USA.
(74)Division of Psychosocial Research and Epidemiology, Netherlands Cancer
Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(75)Department of Urology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.
(76)Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain.
(77)Division of Radiotherapy and Imaging, The Institute of Cancer Research,
London, UK.
(78)Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Princess Anne Hospital, Southampton, UK;
Cancer Sciences, The University of Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(79)Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, UK.
(80)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(81)Churchill Hospital, Oxford, UK; Nuffield Department of Surgical Sciences,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(82)Cancer Genetics Unit and Academic Urology Unit, The Royal Marsden NHS
Foundation Trust, London, UK; St. George's Hospital, London, UK; Division of
Radiotherapy and Imaging, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK;
Department of Medicine, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia.
(83)Department of Translational Medicine, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden;
Departments of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Surgery and Medicine, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
(84)Parkville Familial Cancer Centre, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre and Royal
Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Australia; Department of Medicine, The University
of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia; Cancer Biology and Stem Cells Division, The
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Australia.
(85)Department of Urology, Akershus University Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway.
(86)Royal Surrey Hospital, Guildford, UK.
(87)University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(88)Centre for Cancer Screening, Prevention and Early Diagnosis, Wolfson
Institute of Population Health, Queen Mary University, London, UK.
(89)Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel.
(90)Nottingham City Hospital, Nottingham, UK.
(91)University Hospital Southampton, Southampton, UK.
(92)Oncogenetics Team, Genetics and Epidemiology, The Institute of Cancer
Research, London, UK; Cancer Genetics Unit and Academic Urology Unit, The Royal
Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK. Electronic address:
ros.eeles@icr.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: BRCA1 and BRCA2 pathogenic germline variants (PGVs)
are associated with higher risk of prostate cancer (PC). The IMPACT study
evaluated the utility of targeted prostate-specific antigen (PSA) screening in
BRCA1/BRCA2 PGV carriers. Here we report outcomes after five rounds of PSA
screening in IMPACT.
METHODS: Between 2005 and 2015, 3063 participants aged 40-69 yr (median 54 yr)
were recruited from 65 centres in 20 countries in two cohorts: (1) BRCA1/BRCA2
PGV carriers (915 BRCA1, 901 BRCA2); and (2) age-matched noncarriers for a
familial PGV (727 BRCA1 and 520 BRCA2 noncarriers). Annual PSA screening was
performed, with PSA >3.0 ng/ml used as the indication for prostate biopsy. Our
aim was to identify differences by PGV status in (1) the incidence of PC and of
clinically significant PC (csPC; grade group ≥2) and (2) tumour stage and
characteristics after five screening rounds.
KEY FINDINGS AND LIMITATIONS: There was no statistically significant difference
in PC incidence between BRCA1/BRCA2 PGV carriers and noncarriers. csPC incidence
was significantly higher for BRCA2 PGV carriers than for noncarriers (3.1% vs
1.3%; p = 0.04). Among men with PC, the proportion of tumours with National
Comprehensive Cancer Network intermediate unfavourable/high risk was higher in
the BRCA1/BRCA2 PGV groups versus the corresponding group without PGVs (BRCA2:
65% vs 32%, p = 0.029; BRCA1: 56% vs 18%, p = 0.0017). There were no T4 or
metastatic PC cases. Pathology after radical prostatectomy revealed tumour
upgrading for 7/23 (26%) BRCA1 PGV carriers and 10/34 (26%) BRCA2 PGV carriers,
with no tumour upgrading for men without PGVs. Study limitations include the
biopsy compliance rate and changes in PC diagnostic pathways since 2005.
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS: Annual PSA screening in BRCA2 PGV
carriers confirmed a higher incidence of csPC and detection of clinically
relevant tumours in comparison to noncarriers. For the first time, we confirm
that PSA screening in BRCA1 PGV carriers results in early detection of NCCN
IR-U/HR PC. Systematic PSA screening is recommended for BRCA2 PGV carriers and
should be considered for BRCA1 PGV carriers.

Copyright © 2026 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.eururo.2026.01.031
PMID: 41714267
