---
reference_id: "PMID:4014539"
title: "Epithelioid sarcoma. Diagnosis, prognostic indicators, and treatment."
authors:
- Chase DR
- Enzinger FM
journal: Am J Surg Pathol
year: '1985'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Combined Modality Therapy
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Extremities
- Female
- "Head and Neck Neoplasms/diagnosis, etiology, pathology, surgery"
- Histocytochemistry
- Humans
- Immunochemistry
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mitotic Index
- Neoplasm Invasiveness
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local"
- Prognosis
- "Sarcoma/diagnosis, etiology, pathology, surgery"
- "Soft Tissue Neoplasms/complications, diagnosis, pathology, surgery"
- Wounds and Injuries/complications
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epithelioid sarcoma. Diagnosis, prognostic indicators, and treatment.
**Authors:** Chase DR, Enzinger FM
**Journal:** Am J Surg Pathol (1985)

## Content

1. Am J Surg Pathol. 1985 Apr;9(4):241-63.

Epithelioid sarcoma. Diagnosis, prognostic indicators, and treatment.

Chase DR, Enzinger FM.

A retrospective review of 241 cases of epithelioid sarcoma reaffirmed the 
propensity of this tumor to occur in the distal extremities of young adults. The 
tumor was generally firm and nontender, and involved the dermis, subcutis or 
deeper soft tissues, particularly fascial planes, aponeuroses, and tendon 
sheaths. Follow-up data, available in 202 cases (84%), showed a 77% recurrence 
and a 45% metastatic rate. The most common initial sites of metastasis were 
lymph nodes (48%) and lungs (25%). A more aggressive course was associated with 
a proximal or axial tumor location, increased size and depth, hemorrhage, 
mitotic figures, necrosis, or the presence of vascular invasion. More favorable 
behavior was observed when the tumor arose in younger individuals, in distal 
extremities, or in females between the ages of 10 and 49. (The last observation 
calls for further work with steroid receptors.) Radical excision or amputation 
still appears to be the initial treatment of choice, though adjunctive high-dose 
radiotherapy to the excision site may prove to be of additional value.

PMID: 4014539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]