---
reference_id: "PMID:30561534"
title: "Kufs disease due to mutation of CLN6: clinical, pathological and molecular genetic features."
authors:
- Berkovic SF
- Oliver KL
- Canafoglia L
- Krieger P
- Damiano JA
- Hildebrand MS
- Morbin M
- Vears DF
- Sofia V
- Giuliano L
- Garavaglia B
- Simonati A
- Santorelli FM
- Gambardella A
- Labate A
- Belcastro V
- Castellotti B
- Ozkara C
- Zeman A
- Rankin J
- Mole SE
- Aguglia U
- Farrell M
- Rajagopalan S
- McDougall A
- Brammah S
- Andermann F
- Andermann E
- Dahl HM
- Franceschetti S
- Carpenter S
journal: Brain
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awy297
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Aged
- Brain/ultrastructure
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- "Neuronal Ceroid-Lipofuscinoses/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- Survival Rate
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kufs disease due to mutation of CLN6: clinical, pathological and molecular genetic features.
**Authors:** Berkovic SF, Oliver KL, Canafoglia L, Krieger P, Damiano JA, Hildebrand MS, Morbin M, Vears DF, Sofia V, Giuliano L, Garavaglia B, Simonati A, Santorelli FM, Gambardella A, Labate A, Belcastro V, Castellotti B, Ozkara C, Zeman A, Rankin J, Mole SE, Aguglia U, Farrell M, Rajagopalan S, McDougall A, Brammah S, Andermann F, Andermann E, Dahl HM, Franceschetti S, Carpenter S
**Journal:** Brain (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awy297](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awy297)

## Content

1. Brain. 2019 Jan 1;142(1):59-69. doi: 10.1093/brain/awy297.

Kufs disease due to mutation of CLN6: clinical, pathological and molecular 
genetic features.

Berkovic SF(1), Oliver KL(1), Canafoglia L(2), Krieger P(1), Damiano JA(1), 
Hildebrand MS(1), Morbin M(3), Vears DF(1), Sofia V(4), Giuliano L(4), 
Garavaglia B(5), Simonati A(6), Santorelli FM(7), Gambardella A(8), Labate A(8), 
Belcastro V(9), Castellotti B(10), Ozkara C(11), Zeman A(12), Rankin J(13), Mole 
SE(14), Aguglia U(15)(16), Farrell M(17), Rajagopalan S(18), McDougall A(19), 
Brammah S(20), Andermann F(21)(22), Andermann E(21)(22), Dahl HM(1), 
Franceschetti S(2), Carpenter S(23).

Author information:
(1)Epilepsy Research Centre, Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, 
Austin Health, Heidelberg, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Department of Neurophysiology, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo 
Besta, Milan, Italy.
(3)Neuropathology, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan, 
Italy.
(4)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences and Advanced Technologies "G.F. 
Ingrassia", Section of Neurosciences, University of Catania, Catania, Italy.
(5)Medical Genetics and Neurogenetics Unit, Bicocca Laboratories, Fondazione 
IRCCS Istituto Neurologico "Carlo Besta", Milan, Italy.
(6)Department of Neuroscience, Biomedicine, Movement-Neurology and 
Neuropathology, Policlinico GB Rossi, P.le LA Scuro, Verona, Italy.
(7)Molecular Medicine, IRCCS Fondazione Stella Maris, Pisa, Italy.
(8)Institute of Neurology, University Magna Græcia Catanzaro, Italy; Institute 
of Molecular Bioimaging and Physiology of the National Research Council 
(IBFM-CNR) Germaneto, CZ, Italy.
(9)Neurology Unit, S. Anna Hospital, Como, Italy.
(10)Unit Genetics of Neurodegenerative and Metabolic Diseases, IRCCS Foundation 
C. Besta Neurological Institute, Milan, Italy.
(11)Istanbul University-Cerrahpasa, Medical Faculty, Department of Neurology, 
Istanbul, Turkey.
(12)University of Exeter Medical School, St Luke's Campus, Magdalen Road, Exeter 
EX1 2LU, UK.
(13)Clinical Genetics, Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, Gladstone Road, Exeter, 
UK.
(14)MRC Laboratory for Molecular Cell Biology and UCL GOS Institute of Child 
Health, Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment, University College 
London, London, UK.
(15)Department of Medical and Surgical Sciences, University Magna Græcia 
Catanzaro, Italy.
(16)Institute of Molecular Bioimaging and Physiology of the National Research 
Council (IBFM-CNR) Germaneto, CZ, Italy.
(17)Department of Neuropathology, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin 9, Ireland.
(18)Department of Clinical Genetics, Liverpool Hospital, Liverpool, New South 
Wales Australia.
(19)Department of Neurology, Liverpool Hospital, Liverpool, New South Wales 
Australia.
(20)Central Sydney Electron Microscope Unit, Concord Repatriation General 
Hospital, Concord, New South Wales, Australia.
(21)Epilepsy Research Group, Montreal Neurological Hospital and Institute, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(22)Departments of Neurology and Neurosurgery and Paediatrics, McGill 
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(23)Consultant in Neuropathology, Centro Hospitalar São João, Porto, Portugal.

Comment in
    Brain. 2019 Jan 1;142(1):2-5. doi: 10.1093/brain/awy312.

Kufs disease is the major adult form of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, but is 
rare and difficult to diagnose. Diagnosis was traditionally dependent on the 
demonstration of characteristic storage material, but distinction from normal 
age-related accumulation of lipofuscin can be challenging. Mutation of CLN6 has 
emerged as the most important cause of recessive Kufs disease but, remarkably, 
is also responsible for variant late infantile ceroid lipofuscinosis. Here we 
provide a detailed description of Kufs disease due to CLN6 pathogenic variants. 
We studied 20 cases of Kufs disease with CLN6 pathogenic variants from 13 
unrelated families. Mean age of onset was 28 years (range 12-51) with bimodal 
peaks in teenage and early adult life. The typical presentation was of 
progressive myoclonus epilepsy with debilitating myoclonic seizures and 
relatively infrequent tonic-clonic seizures. Patients became wheelchair-bound 
with a mean 12 years post-onset. Ataxia was the most prominent motor feature. 
Dementia appeared to be an invariable accompaniment, although it could take a 
number of years to manifest and occasionally cognitive impairment preceded 
myoclonic seizures. Patients were usually highly photosensitive on EEG. MRI 
showed progressive cerebral and cerebellar atrophy. The median survival time was 
26 years from disease onset. Ultrastructural examination of the pathology 
revealed fingerprint profiles as the characteristic inclusions, but they were 
not reliably seen in tissues other than brain. Curvilinear profiles, which are 
seen in the late infantile form, were not a feature. Of the 13 unrelated 
families we observed homozygous CLN6 pathogenic variants in four and compound 
heterozygous variants in nine. Compared to the variant late infantile form, 
there was a lower proportion of variants that predicted protein truncation. 
Certain heterozygous missense variants in the same amino acid position were 
found in both variant late infantile and Kufs disease. There was a predominance 
of cases from Italy and surrounding regions; this was partially explained by the 
discovery of three founder pathogenic variants. Clinical distinction of type A 
(progressive myoclonus epilepsy) and type B (dementia with motor disturbance) 
Kufs disease was supported by molecular diagnoses. Type A is usually caused by 
recessive pathogenic variants in CLN6 or dominant variants in DNAJC5. Type B 
Kufs is usually associated with recessive CTSF pathogenic variants. The 
diagnosis of Kufs remains challenging but, with the availability of genetic 
diagnosis, this will largely supersede the use of diagnostic biopsies, 
particularly as biopsies of peripheral tissues has unsatisfactory sensitivity 
and specificity.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awy297
PMID: 30561534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]