---
reference_id: "PMID:40372974"
title: "Signalling pathways in a nutshell: from pathogenesis to therapeutical implications in prostate cancer."
authors:
- Goncharov AP
- Dicusari Elissaiou C
- Ben Aharon Farzalla E
- Akhvlediani G
- Vashakidze N
- Kharaishvili G
journal: Ann Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1080/07853890.2025.2474175
keywords:
- Humans
- "Prostatic Neoplasms/pathology, metabolism, therapy, drug therapy"
- Male
- Signal Transduction/physiology
- Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition/physiology
- Transforming Growth Factor beta/metabolism
- Hedgehog Proteins/metabolism
- NF-kappa B/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Signalling pathways in a nutshell: from pathogenesis to therapeutical implications in prostate cancer.
**Authors:** Goncharov AP, Dicusari Elissaiou C, Ben Aharon Farzalla E, Akhvlediani G, Vashakidze N, Kharaishvili G
**Journal:** Ann Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1080/07853890.2025.2474175](https://doi.org/10.1080/07853890.2025.2474175)

## Content

1. Ann Med. 2025 Dec;57(1):2474175. doi: 10.1080/07853890.2025.2474175. Epub 2025
 May 15.

Signalling pathways in a nutshell: from pathogenesis to therapeutical
implications in prostate cancer.

Goncharov AP(1)(2), Dicusari Elissaiou C(1), Ben Aharon Farzalla E(1),
Akhvlediani G(3)(4)(5), Vashakidze N(1), Kharaishvili G(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Pathology, Palacky University, Olomouc,
Czech Republic.
(2)Department of Oncology, University Hospital, Olomouc, Czech Republic.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Georgian-American University, Tbilisi, Georgia.
(4)American Hospital in Tbilisi, Tbilisi, Georgia.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, University of Georgia, Tbilisi, Georgia.
(6)Department of Human Morphology and Pathology, Medical Faculty, David
Tvildiani Medical University, Tbilisi, Georgia.
(7)Department of Clinical and Molecular Pathology, University Hospital, Olomouc,
Czech Republic.

From tumorigenesis to the establishment of local or metastatic high-grade
tumours, an integral part of the cellular lifespan relies on various signalling
pathways. Particular pathways that allow cells to proliferate by creating a
network of new blood vessels have been documented, whereas other pathways are
primarily involved with a migration to distant body parts, partially through the
process of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). This review will discuss the
different signalling pathways, such as TGF-β, Cripto-1, Wnt pathways, Hedgehog,
Notch and NF-κB pathways, and how they promote tumour initiation and progression
by influencing diverse cellular processes and EMT in general and in benign and
malignant prostate tumours. This review will discuss only the critical pathways.
Therefore, many other types of signalling pathways which are related to prostate
cancer will not be discussed. Possibilities for further investigation will be
mentioned, as many underlying mechanisms involved in these pathways have
potential as targets in future tumour therapy. This review will also introduce
some novel clinical trials relating to the inhibition of signalling pathways and
their clinical outcomes.

DOI: 10.1080/07853890.2025.2474175
PMCID: PMC12082737
PMID: 40372974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported
by the author(s).
