---
reference_id: "PMID:11684137"
title: "Affective instability and impulsivity in borderline personality and bipolar II disorders: similarities and differences."
authors:
- Henry C
- Mitropoulou V
- New AS
- Koenigsberg HW
- Silverman J
- Siever LJ
journal: J Psychiatr Res
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1016/s0022-3956(01)00038-3
keywords:
- Adult
- "Bipolar Disorder/diagnosis, epidemiology, psychology"
- "Borderline Personality Disorder/diagnosis, epidemiology, psychology"
- Comorbidity
- "Disruptive, Impulse Control, and Conduct Disorders/diagnosis, epidemiology, psychology"
- Female
- Hostility
- Humans
- Male
- "Mood Disorders/diagnosis, epidemiology, psychology"
- Psychiatric Status Rating Scales
- Surveys and Questionnaires
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Affective instability and impulsivity in borderline personality and bipolar II disorders: similarities and differences.
**Authors:** Henry C, Mitropoulou V, New AS, Koenigsberg HW, Silverman J, Siever LJ
**Journal:** J Psychiatr Res (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0022-3956(01)00038-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022-3956(01)00038-3)

## Content

1. J Psychiatr Res. 2001 Nov-Dec;35(6):307-12. doi:
10.1016/s0022-3956(01)00038-3.

Affective instability and impulsivity in borderline personality and bipolar II 
disorders: similarities and differences.

Henry C(1), Mitropoulou V, New AS, Koenigsberg HW, Silverman J, Siever LJ.

Author information:
(1)Service Universitaire de Psychiatrie, Centre Hospitalier Charles Perrens, 121 
rue de la Béchade, 33076, Bordeaux, France.

OBJECTIVES: many studies have reported a high degree of comorbidity between mood 
disorders, among which are bipolar disorders, and borderline personality 
disorder and some studies have suggested that these disorders are co-transmitted 
in families. However, few studies have compared personality traits between these 
disorders to determine whether there is a dimensional overlap between the two 
diagnoses. The aim of this study was to compare impulsivity, affective lability 
and intensity in patients with borderline personality and bipolar II disorder 
and in subjects with neither of these diagnoses.
METHODS: patients with borderline personality but without bipolar disorder 
(n=29), patients with bipolar II disorder without borderline personality but 
with other personality disorders (n=14), patients with both borderline 
personality and bipolar II disorder (n=12), and patients with neither borderline 
personality nor bipolar disorder but other personality disorders (OPD; n=93) 
were assessed using the Affective Lability Scale (ALS), the Affect Intensity 
Measure (AIM), the Buss-Durkee Hostility Inventory (BDHI) and the Barratt 
Impulsiveness Scale (BIS-7B).
RESULTS: borderline personality patients had significantly higher ALS total 
scores (P<0.05) and bipolar II patients tended to have higher ALS scores than 
patients with OPD (P<0.06). On one of the ALS subscales, the borderline patients 
displayed significant higher affective lability between euthymia and anger 
(P<0.002), whereas patients with bipolar II disorder displayed affective 
lability between euthymia and depression (P<0.04), or elation (P<0.01) or 
between depression and elation (P<0.01). A significant interaction between 
borderline personality and bipolar II disorder was observed for lability between 
anxiety and depression (P<0.01) with the ALS. High scores for impulsiveness 
(BISTOT, P<0.001) and hostility (BDHI, P<0.05) were obtained for borderline 
personality patients only and no significant interactions between diagnoses were 
observed. Only borderline personality patients tended to have higher affective 
intensity (AIM, P<0.07).
CONCLUSIONS: borderline personality disorder and bipolar II disorder appear to 
involve affective lability, which may account for the efficacy of mood 
stabilizers treatments in both disorders. However, our results suggest that 
borderline personality disorder cannot be viewed as an attenuated group of 
affective disorders.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-3956(01)00038-3
PMID: 11684137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]