---
reference_id: "PMID:33239480"
title: Examination of Large Artery Atherosclerosis could Reveal Small Artery Retinopathy in Untreated Middle-Aged Individuals.
authors:
- Sugiura T
- Dohi Y
- Takagi Y
- Yokochi T
- Yoshikane N
- Suzuki K
- Tomiishi T
- Nagami T
- Iwase M
- Takase H
- Seo Y
- Ohte N
journal: J Atheroscler Thromb
year: '2022'
doi: 10.5551/jat.59857
keywords:
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Ankle Brachial Index
- "Atherosclerosis/complications, diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Carotid Intima-Media Thickness
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Humans
- "Hypertension/complications, diagnosis, physiopathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Regression Analysis
- "Retinal Diseases/complications, diagnosis, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Examination of Large Artery Atherosclerosis could Reveal Small Artery Retinopathy in Untreated Middle-Aged Individuals.
**Authors:** Sugiura T, Dohi Y, Takagi Y, Yokochi T, Yoshikane N, Suzuki K, Tomiishi T, Nagami T, Iwase M, Takase H, Seo Y, Ohte N
**Journal:** J Atheroscler Thromb (2022)
**DOI:** [10.5551/jat.59857](https://doi.org/10.5551/jat.59857)

## Content

1. J Atheroscler Thromb. 2022 Jan 1;29(1):11-23. doi: 10.5551/jat.59857. Epub
2020  Nov 25.

Examination of Large Artery Atherosclerosis could Reveal Small Artery 
Retinopathy in Untreated Middle-Aged Individuals.

Sugiura T(1)(2), Dohi Y(2)(3), Takagi Y(2)(4), Yokochi T(2)(5), Yoshikane N(2), 
Suzuki K(2), Tomiishi T(2), Nagami T(2), Iwase M(4), Takase H(1)(6), Seo Y(1), 
Ohte N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical 
Sciences.
(2)Health Support Center WELPO, Toyota Motor Corporation.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Rehabilitation Sciences, Nagoya 
Gakuin University.
(4)Toyota Memorial Hospital.
(5)Midtown Clinic Meieki.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Enshu Hospital.

AIMS: Small arteries can be visualized in the ocular fundus, and findings of 
retinopathy based on Scheie classification are often applied to evaluate the 
impact of hypertension and atherosclerosis. However, the relationship between 
damage in the large and small arteries has not been investigated sufficiently, 
especially in the early stages. The present study investigated possible 
associations between large artery atherosclerosis and small artery retinopathy 
in untreated middle-aged individuals.
METHODS: Untreated middle-aged workers undergoing periodic health check-ups 
(n=7,730, 45±8 years) were enrolled in this study. The absence or presence and 
extent of retinopathy were characterized by ophthalmologists as hypertensive 
(H0-4) and atherosclerotic grades (S0-4) based on Scheie classification. Large 
artery atherosclerosis was examined based on functional assessment of the 
cardio-ankle vascular index (CAVI) and morphological assessment of the carotid 
intima-media thickness (IMT) by ultrasound.
RESULTS: We found significant differences in CAVI and carotid IMT between 
individuals with and without hypertensive or atherosclerotic retinopathy. 
Multivariable regression analysis showed that the presence of hypertensive and 
atherosclerotic retinopathy was significantly associated with CAVI and carotid 
IMT. Logistic regression analysis with the endpoint of a hypertensive or 
atherosclerotic lesion revealed that CAVI and carotid IMT are independent 
determinants of retinopathy.
CONCLUSIONS: CAVI and carotid IMT were significantly associated with the 
presence of retinopathy based on Scheie classification in untreated middle-aged 
subjects, implying that atherosclerotic examination in large arteries could 
reveal early-stage small artery retinopathy.

DOI: 10.5551/jat.59857
PMCID: PMC8737076
PMID: 33239480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]