---
reference_id: "PMID:20560010"
title: "The left ventricular outflow in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: from structure to function."
authors:
- Yacoub MH
- El-Hamamsy I
- Said K
- Magdi G
- Abul Enein F
- George R
- Rossi A
- Olivotto I
- Cecchi F
journal: J Cardiovasc Transl Res
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1007/s12265-009-9153-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The left ventricular outflow in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: from structure to function.
**Authors:** Yacoub MH, El-Hamamsy I, Said K, Magdi G, Abul Enein F, George R, Rossi A, Olivotto I, Cecchi F
**Journal:** J Cardiovasc Transl Res (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12265-009-9153-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12265-009-9153-2)

## Content

1. J Cardiovasc Transl Res. 2009 Dec;2(4):510-7. doi: 10.1007/s12265-009-9153-2. 
Epub 2009 Nov 26.

The left ventricular outflow in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: from structure to 
function.

Yacoub MH(1), El-Hamamsy I, Said K, Magdi G, Abul Enein F, George R, Rossi A, 
Olivotto I, Cecchi F.

Author information:
(1)Harefield Heart Science Center, Harefield Hospital, London, UK. 
m.yacoub@imperial.ac.uk

Left ventricular outflow tract obstruction (LVOTO) is one of the defining 
features of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) and one of the main determinants 
of prognosis. Although the importance of obstruction was recognized since the 
original description by Teare and Brock, its exact cause and methods for its 
relief are still being hotly debated. We believe that a rational approach to 
solving these issues depends on thorough understanding of the specific structure 
and functions of the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) in health and 
disease. There is now compelling evidence that the LVOT performs a series of 
vital sophisticated functions which are mediated by the design characteristics, 
structure, and biological properties of its component parts and that 
dysregulation of one or more of these functions results in obstruction and other 
abnormalities. We here review the integrated functions of the LVOT, its 
structural and functional relationships, with particular reference to its 
component parts (the major players) and their role in HCM. This knowledge is 
essential to evolve tailored restorative techniques for treating HCM.

DOI: 10.1007/s12265-009-9153-2
PMID: 20560010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]