---
reference_id: "PMID:38003290"
title: "Current Medical Therapy and Revascularization in Peripheral Artery Disease of the Lower Limbs: Impacts on Subclinical Chronic Inflammation."
authors:
- Cecchini AL
- Biscetti F
- Manzato M
- Lo Sasso L
- Rando MM
- Nicolazzi MA
- Rossini E
- Eraso LH
- Dimuzio PJ
- Massetti M
- Gasbarrini A
- Flex A
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms242216099
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Current Medical Therapy and Revascularization in Peripheral Artery Disease of the Lower Limbs: Impacts on Subclinical Chronic Inflammation.
**Authors:** Cecchini AL, Biscetti F, Manzato M, Lo Sasso L, Rando MM, Nicolazzi MA, Rossini E, Eraso LH, Dimuzio PJ, Massetti M, Gasbarrini A, Flex A
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms242216099](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms242216099)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Nov 8;24(22):16099. doi: 10.3390/ijms242216099.

Current Medical Therapy and Revascularization in Peripheral Artery Disease of 
the Lower Limbs: Impacts on Subclinical Chronic Inflammation.

Cecchini AL(1), Biscetti F(1), Manzato M(2), Lo Sasso L(2), Rando MM(1), 
Nicolazzi MA(1), Rossini E(1), Eraso LH(3), Dimuzio PJ(3), Massetti M(2)(4), 
Gasbarrini A(2)(5), Flex A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Internal Medicine, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. 
Gemelli IRCCS, 00168 Rome, Italy.
(2)Facoltà di Medicina e Chirurgia, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, 00168 
Rome, Italy.
(3)Division of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery, Thomas Jefferson University, 
Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.
(4)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario 
A. Gemelli IRCCS, 00168 Rome, Italy.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, 00168 
Rome, Italy.

Peripheral artery disease (PAD), coronary artery disease (CAD), and 
cerebrovascular disease (CeVD) are characterized by atherosclerosis and 
inflammation as their underlying mechanisms. This paper aims to conduct a 
literature review on pharmacotherapy for PAD, specifically focusing on how 
different drug classes target pro-inflammatory pathways. The goal is to enhance 
the choice of therapeutic plans by considering their impact on the chronic 
subclinical inflammation that is associated with PAD development and 
progression. We conducted a comprehensive review of currently published original 
articles, narratives, systematic reviews, and meta-analyses. The aim was to 
explore the relationship between PAD and inflammation and evaluate the influence 
of current pharmacological and nonpharmacological interventions on the 
underlying chronic subclinical inflammation. Our findings indicate that the 
existing treatments have added anti-inflammatory properties that can potentially 
delay or prevent PAD progression and improve outcomes, independent of their 
effects on traditional risk factors. Although inflammation-targeted therapy in 
PAD shows promising potential, its benefits have not been definitively proven 
yet. However, it is crucial not to overlook the pleiotropic properties of the 
currently available treatments, as they may provide valuable insights for 
therapeutic strategies. Further studies focusing on the anti-inflammatory and 
immunomodulatory effects of these treatments could enhance our understanding of 
the mechanisms contributing to the residual risk in PAD and pave the way for the 
development of novel therapies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms242216099
PMCID: PMC10671371
PMID: 38003290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interest.