---
reference_id: "PMID:39999281"
title: "The Role of 18 F-FDG PET/CT Combined With MPI in Cogan's Syndrome With Multiple Arteritis and Coronary Involvement: A Case Report."
authors:
- Zhang Y
- Han X
- Nan N
- Dong W
- Mi H
journal: Clin Nucl Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1097/RLU.0000000000005788
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Role of 18 F-FDG PET/CT Combined With MPI in Cogan's Syndrome With Multiple Arteritis and Coronary Involvement: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Zhang Y, Han X, Nan N, Dong W, Mi H
**Journal:** Clin Nucl Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1097/RLU.0000000000005788](https://doi.org/10.1097/RLU.0000000000005788)

## Content

1. Clin Nucl Med. 2025 Jun 1;50(6):553-555. doi: 10.1097/RLU.0000000000005788.
Epub  2025 Feb 25.

The Role of 18 F-FDG PET/CT Combined With MPI in Cogan's Syndrome With Multiple 
Arteritis and Coronary Involvement: A Case Report.

Zhang Y(1), Han X(1), Nan N(2)(3), Dong W(1), Mi H(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Nuclear Medicine.
(2)Cardiology.
(3)Beijing Engineering Research Center of Cardiovascular Wisdom Diagnosis and 
Treatment, Beijing Anzhen Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing 
Institute of Heart, Lung and Blood Vessel Diseases, Beijing, China.

We present a case of a 49-year-old woman who complained of chest pain after 
activity for 3 months. She had undergone percutaneous coronary intervention 
(PCI) on the left main (LM) and right coronary artery (RCA) for acute myocardial 
infarction (AMI) 1 year ago. At this admission, a coronary angiogram (CAG) 
revealed stent restenosis. Then, 99m Tc-Sestamibi myocardial perfusion imaging 
(MPI) and 18 F-FDG PET/CT showed multiple arteritis involving the coronary 
artery with no obvious myocardial ischemia. This suggests that the patient 
should be treated with anti-inflammatory measures instead of repeating 
revascularization caused by persistent stent stenosis, making this an extremely 
rare case of Cogan's syndrome (CS).

Copyright © 2025 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/RLU.0000000000005788
PMID: 39999281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest and sources of funding: 
none declared.