---
reference_id: "PMID:29140460"
title: A Meta-Analysis of Social Skills Training and Related Interventions for Psychosis.
authors:
- Turner DT
- McGlanaghy E
- Cuijpers P
- van der Gaag M
- Karyotaki E
- MacBeth A
journal: Schizophr Bull
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbx146
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Meta-Analysis of Social Skills Training and Related Interventions for Psychosis.
**Authors:** Turner DT, McGlanaghy E, Cuijpers P, van der Gaag M, Karyotaki E, MacBeth A
**Journal:** Schizophr Bull (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/schbul/sbx146](https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbx146)

## Content

1. Schizophr Bull. 2018 Apr 6;44(3):475-491. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbx146.

A Meta-Analysis of Social Skills Training and Related Interventions for 
Psychosis.

Turner DT(1), McGlanaghy E(2), Cuijpers P(1), van der Gaag M(3), Karyotaki E(1), 
MacBeth A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Psychology, Vrije Universitiet, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Clinical and Health Psychology, School of Health in Social 
Science, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Parnassia Psychiatric Institute, The Hague, The 
Netherlands.

Comment in
    Schizophr Bull. 2018 Apr 6;44(3):472-474. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbx184.
    Aust Occup Ther J. 2019 Feb;66(1):121-122. doi: 10.1111/1440-1630.12545.

OBJECTIVE: Evidence suggests that social skills training (SST) is an efficacious 
intervention for negative symptoms in psychosis, whereas evidence of efficacy in 
other psychosis symptom domains is limited. The current article reports a 
comprehensive meta-analytic review of the evidence for SST across relevant 
outcome measures, control comparisons, and follow-up assessments. The secondary 
aim of this study was to identify and investigate the efficacy of SST subtypes.
METHODS: A systematic literature search identified 27 randomized controlled 
trials including N = 1437 participants. Trials assessing SST against active 
controls, treatment-as-usual (TAU), and waiting list control were included. Risk 
of bias was assessed using the Cochrane risk of bias assessment tool. A series 
of 70 meta-analytic comparisons provided effect sizes in Hedges' g. 
Heterogeneity and publication bias were assessed.
RESULTS: SST demonstrated superiority over TAU (g = 0.3), active controls (g = 
0.2-0.3), and comparators pooled (g = 0.2-0.3) for negative symptoms, and over 
TAU (g = 0.4) and comparators pooled (g = 0.3) for general psychopathology. 
Superiority was indicated in a proportion of comparisons for all symptoms pooled 
and social outcome measures. SST subtype comparisons were underpowered, although 
social-cognitive approaches demonstrated superiority vs comparators pooled. SST 
treatment effects were maintained at proportion of follow-up comparisons.
CONCLUSIONS: SST demonstrates a magnitude of effect for negative symptoms 
similar to those commonly reported for cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) for 
positive symptoms, although unlike CBT, SST is not routinely recommended in 
treatment guidelines for psychological intervention. SST may have potential for 
wider implementation. Further stringent effectiveness research alongside wider 
pilot implementation of SST in community mental health teams is warranted.

DOI: 10.1093/schbul/sbx146
PMCID: PMC5890475
PMID: 29140460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]