---
reference_id: "PMID:37604356"
title: Distinct NOD2 mutations reported in three families with Blau syndrome (BS) from a single center in India - Case series and review of literature.
authors:
- Baisya R
- Manthri R
- Tyagi M
- Uppin SG
- Rajasekhar L
journal: Clin Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2023.109743
keywords:
- Male
- Sarcoidosis/genetics
- "Uveitis/genetics, diagnosis"
- Child
- Hereditary Autoinflammatory Diseases
- Synovitis
- India
- Female
- Mutation
- Nod2 Signaling Adaptor Protein/genetics
- Mothers
- Humans
- Arthritis/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distinct NOD2 mutations reported in three families with Blau syndrome (BS) from a single center in India - Case series and review of literature.
**Authors:** Baisya R, Manthri R, Tyagi M, Uppin SG, Rajasekhar L
**Journal:** Clin Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clim.2023.109743](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clim.2023.109743)

## Content

1. Clin Immunol. 2023 Oct;255:109743. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2023.109743. Epub 2023 
Aug 20.

Distinct NOD2 mutations reported in three families with Blau syndrome (BS) from 
a single center in India - Case series and review of literature.

Baisya R(1), Manthri R(1), Tyagi M(2), Uppin SG(3), Rajasekhar L(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology & Rheumatology, Nizam's Institute of 
Medical Sciences (NIMS), Hyderabad, India.
(2)L V Prasad Eye Institute (LVPEI), Hyderabad, India.
(3)Department Pathology, Nizam's Institute of Medical Sciences (NIMS), 
Hyderabad, India.
(4)Department of Clinical Immunology & Rheumatology, Nizam's Institute of 
Medical Sciences (NIMS), Hyderabad, India. Electronic address: 
lizarajasekhar@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: Blau syndrome (BS), considered a rare pediatric autoinflammatory 
disease, is characterised by a triad of granulomatous arthritis, dermatitis and 
uveitis. Here we present a tale of three families visited in our outpatient 
department in the last two years (2020-2022) where more than one member was 
affected with either skin, ophthalmological and joint involvement with either 
biopsy-proven granuloma or genetic mutation at NOD2 gene suggesting the 
diagnosis of BS.
CASE SERIES: The first family had three affected members where the mother and 
her two children had skin changes, polyarthritis and a pathogenic mutation in 
NOD2 gene (exon 4, c.1000C > T, p.Arg334Trp) suggesting BS. The second family 
had two affected members where both mother and her son had uveitis, skin changes 
with NOD2 mutation at exon 4 with c.1147G > A (p Glu 383 Lys) variant. The son 
also had polyarthritis and his skin biopsy was suggestive of granulomatous 
inflammation. In the third family with two affected members, we found a mutation 
in NOD2 on exon 4 (c 1324C > T, p.Lys 442 Phe) which was described as pathogenic 
with only one report published till date.
CONCLUSION: These three cases presented to us within the last two years and led 
to a diagnosis of BS in three other family members with discrete mutations 
(commonest to rarest) on the NOD2 gene in the three families.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clim.2023.109743
PMID: 37604356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest Authors declare no 
conflicts.