---
reference_id: "PMID:37194974"
title: Genetics of sinoatrial node function and heart rate disorders.
authors:
- van der Maarel LE
- Postma AV
- Christoffels VM
journal: Dis Model Mech
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1242/dmm.050101
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- "Sinoatrial Node/pathology, physiology"
- Heart Rate
- "Atrial Fibrillation/genetics, pathology"
- Mammals
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics of sinoatrial node function and heart rate disorders.
**Authors:** van der Maarel LE, Postma AV, Christoffels VM
**Journal:** Dis Model Mech (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dmm.050101](https://doi.org/10.1242/dmm.050101)

## Content

1. Dis Model Mech. 2023 May 1;16(5):dmm050101. doi: 10.1242/dmm.050101. Epub 2023
 May 17.

Genetics of sinoatrial node function and heart rate disorders.

van der Maarel LE(1), Postma AV(1)(2), Christoffels VM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biology, Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, Amsterdam 
Reproduction and Development, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, University 
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam 1105 AZ, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, Amsterdam 
Reproduction and Development, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, University 
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam 1105 AZ, The Netherlands.

The sinoatrial node (SAN) is the primary pacemaker of the mammalian heart, 
initiating its electrical activation and ensuring that the heart's functional 
cardiac output meets physiological demand. SAN dysfunction (SND) can cause 
complex cardiac arrhythmias that can manifest as severe sinus bradycardia, sinus 
arrest, chronotropic incompetence and increased susceptibility to atrial 
fibrillation, among other cardiac conditions. SND has a complex aetiology, with 
both pre-existing disease and heritable genetic variation predisposing 
individuals to this pathology. In this Review, we summarize the current 
understanding of the genetic contributions to SND and the insights that they 
provide into this disorder's underlying molecular mechanisms. With an improved 
understanding of these molecular mechanisms, we can improve treatment options 
for SND patients and develop new therapeutics.

© 2023. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.050101
PMCID: PMC10214849
PMID: 37194974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.