---
reference_id: "PMID:35934917"
title: A novel SLC35D1 variant causing milder phenotype of Schneckenbecken dysplasia in a large pedigree.
authors:
- Özer L
- Aktuna S
- Unsal E
- Ünal MA
- Sahin G
- Baltaci V
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62939
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Monosaccharide Transport Proteins/genetics
- Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Pregnancy
- Uridine Diphosphate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel SLC35D1 variant causing milder phenotype of Schneckenbecken dysplasia in a large pedigree.
**Authors:** Özer L, Aktuna S, Unsal E, Ünal MA, Sahin G, Baltaci V
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.62939](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.62939)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2022 Oct;188(10):3078-3083. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62939. Epub 
2022 Aug 7.

A novel SLC35D1 variant causing milder phenotype of Schneckenbecken dysplasia in 
a large pedigree.

Özer L(1)(2), Aktuna S(1)(2), Unsal E(1)(2), Ünal MA(3), Sahin G(4), Baltaci 
V(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Yuksek İhtisas University Medical School, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Mikrogen Genetic Diagnosis Center, Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Ankara University Stem Cell Institute, Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey.
(4)Genart IVF Center, Ankara, Turkey.

SLC35D1 gene encodes UDP-glucuronic acid/UDP-n-acetylgalactosamine dual 
transporter protein and transports organic or inorganic molecules across 
cellular membranes. SLC35D1 gene pathogenic variants causes Schneckenbecken 
dysplasia (SHNKND) which is a rare lethal autosomal recessive disorder 
characterized by the snail-like pelvis, flattening of vertebral bodies, short 
and broad long bones with a dumbbell-like appearance, thoracic hypoplasia. Only 
six cases with homozygous SLC35D1 variants have been reported to date, and all 
of these cases were lost in the perinatal period. Here we report different 
family members with a novel SLC35D1 variant who presented a milder phenotype of 
SHNKND. The affected patients have common clinical features such as short 
stature, mild mesomelia, shortening of the lower extremity, genu valgum, and 
narrow thorax. Exome sequencing of the proband revealed a homozygous missense 
variant of SLC35D1 gene, c.401 T > C (p. Met134Thr). The affected siblings, 
their two cousins, and their paternal uncle with a similar phenotype were also 
homozygous for the variant. This is the first case report of a family with a 
novel likely pathogenic variant (p. Met134Thr) and mild phenotypic features. It 
has the largest family with different ages of patients (ages ranged 4-31 years 
old) reported to date. The present report supports the evidence that the p. 
Met134Thr variant is responsible for a milder phenotype than previously reported 
cases with SLC35D1 pathogenic variants.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.62939
PMID: 35934917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]