---
reference_id: "PMID:37887561"
title: "Sustained Suppression of Gorlin Syndrome-Associated Basal Cell Carcinomas with Vismodegib or Sonidegib: A Case Series."
authors:
- Wescott R
- Samlowski W
journal: Curr Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/curroncol30100661
keywords:
- Humans
- "Basal Cell Nevus Syndrome/drug therapy, pathology"
- "Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology"
- "Hedgehog Proteins/metabolism, therapeutic use"
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/drug therapy, pathology"
- Biphenyl Compounds
- Pyridines
- Anilides
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sustained Suppression of Gorlin Syndrome-Associated Basal Cell Carcinomas with Vismodegib or Sonidegib: A Case Series.
**Authors:** Wescott R, Samlowski W
**Journal:** Curr Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/curroncol30100661](https://doi.org/10.3390/curroncol30100661)

## Content

1. Curr Oncol. 2023 Oct 16;30(10):9156-9167. doi: 10.3390/curroncol30100661.

Sustained Suppression of Gorlin Syndrome-Associated Basal Cell Carcinomas with 
Vismodegib or Sonidegib: A Case Series.

Wescott R(1), Samlowski W(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, University of Nevada, Reno, NV 89557, USA.
(2)Comprehensive Cancer Centers of Nevada (Medical Oncology), Las Vegas, NV 
89148, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Kirk Kirkorian School of Medicine, University of 
Nevada Las Vegas (UNLV), Las Vegas, NV 89106, USA.

Nevoid basal-cell carcinoma syndrome (Gorlin syndrome) is characterized by 
numerous cutaneous basal cell carcinomas mediated by mutations in the hedgehog 
pathway. Vismodegib or sonidegib represent promising treatment options. We 
identified 10 Gorlin patients who were treated with sonidegib (n = 6) or 
vismodegib (n = 4) between March 2012 and March 2022. We analyzed the activity, 
toxicity, and duration of the response to oral hedgehog inhibitors. The number 
of new tumors that developed prior to treatment or after treatment as well as 
the time of response and durability of responses were assessed. All patients 
achieved a complete remission. With a 30.7 ± 48.4-month median follow-up, the 
drug treatment significantly reduced the number of new basal cell cancers from a 
mean of 28.3 ± 24.6 prior to treatment to a mean of 1.4 ± 2.0 during treatment 
(p = 0.0048). The median time to develop a new basal cell cancer was 47.3 
months. Three patients eventually developed localized recurrences. After 
resection, ongoing treatment suppressed the development of additional lesions. 
One patient developed numerous new drug-resistant basal cell cancers and died of 
acute leukemia. Six patients required treatment modifications for toxicity. 
Sustained hedgehog inhibitor treatment can suppress the progression of both new 
and existing basal cell carcinomas for an extended period. Drug administration 
schedule adjustments improved tolerance without altering efficacy, potentially 
contributing to a prolonged response duration.

DOI: 10.3390/curroncol30100661
PMCID: PMC10604938
PMID: 37887561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as potential conflicts of interest.