---
reference_id: "PMID:33532242"
title: Co-therapy with S-adenosylmethionine and nicotinamide riboside improves t-cell survival and function in Arts Syndrome (PRPS1 deficiency).
authors:
- Lenherr N
- Christodoulou J
- Duley J
- Dobritzsch D
- Fairbanks L
- Datta AN
- Filges I
- Gürtler N
- Roelofsen J
- van Kuilenburg ABP
- Kemper C
- West EE
- Szinnai G
- Huemer M
journal: Mol Genet Metab Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2021.100709
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Co-therapy with S-adenosylmethionine and nicotinamide riboside improves t-cell survival and function in Arts Syndrome (PRPS1 deficiency).
**Authors:** Lenherr N, Christodoulou J, Duley J, Dobritzsch D, Fairbanks L, Datta AN, Filges I, Gürtler N, Roelofsen J, van Kuilenburg ABP, Kemper C, West EE, Szinnai G, Huemer M
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgmr.2021.100709](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgmr.2021.100709)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2021 Jan 20;26:100709. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2021.100709.
eCollection 2021 Mar.

Co-therapy with S-adenosylmethionine and nicotinamide riboside improves t-cell
survival and function in Arts Syndrome (PRPS1 deficiency).

Lenherr N(1), Christodoulou J(2), Duley J(3), Dobritzsch D(4), Fairbanks L(5),
Datta AN(1), Filges I(6), Gürtler N(1)(7), Roelofsen J(8), van Kuilenburg
ABP(8), Kemper C(9), West EE(9), Szinnai G(1), Huemer M(1)(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University Children's Hospital Basel and
University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, The University of Melbourne, Murdoch Children's
Research Institute, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(3)School of Pharmacy, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(4)Department of Chemistry-BMC, Uppsala Universitet, Uppsala, Sweden.
(5)Purine Research Laboratory, St Thomas' Hospital, London SE1 7EH, UK.
(6)Medical Genetics, Institute of Medical Genetics and Pathology, University
Hospital and University of Basel, Switzerland.
(7)Department of Otolarynology, University Hospital of Basel, University of
Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(8)Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Department of Clinical Chemistry,
Amsterdam Gastroenterology & Metabolism, Cancer Center Amsterdam, Meibergdreef
9, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(9)Laboratory of Complement and Inflammation Research, National Heart, Lung and
Blood Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(10)Division of Metabolism and Children's Research Center, University Childrens'
Hospital Zürich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(11)Dept. of Paediatrics Landeskrankenhaus Bregenz, Bregenz, Austria.

Arts syndrome or phosphoribosyl-pyrophosphate-synthetase-1 (PRPS1) deficiency is
caused by loss-of-function mutations in the PRPS1 gene (Xq22.3). PRPS1 is an
initial and essential step for the synthesis of the nucleotides of purines,
pyrimidines, and nicotinamide. Classically, affected males present with
sensorineural hearing loss, optic atrophy, muscular hypotonia, developmental
impairment, and recurrent severe respiratory infections early in life. Treatment
of a 3-year old boy with S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) replenished erythrocyte
purine nucleotides of adenosine and guanosine, while SAM and nicotinamide
riboside co-therapy further improved his clinical phenotype as well as T-cell
survival and function.

© 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2021.100709
PMCID: PMC7823043
PMID: 33532242
