---
reference_id: "PMID:24769871"
title: "Fatty acid composition, oxidation status and volatile organic compounds in \"Colonnata\" lard from Large White or Cinta Senese pigs as affected by curing time."
authors:
- Serra A
- Buccioni A
- Rodriguez-Estrada MT
- Conte G
- Cappucci A
- Mele M
journal: Meat Sci
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.meatsci.2014.03.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fatty acid composition, oxidation status and volatile organic compounds in "Colonnata" lard from Large White or Cinta Senese pigs as affected by curing time.
**Authors:** Serra A, Buccioni A, Rodriguez-Estrada MT, Conte G, Cappucci A, Mele M
**Journal:** Meat Sci (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.meatsci.2014.03.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.meatsci.2014.03.002)

## Content

1. Meat Sci. 2014 Aug;97(4):504-12. doi: 10.1016/j.meatsci.2014.03.002. Epub 2014
 Mar 13.

Fatty acid composition, oxidation status and volatile organic compounds in 
"Colonnata" lard from Large White or Cinta Senese pigs as affected by curing 
time.

Serra A(1), Buccioni A(2), Rodriguez-Estrada MT(3), Conte G(4), Cappucci A(4), 
Mele M(5).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Agrarie, Alimentari e Agro-ambientali, University of 
Pisa, Italy; Centro di Ricerche Agroambientali "E. Avanzi", University of Pisa, 
Italy. Electronic address: andrea.serra@unipi.it.
(2)Dipartimento di Scienze delle Produzioni Agroalimentari e dell'Ambiente, 
University of Firenze, Italy.
(3)Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Agro-Alimentari Alma Mater Studiorum, 
University of Bologna, Italy.
(4)Centro di Ricerche Agroambientali "E. Avanzi", University of Pisa, Italy.
(5)Dipartimento di Scienze Agrarie, Alimentari e Agro-ambientali, University of 
Pisa, Italy; Centro di Ricerche Agroambientali "E. Avanzi", University of Pisa, 
Italy.

The aim of the present paper was to evaluate the fatty acid composition, 
lipolysis, lipid oxidation and volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in Colonnata 
lard from Large White (LW) or Cinta Senese (CS) pigs during one-year of curing. 
CS lard contained higher amounts of unsaturated fatty acids than that from LW, 
due to the different rearing and feeding systems. Despite higher lipolysis in CS 
backfat during the curing period, the rate of fatty acid and cholesterol 
oxidation was higher in LW. The amount of cholesterol oxidation products (COPs) 
and thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARs) significantly decreased 
after 3 months of curing, regardless of the type of lard. VOCs composition of 
lard was affected by curing time, but not by breed. While volatile fatty acid 
oxidation products (mainly aldehydes) were present at the beginning of curing, 
subsequently other volatile compounds (such as sulphur compounds and terpenes) 
that derived from ingredients used for lard production, increased in the 
samples.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.meatsci.2014.03.002
PMID: 24769871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]