---
reference_id: "PMID:39316598"
title: "Transmission of dominant strains of Campylobacter jejuni and Campylobacter coli between farms and retail stores in Ecuador: Genetic diversity and antimicrobial resistance."
authors:
- Montero L
- Medina-Santana JL
- Ishida M
- Sauders B
- Trueba G
- Vinueza-Burgos C
journal: PLoS One
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0308030
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transmission of dominant strains of Campylobacter jejuni and Campylobacter coli between farms and retail stores in Ecuador: Genetic diversity and antimicrobial resistance.
**Authors:** Montero L, Medina-Santana JL, Ishida M, Sauders B, Trueba G, Vinueza-Burgos C
**Journal:** PLoS One (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0308030](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0308030)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2024 Sep 24;19(9):e0308030. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0308030. 
eCollection 2024.

Transmission of dominant strains of Campylobacter jejuni and Campylobacter coli 
between farms and retail stores in Ecuador: Genetic diversity and antimicrobial 
resistance.

Montero L(1), Medina-Santana JL(2), Ishida M(3), Sauders B(3), Trueba G(1), 
Vinueza-Burgos C(2).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Microbiología, Colegio de Ciencias Biológicas y Ambientales, 
Universidad San Francisco de Quito, Quito, Ecuador.
(2)Unidad de investigación de Enfermedades Transmitidas por Alimentos y 
Resistencia a los Antimicrobianos (UNIETAR), Facultad de Medicina Veterinaria y 
Zootecnia, Universidad Central de Ecuador, Quito, Ecuador.
(3)Division of Food Laboratory, New York State Department of Agriculture and 
Markets, Albany, NY, United States of America.

Thermotolerant Campylobacter is an important zoonotic pathogen known for causing 
gastroenteritis in humans, with poultry as its primary reservoir. A total of 468 
samples were collected, of which 335 were chicken carcass samples (representing 
the food component), and 133 were chicken caeca samples (representing the animal 
component). These samples underwent culture, with colonies examined under a 
microscope. Species identification was achieved through multiplex PCR. 
Additionally, antimicrobial susceptibility profiles were determined using the 
Kirby-Bauer method, testing for sensitivity to gentamicin, ciprofloxacin, 
tetracycline, and erythromycin. Additionally, 55 C. jejuni (62.5%) and 33 C. 
coli (37.5%) isolates were selected for whole genome sequencing (WGS). A High 
prevalence of Campylobacter was observed, with rates of 95.5% (n = 127, CI95%: 
92.5% - 98.5%) in the animal component and 72.5% (n = 243, CI95%: 69.9% - 75.1%) 
in the food component. Specifically, C. jejuni was detected in 33.1% (n = 42) of 
poultry farms and 38.3% (n = 93) of chicken carcasses, while C. coli was found 
in 64.6% (n = 82) of poultry farms and 60.5% (n = 147) of chicken carcasses. 
Antimicrobials with the highest rates of resistance (67%-100%) were 
ciprofloxacin and tetracycline, in both animal and food component isolates. 
Erythromycin resistance was notable, ranging from 22% to 33%, with only two C. 
jejuni isolates from retail were resistant to gentamicin. Furthermore, multidrug 
resistance was identified in 23% (20 isolates) of the Campylobacter isolates. 
Genetic analysis revealed the presence of fourteen resistance genes in both C. 
jejuni and C. coli isolates, including tet(O), blaOXA-460, blaOXA-184, 
blaOXA-489, blaOXA-193, blaOXA-784, blaOXA-603, aph(3')-IIIa, aad9, aph(2'')-If, 
aadE-Cc, sat4, and ant(6)-Ia. Additionally, twenty-five plasmids were detected 
in the 88 Campylobacter isolates examined. Interestingly, most isolates also 
harbored genes encoding putative virulence factors associated with 
pathogenicity, invasion, adherence, and production of cytolethal distending 
toxin (cdt): cheV, cheA, cheW, cheY, flaA, flgR, flaC, flaD, flgB, flgC, ciaB, 
ciaC. The WGS analysis showed the presence of several cgSTs in both animal and 
food components, with nine of them widely disseminated between components. 
Moreover, C. coli and C. jejuni isolates from different sources presented less 
than 11 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), suggesting clonality (16 
isolates). Further analysis using SNP tree demonstrated widespread distribution 
of certain C. jejuni and C. coli clones across multiple farms and retail stores. 
This study presents, for the first-time, insights into the clonality, plasmid 
diversity, virulence, and antimicrobial resistance (AMR) of thermotolerant 
Campylobacter strains originating from the Ecuadorian poultry industry. The 
identification of AMR genes associated with the main antibiotics used in the 
treatment of campylobacteriosis in humans, highlights the importance of the 
prudent use of antimicrobials in the poultry industry. Additionally, this 
research remarks the need for regional studies to understand the epidemiology of 
this pathogen.

Copyright: This is an open access article, free of all copyright, and may be 
freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise 
used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the 
Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0308030
PMCID: PMC11421796
PMID: 39316598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.