---
reference_id: "PMID:25755533"
title: Gaucher disease.
authors:
- Nagral A
journal: J Clin Exp Hepatol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.jceh.2014.02.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gaucher disease.
**Authors:** Nagral A
**Journal:** J Clin Exp Hepatol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jceh.2014.02.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jceh.2014.02.005)

## Content

1. J Clin Exp Hepatol. 2014 Mar;4(1):37-50. doi: 10.1016/j.jceh.2014.02.005. Epub
 2014 Apr 21.

Gaucher disease.

Nagral A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Jaslok Hospital and Research Centre, Mumbai, 
Maharashtra, India.

Gaucher disease is the commonest lysosomal storage disease seen in India and 
worldwide. It should be considered in any child or adult with an unexplained 
splenohepatomegaly and cytopenia which are seen in the three types of Gaucher 
disease. Type 1 is the non-neuronopathic form and type 2 and 3 are the 
neuronopathic forms. Type 2 is a more severe neuronopathic form leading to 
mortality by 2 years of age. Definitive diagnosis is made by a blood test-the 
glucocerebrosidase assay. There is no role for histological examination of the 
bone marrow, liver or spleen for diagnosis of the disease. Molecular studies for 
mutations are useful for confirming diagnosis, screening family members and 
prognosticating the disease. A splenectomy should not be performed except for 
palliation or when there is no response to enzyme replacement treatment or no 
possibility of getting any definitive treatment. Splenectomy may worsen skeletal 
and lung manifestations in Gaucher disease. Enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) has 
completely revolutionized the prognosis and is now the standard of care for 
patients with this disease. Best results are seen in type 1 disease with good 
resolution of splenohepatomegaly, cytopenia and bone symptoms. Neurological 
symptoms in type 3 disease need supportive care. ERT is of no benefit in type 2 
disease. Monitoring of patients on ERT involves evaluation of growth, blood 
counts, liver and spleen size and biomarkers such as chitotriosidase which 
reflect the disease burden. Therapy with ERT is very expensive and though 
patients in India have so far got the drug through a charitable access 
programme, there is a need for the government to facilitate access to treatment 
for this potentially curable disease. Bone marrow transplantation is an inferior 
option but may be considered when access to expensive ERT is not possible.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jceh.2014.02.005
PMCID: PMC4017182
PMID: 25755533