---
reference_id: "PMID:28179030"
title: "Survival in infants treated with sebelipase Alfa for lysosomal acid lipase deficiency: an open-label, multicenter, dose-escalation study."
authors:
- Jones SA
- Rojas-Caro S
- Quinn AG
- Friedman M
- Marulkar S
- Ezgu F
- Zaki O
- Gargus JJ
- Hughes J
- Plantaz D
- Vara R
- Eckert S
- Arnoux JB
- Brassier A
- Le Quan Sang KH
- Valayannopoulos V
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-017-0587-3
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Sterol Esterase/therapeutic use
- Survival Analysis
- "Wolman Disease/drug therapy, mortality"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Survival in infants treated with sebelipase Alfa for lysosomal acid lipase deficiency: an open-label, multicenter, dose-escalation study.
**Authors:** Jones SA, Rojas-Caro S, Quinn AG, Friedman M, Marulkar S, Ezgu F, Zaki O, Gargus JJ, Hughes J, Plantaz D, Vara R, Eckert S, Arnoux JB, Brassier A, Le Quan Sang KH, Valayannopoulos V
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-017-0587-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-017-0587-3)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2017 Feb 8;12(1):25. doi: 10.1186/s13023-017-0587-3.

Survival in infants treated with sebelipase Alfa for lysosomal acid lipase
deficiency: an open-label, multicenter, dose-escalation study.

Jones SA(1), Rojas-Caro S(2), Quinn AG(2)(3), Friedman M(4), Marulkar S(4), Ezgu
F(5), Zaki O(6), Gargus JJ(7), Hughes J(8), Plantaz D(9), Vara R(10), Eckert
S(2), Arnoux JB(11), Brassier A(11), Le Quan Sang KH(11), Valayannopoulos
V(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, 6th floor, St Mary's Hospital,
Central Manchester Foundation Trust, University of Manchester, Oxford Road,
Manchester, M13 9WL, UK. simon.jones@cmft.nhs.uk.
(2)Synageva BioPharma Corp., 33 Hayden Avenue, Lexington, MA, 02421, USA.
(3)Present: IDBioPharm Consulting, LLC, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 100 College Street, New Haven, CT, 06510, USA.
(5)Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, Gazi Hospital, 10th Floor, Beşevler
Ankara, Turkey.
(6)Ain Shams University Pediatrics Hospital, 3, Kamal Raslan, Heliopolis, Cairo,
11771, Egypt.
(7)University of California, Irvine, 2056 Hewitt Hall, 843 Health Sciences Road,
Irvine, CA, 92697, USA.
(8)Temple Street Children's University Hospital, 1 Temple Street, Dublin, 1,
Ireland.
(9)Hôpital Couple-Enfant CHU Grenoble, Avenue Maquis du Grésivaudan, 38700 La
Tronche, Grenoble, France.
(10)Evelina Children's Hospital, Westminster Bridge Road, London, SE1 7EH, UK.
(11)Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades and IMAGINE Institute, 149 Rue de Sèvres,
75015, Paris, France.
(12)Present: Sanofi Genzyme, Cambridge, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Infants presenting with lysosomal acid lipase deficiency have marked
failure to thrive, diarrhea, massive hepatosplenomegaly, anemia, rapidly
progressive liver disease, and death typically in the first 6 months of life;
the only available potential treatment has been hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation, which is associated with high morbidity and mortality in this
population. The study objective was to evaluate safety and efficacy (including
survival) of enzyme replacement with sebelipase alfa in infants with lysosomal
acid lipase deficiency. This is an ongoing multicenter, open-label, phase 2/3
study conducted in nine countries. The study enrolled infants with growth
failure prior to 6 months of age with rapidly progressive lysosomal acid lipase
deficiency; they received once-weekly doses of sebelipase alfa initiated at
0.35 mg/kg with intrapatient dose escalation up to 5 mg/kg. The main outcome of
interest is survival to 12 months and survival beyond 24 months of age.
RESULTS: Nine patients were enrolled; median age at baseline was 3.0 months
(range 1.1-5.8 months). Sixty-seven percent (exact 95% CI 30%-93%) of sebelipase
alfa-treated infants survived to 12 months of age compared with 0% (exact 95% CI
0%-16%) for a historical control group (n = 21). Patients who survived to age
12 months exhibited improvements in weight-for-age, reductions in markers of
liver dysfunction and hepatosplenomegaly, and improvements in anemia and
gastrointestinal symptoms. Three deaths occurred early (first few months of
life), two patients died because of advanced disease, and a third patient died
following complications of non-protocol-specified abdominal paracentesis. A
fourth death occurred at 15 months of age and was related to other clinical
conditions. The five surviving patients have survived to age ≥24 months with
continued sebelipase alfa treatment; all have displayed marked improvement in
growth parameters and liver function. Serious adverse events considered related
to sebelipase alfa were reported in one of the nine infants (infusion reaction:
tachycardia, pallor, chills, and pyrexia). Most infusion-associated reactions
were mild and non-serious.
CONCLUSION: Sebelipase alfa markedly improved survival with substantial
clinically meaningful improvements in growth and other key disease
manifestations in infants with rapidly progressive lysosomal acid lipase
deficiency TRIAL REGISTRATION: Clinicaltrials.gov NCT01371825 . Registered 9
June 2011.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-017-0587-3
PMCID: PMC5299659
PMID: 28179030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
