---
reference_id: "PMID:40321354"
title: "Aromatase deficiency due to novel CYP19A1 mutation: a rare cause of maternal and fetal virilization."
authors:
- Naseem A
- Zahid M
- Arshad K
- Hussain SS
- Aftab S
- Saeed A
- Cheema HA
journal: Case Rep Perinat Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1515/crpm-2023-0032
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aromatase deficiency due to novel CYP19A1 mutation: a rare cause of maternal and fetal virilization.
**Authors:** Naseem A, Zahid M, Arshad K, Hussain SS, Aftab S, Saeed A, Cheema HA
**Journal:** Case Rep Perinat Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1515/crpm-2023-0032](https://doi.org/10.1515/crpm-2023-0032)

## Content

1. Case Rep Perinat Med. 2024 Apr 26;13(1):20230032. doi: 10.1515/crpm-2023-0032.
 eCollection 2024 Jan.

Aromatase deficiency due to novel CYP19A1 mutation: a rare cause of maternal and 
fetal virilization.

Naseem A(1), Zahid M(1), Arshad K(1), Hussain SS(1), Aftab S(1), Saeed A(2), 
Cheema HA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, University of Child 
Health Sciences, The Children's Hospital Lahore, Lahore, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, 
University of Child Health Sciences, The Children's Hospital Lahore, Lahore, 
Pakistan.

OBJECTIVES: Aromatase deficiency is a rare autosomal recessive condition due to 
a mutation in the CYP19A1 encoding aromatase enzyme. This enzyme protects the 
fetus and mother from excess androgens by converting them into estrogen. We are 
reporting a case of aromatase deficiency presented with atypical genitalia and 
maternal virilization due to a novel mutation in CYP19A1.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 10-day-old newborn presented with atypical genitalia and a 
history of maternal virilization during pregnancy. On examination, the baby had 
a Prader score of 3. Further investigation revealed karyotype 46 XX, with a 
normal uterus and ovaries on ultrasonography. The hormonal profile of the baby 
was normal except for the raised follicle stimulating hormone (FSH). Maternal 
ultrasound revealed polycystic ovaries, and the hormonal profile was within the 
normal range with slightly raised testosterone. Whole exome sequencing was done, 
which reported that the baby was carrying a novel homozygous mutation of the 
CYP19A1 gene c.575G>C p. (Arg192Pro), confirming the diagnosis of aromatase 
deficiency.
CONCLUSIONS: Aromatase deficiency is a rare condition. A history of maternal 
virilization during pregnancy in a child born with atypical genitalia should 
alert physicians to consider aromatase deficiency.

© 2024 the author(s), published by De Gruyter, Berlin/Boston.

DOI: 10.1515/crpm-2023-0032
PMCID: PMC12048141
PMID: 40321354

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors state no 
conflict of interest.