---
reference_id: "PMID:27329761"
title: "A novel missense variant in PRKCB segregates low-frequency hearing loss in an autosomal dominant family with Meniere's disease."
authors:
- Martín-Sierra C
- Requena T
- Frejo L
- Price SD
- Gallego-Martinez A
- Batuecas-Caletrio A
- Santos-Pérez S
- Soto-Varela A
- Lysakowski A
- Lopez-Escamez JA
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddw183
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel missense variant in PRKCB segregates low-frequency hearing loss in an autosomal dominant family with Meniere's disease.
**Authors:** Martín-Sierra C, Requena T, Frejo L, Price SD, Gallego-Martinez A, Batuecas-Caletrio A, Santos-Pérez S, Soto-Varela A, Lysakowski A, Lopez-Escamez JA
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddw183](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddw183)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Aug 15;25(16):3407-3415. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddw183. Epub
2016  Jun 21.

A novel missense variant in PRKCB segregates low-frequency hearing loss in an 
autosomal dominant family with Meniere's disease.

Martín-Sierra C(1), Requena T(1), Frejo L(1), Price SD(2), Gallego-Martinez 
A(1), Batuecas-Caletrio A(3), Santos-Pérez S(4), Soto-Varela A(4), Lysakowski 
A(2)(5), Lopez-Escamez JA(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Otology & Neurotology Group CTS495, Department of Genomic Medicine, GENYO - 
Centre for Genomics and Oncological Research - Pfizer/University of 
Granada/Junta de Andalucía, PTS, Granada 18016, Spain.
(2)Dept. of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Univ. of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 
60612, USA.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology, Hospital Universitario Salamanca 37007, Spain.
(4)Division of Otoneurology, Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Complexo 
Hospitalario Universitario, Santiago de Compostela 15706, Spain.
(5)Dept. of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Univ. of Illinois at Chicago, 
Chicago IL 60612, USA.
(6)Otology & Neurotology Group CTS495, Department of Genomic Medicine, GENYO - 
Centre for Genomics and Oncological Research - Pfizer/University of 
Granada/Junta de Andalucía, PTS, Granada 18016, Spain 
antonio.lopezescamez@genyo.es.
(7)Department of Otolaryngology, Instituto de Investigación Biosanitaria 
ibs.GRANADA, Complejo Hospitalario Universidad de Granada (CHUGRA) Granada 
18016, Spain.

Meniere's Disease (MD) is a complex disorder associated with an accumulation of 
endolymph in the membranous labyrinth in the inner ear. It is characterized by 
recurrent attacks of spontaneous vertigo associated with sensorineural hearing 
loss (SNHL) and tinnitus. The SNHL usually starts at low and medium frequencies 
with a variable progression to high frequencies. We identified a novel missense 
variant in the PRKCB gene in a Spanish family with MD segregating low-to-middle 
frequency SNHL. Confocal imaging showed strong PKCB II protein labelling in 
non-sensory cells, the tectal cells and inner border cells of the rat organ of 
Corti with a tonotopic expression gradient. The PKCB II signal was more 
pronounced in the apical turn of the cochlea when compared with the middle and 
basal turns. It was also much higher in cochlear tissue than in vestibular 
tissue. Taken together, our findings identify PRKCB gene as a novel candidate 
gene for familial MD and its expression gradient in supporting cells of the 
organ of Corti deserves attention, given the role of supporting cells in 
K+ recycling within the endolymph, and its apical turn location may explain the 
onset of hearing loss at low frequencies in MD.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddw183
PMCID: PMC5179939
PMID: 27329761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]