---
reference_id: "PMID:35468688"
title: "Optimising Outcomes in Non Small Cell Lung Cancer: Targeting Cancer Cachexia."
authors:
- Phillips I
- Stares M
- Allan L
- Sayers J
- Skipworth R
- Laird B
journal: Front Biosci (Landmark Ed)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.31083/j.fbl2704129
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Optimising Outcomes in Non Small Cell Lung Cancer: Targeting Cancer Cachexia.
**Authors:** Phillips I, Stares M, Allan L, Sayers J, Skipworth R, Laird B
**Journal:** Front Biosci (Landmark Ed) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.31083/j.fbl2704129](https://doi.org/10.31083/j.fbl2704129)

## Content

1. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2022 Apr 18;27(4):129. doi: 10.31083/j.fbl2704129.

Optimising Outcomes in Non Small Cell Lung Cancer: Targeting Cancer Cachexia.

Phillips I(1)(2), Stares M(1)(2), Allan L(3), Sayers J(4), Skipworth R(5), Laird 
B(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Edinburgh Cancer Centre, Western General Hospital, EH4 2LF Edinburgh, 
Scotland, UK.
(2)Cancer Research UK Edinburgh Cancer Research Centre, University of Edinburgh, 
EH4 2XR Edinburgh, Scotland, UK.
(3)Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, Royal Surrey NHS Foundation Trust, GU2 
7XX Guildford, Surrey, UK.
(4)St Columba Hospice, EH5 3RW Edinburgh, Scotland, UK.
(5)Clinical and Surgical Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Royal Infirmary 
Edinburgh, EH16 4SA Edinburgh, Scotland, UK.

Lung cancer is the commonest malignancy worldwide and the leading cause of 
cancer death. Half of patients with lung cancer present with advanced disease. 
The number of systemic therapies including immunotherapy and targeted treatment 
are rapidly increasing. Despite this, the outcomes for many patients with 
locally advanced and advanced lung cancer are poor, as many patients are too 
unwell for treatment. One of the reasons patients with Non-Small Cell Lung 
Cancer are not fit for treatment is cancer cachexia, which is common (upto 75% 
of patients) in this group. This metabolic syndrome presents clinically as 
weight loss (muscle +/- fat), decreased physical function (patients less active) 
and anorexia on a background of systemic inflammation. Currently there is not an 
optimal management pathway for these patients, however, there is emerging data 
that multi-modal intervention including nutritional support, physical training 
and pharmacological therapy may have a role in treating cachexia. This review 
discusses assessment and intervention in cancer cachexia.

© 2022 The Author(s). Published by IMR Press.

DOI: 10.31083/j.fbl2704129
PMID: 35468688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.