---
reference_id: "PMID:25305078"
title: "Identification of two novel mutations in FAM136A and DTNA genes in autosomal-dominant familial Meniere's disease."
authors:
- Requena T
- Cabrera S
- Martín-Sierra C
- Price SD
- Lysakowski A
- Lopez-Escamez JA
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu524
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of two novel mutations in FAM136A and DTNA genes in autosomal-dominant familial Meniere's disease.
**Authors:** Requena T, Cabrera S, Martín-Sierra C, Price SD, Lysakowski A, Lopez-Escamez JA
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddu524](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddu524)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Feb 15;24(4):1119-26. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu524. Epub 2014
Oct  9.

Identification of two novel mutations in FAM136A and DTNA genes in 
autosomal-dominant familial Meniere's disease.

Requena T(1), Cabrera S(1), Martín-Sierra C(1), Price SD(2), Lysakowski A(2), 
Lopez-Escamez JA(3).

Author information:
(1)Otology & Neurotology Group CTS495, Department of Genomic Medicine, GENYO - 
Centre for Genomics and Oncological Research - Pfizer/University of 
Granada/Junta de Andalucía, PTS, Granada 18016, Spain.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Illinois, Chicago, IL 
60612, USA and.
(3)Otology & Neurotology Group CTS495, Department of Genomic Medicine, GENYO - 
Centre for Genomics and Oncological Research - Pfizer/University of 
Granada/Junta de Andalucía, PTS, Granada 18016, Spain, Department of 
Otolaryngology, Hospital de Poniente, El Ejido, Almería 04700, Spain 
antonio.lopezescamez@genyo.es.

Meniere's disease (MD) is a chronic disorder of the inner ear defined by 
sensorineural hearing loss, tinnitus and episodic vertigo, and familial MD is 
observed in 5-15% of sporadic cases. Although its pathophysiology is largely 
unknown, studies in human temporal bones have found an accumulation of endolymph 
in the scala media of the cochlea. By whole-exome sequencing, we have identified 
two novel heterozygous single-nucleotide variants in FAM136A and DTNA genes, 
both in a Spanish family with three affected cases in consecutive generations, 
highly suggestive of autosomal-dominant inheritance. The nonsense mutation in 
the FAM136A gene leads to a stop codon that disrupts the FAM136A protein 
product. Sequencing revealed two mRNA transcripts of FAM136A in lymphoblasts 
from patients, which were confirmed by immunoblotting. Carriers of the FAM136A 
mutation showed a significant decrease in the expression level of both 
transcripts in lymphoblastoid cell lines. The missense mutation in the DTNA gene 
produces a novel splice site which skips exon 21 and leads to a shorter 
alternative transcript. We also demonstrated that FAM136A and DTNA proteins are 
expressed in the neurosensorial epithelium of the crista ampullaris of the rat 
by immunohistochemistry. While FAM136A encodes a mitochondrial protein with 
unknown function, DTNA encodes a cytoskeleton-interacting membrane protein 
involved in the formation and stability of synapses with a crucial role in the 
permeability of the blood-brain barrier. Neither of these genes has been 
described in patients with hearing loss, FAM136A and DTNA being candidate gene 
for familiar MD.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddu524
PMCID: PMC4834881
PMID: 25305078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]