---
reference_id: "PMID:33673911"
title: A Target Antigen-Based Approach to the Classification of Membranous Nephropathy.
authors:
- Bobart SA
- Tehranian S
- Sethi S
- Alexander MP
- Nasr SH
- Casal Moura M
- Vrana JA
- Said S
- Giesen CD
- Lieske JC
- Fervenza FC
- De Vriese AS
journal: Mayo Clin Proc
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2020.11.028
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Antigens/metabolism
- Autoantibodies/metabolism
- Cadherins/metabolism
- Female
- "Glomerulonephritis, Membranous/immunology"
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Male
- Middle Aged
- N-Acetylglucosaminyltransferases/metabolism
- Neural Cell Adhesion Molecules/metabolism
- Protocadherins
- "Receptors, Phospholipase A2/metabolism"
- Severity of Illness Index
- Thrombospondins/metabolism
- Exostosin 2
- Exostosin 1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Target Antigen-Based Approach to the Classification of Membranous Nephropathy.
**Authors:** Bobart SA, Tehranian S, Sethi S, Alexander MP, Nasr SH, Casal Moura M, Vrana JA, Said S, Giesen CD, Lieske JC, Fervenza FC, De Vriese AS
**Journal:** Mayo Clin Proc (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mayocp.2020.11.028](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2020.11.028)

## Content

1. Mayo Clin Proc. 2021 Mar;96(3):577-591. doi: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2020.11.028.

A Target Antigen-Based Approach to the Classification of Membranous Nephropathy.

Bobart SA(1), Tehranian S(2), Sethi S(3), Alexander MP(3), Nasr SH(3), Casal 
Moura M(4), Vrana JA(3), Said S(3), Giesen CD(3), Lieske JC(2), Fervenza FC(2), 
De Vriese AS(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; 
Cleveland Clinic Florida, Weston.
(2)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(4)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(5)Division of Nephrology and Infectious Diseases, AZ Sint-Jan Brugge, Brugge, 
Belgium; Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: 
an.devriese@azsintjan.be.

Comment in
    Mayo Clin Proc. 2021 Mar;96(3):523-525. doi: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2021.01.011.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the clinical and pathological phenotype of membranous 
nephropathy (MN) associated with M-type-phospholipase-A2-receptor (PLA2R), 
thrombospondin-type-1-domain-containing-7A (THSD7A), semaphorin 3B (SEMA3B), 
neural-epidermal-growth-factor-like-1-protein (NELL-1), protocadherin 7 (PCDH7), 
exostosin 1/exostosin 2 (EXT1/EXT2) and neural cell adhesion molecule 1 (NCAM-1) 
as target antigens.
METHODS: A retrospective cohort of 270 adult patients with biopsy-proven MN 
diagnosed between January 2015 and April 2020 was classified as PLA2R-, THSD7A-, 
SEMA3B-, NELL-1-, PCDH7-, EXT1/EXT2-, NCAM-1-associated or septuple-negative MN 
using serologic tests, immunostaining, and/or mass spectrometry. Clinical, 
biochemical, pathologic, and follow-up data were systematically abstracted from 
the medical records, including disease activity of conditions traditionally 
associated with MN and occurring within 5 years of MN diagnosis.
RESULTS: Patients with PLA2R-associated MN were predominantly middle-aged white 
men without associated disease. The presence of associated disease did not 
affect the clinical and pathologic characteristics of PLA2R-associated MN, 
suggesting that they were coincidental rather than causally linked. THSD7A-, 
NELL-1-, PCDH7-, and NCAM-1-associated MN were rare and SEMA3B-associated MN was 
not discovered in our cohort. EXT1/EXT2-associated MN was primarily diagnosed in 
younger women with active systemic autoimmunity. A significant proportion of 
septuple-negative patients had associated malignancy or systemic autoimmunity.
CONCLUSION: The widely used distinction between primary and secondary MN has 
limitations. We propose a refined terminology that combines the target antigen 
and associated disease to better classify MN and guide clinical decision making.

Copyright © 2020 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research. Published 
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2020.11.028
PMID: 33673911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]