---
reference_id: "PMID:24321419"
title: Risk factors for arterial thrombosis in antiphospholipid syndrome.
authors:
- Matyja-Bednarczyk A
- Swadźba J
- Iwaniec T
- Sanak M
- Dziedzina S
- Ćmiel A
- Musiał J
journal: Thromb Res
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2013.11.012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk factors for arterial thrombosis in antiphospholipid syndrome.
**Authors:** Matyja-Bednarczyk A, Swadźba J, Iwaniec T, Sanak M, Dziedzina S, Ćmiel A, Musiał J
**Journal:** Thromb Res (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.thromres.2013.11.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.thromres.2013.11.012)

## Content

1. Thromb Res. 2014 Feb;133(2):173-6. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2013.11.012. Epub 
2013 Nov 26.

Risk factors for arterial thrombosis in antiphospholipid syndrome.

Matyja-Bednarczyk A(1), Swadźba J(1), Iwaniec T(1), Sanak M(1), Dziedzina S(1), 
Ćmiel A(2), Musiał J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow, 
Poland.
(2)Faculty of Applied Mathematics, University of Science and Technology, Krakow, 
Poland.
(3)Department of Medicine, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow, 
Poland. Electronic address: mmmusia@cyf-kr.edu.pl.

INTRODUCTION: Antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is associated with the risk of 
both arterial and venous thrombosis. However, it is not known which factors 
might determine the location of thrombosis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To retrospectively characterize factors associated with 
the risk of arterial thrombosis in a cohort of APS patients. Analysis included 
laboratory and clinical criteria of APS, together with classical cardiovascular 
risk factors and the possible role of platelet integrin α₂β₁ (807 C/T) and 
α(IIb)β₃ (PI A1/2) genetic polymorphisms. We enrolled 163 APS patients (123 
women and 40 men aged 21-75; mean age 43 years); 78 suffered from arterial 
thrombosis.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences in the frequency or titers of 
different antiphospholipid antibodies with the exception of slightly increased 
frequency of IgG anticardiolipin antibodies (ACL) in the arterial thrombosis 
group. Livedo reticularis was observed significantly more often in the arterial 
thrombosis group, particularly in stroke patients. In univariate analysis 
arterial thrombosis was associated with male gender (OR-2,201; p=0,033), 
arterial hypertension (OR-2,81; p=0,002) and hypercholesterolemia (OR-3,69; 
p=0,001). On multivariate analysis arterial hypertension (OR=1,78; p=0,008) and 
hypercholesterolemia (OR=2,001; p=0,002) remained as independent risk factors 
for arterial thrombosis. Platelet glycoprotein polymorphisms studied did not 
show any significant associations with arterial thrombosis in APS patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Among APS patients those with ACL IgG antibodies, having livedo 
reticularis, and suffering from hypertension an hypercholesterolemia are at the 
increased risk of arterial thrombosis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.thromres.2013.11.012
PMID: 24321419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]