---
reference_id: "PMID:24999515"
title: Mandibulofacial Dysostosis with Microcephaly.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Lines M
- Hartley T
- MacDonald SK
- Boycott KM
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mandibulofacial Dysostosis with Microcephaly.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Lines M, Hartley T, MacDonald SK, Boycott KM

## Content

1. Mandibulofacial Dysostosis with Microcephaly.

Lines M(1), Hartley T(2), MacDonald SK(2), Boycott KM(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2014 Jul 3 [updated 2023 Apr 6].

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Alberta Children's Hospital, 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada
(2)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, 
Canada
(3)Department of Genetics, Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, 
Ontario, Canada

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Mandibulofacial dysostosis with microcephaly (MFDM) is 
characterized by malar and mandibular hypoplasia, microcephaly (congenital or 
postnatal onset), intellectual disability (mild, moderate, or severe), 
malformations of the external ear, and hearing loss that is typically 
conductive. Associated craniofacial malformations may include cleft palate, 
choanal atresia, zygomatic arch cleft (identified on cranial CT scan), and 
facial asymmetry. Other relatively common findings (present in 25%-35% of 
individuals) can include cardiac anomalies, thumb anomalies, esophageal 
atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula, short stature, spine anomalies, and epilepsy.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of MFDM is confirmed in a proband with typical 
clinical findings and a heterozygous pathogenic variant in EFTUD2 identified by 
genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Individualized treatment of 
craniofacial manifestations is managed by a multidisciplinary team which may 
include: oromaxillofacial surgery, plastic surgery, otolaryngology, 
dentistry/orthodontics, and occupational and speech-language therapy. Newborn 
infants may have airway compromise at delivery due to choanal atresia and/or 
mandibular hypoplasia, requiring intubation and/or tracheostomy for initial 
stabilization. Esophageal atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula, cardiac defects, 
renal anomalies, and thumb anomalies are treated in a routine manner. Short 
stature is managed expectantly. Treatment of hearing loss is individualized, and 
may involve conventional hearing aid(s), bone-anchored hearing aid(s), and/or 
cochlear implant(s). Early individualized educational and therapy plans are 
devised as needed to optimize developmental outcome. Surveillance: Annual growth 
assessment and periodic developmental assessment with evaluation for obstructive 
sleep apnea and epilepsy as needed.
GENETIC COUNSELING: MFDM is an autosomal dominant disorder. Most individuals 
diagnosed with MFDM to date are presumed to have the disorder as the result of a 
de novo EFTUD2 pathogenic variant; in some individuals, the causative pathogenic 
variant was inherited from a parent with a milder phenotypic presentation. If a 
parent of the proband has the pathogenic variant identified in the proband, the 
risk to sibs of the proband (at conception) is 50%. Once the causative EFTUD2 
pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, prenatal 
testing and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 24999515