---
reference_id: "PMID:38966492"
title: "Pediatric dilated cardiomyopathy: a review of current clinical approaches and pathogenesis."
authors:
- Malinow I
- Fong DC
- Miyamoto M
- Badran S
- Hong CC
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2024.1404942
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pediatric dilated cardiomyopathy: a review of current clinical approaches and pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Malinow I, Fong DC, Miyamoto M, Badran S, Hong CC
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2024.1404942](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2024.1404942)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2024 Jun 19;12:1404942. doi: 10.3389/fped.2024.1404942. 
eCollection 2024.

Pediatric dilated cardiomyopathy: a review of current clinical approaches and 
pathogenesis.

Malinow I(1), Fong DC(1), Miyamoto M(1), Badran S(2), Hong CC(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States.
(2)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Michigan State University College of 
Human Medicine Helen Devos Children's Hospital, Grand Rapids, MI, United States.
(3)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Michigan State University 
College of Human Medicine, East Lansing, MI, United States.

Pediatric dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a rare, yet life-threatening 
cardiovascular condition characterized by systolic dysfunction with 
biventricular dilatation and reduced myocardial contractility. Therapeutic 
options are limited with nearly 40% of children undergoing heart transplant or 
death within 2 years of diagnosis. Pediatric patients are currently diagnosed 
based on correlating the clinical picture with echocardiographic findings. 
Patient age, etiology of disease, and parameters of cardiac function 
significantly impact prognosis. Treatments for pediatric DCM aim to ameliorate 
symptoms, reduce progression of disease, and prevent life-threatening 
arrhythmias. Many therapeutic agents with known efficacy in adults lack the same 
evidence in children. Unlike adult DCM, the pathogenesis of pediatric DCM is not 
well understood as approximately two thirds of cases are classified as 
idiopathic disease. Children experience unique gene expression changes and 
molecular pathway activation in response to DCM. Studies have pointed to a 
significant genetic component in pediatric DCM, with variants in genes related 
to sarcomere and cytoskeleton structure implicated. In this regard, pediatric 
DCM can be considered pediatric manifestations of inherited cardiomyopathy 
syndromes. Yet exciting recent studies in infantile DCM suggest that this subset 
has a distinct etiology involving defective postnatal cardiac maturation, such 
as the failure of programmed centrosome breakdown in cardiomyocytes. Improved 
knowledge of pathogenesis is central to developing child-specific treatment 
approaches. This review aims to discuss the established biological pathogenesis 
of pediatric DCM, current clinical guidelines, and promising therapeutic 
avenues, highlighting differences from adult disease. The overarching goal is to 
unravel the complexities surrounding this condition to facilitate the 
advancement of novel therapeutic interventions and improve prognosis and overall 
quality of life for pediatric patients affected by DCM.

© 2024 Malinow, Fong, Miyamoto, Badran and Hong.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2024.1404942
PMCID: PMC11223501
PMID: 38966492

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that 
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. 
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.