---
reference_id: "PMID:39008537"
title: Complete and durable regression of leptomeningeal involvement during lorlatinib treatment in a patient with lung cancer.
authors:
- Guaitoli G
- Martinelli E
- Trudu L
- Desideri I
- Mortini P
- Greco S
- Bruni A
- Greto D
- Pecchioli G
- Chiavelli C
- Dominici M
- Bertolini F
journal: Anticancer Drugs
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/CAD.0000000000001637
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- "Aminopyridines/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- "Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, pathology"
- Lactams/therapeutic use
- "Lactams, Macrocyclic/therapeutic use"
- "Lung Neoplasms/complications, drug therapy, pathology"
- "Meningeal Neoplasms/complications, drug therapy, pathology"
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- Pyrazoles/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Complete and durable regression of leptomeningeal involvement during lorlatinib treatment in a patient with lung cancer.
**Authors:** Guaitoli G, Martinelli E, Trudu L, Desideri I, Mortini P, Greco S, Bruni A, Greto D, Pecchioli G, Chiavelli C, Dominici M, Bertolini F
**Journal:** Anticancer Drugs (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/CAD.0000000000001637](https://doi.org/10.1097/CAD.0000000000001637)

## Content

1. Anticancer Drugs. 2024 Oct 1;35(9):867-871. doi: 10.1097/CAD.0000000000001637.
 Epub 2024 Jul 9.

Complete and durable regression of leptomeningeal involvement during lorlatinib
treatment in a patient with lung cancer.

Guaitoli G(1), Martinelli E(1), Trudu L(1)(2), Desideri I(3)(4), Mortini P(5),
Greco S(1), Bruni A(6), Greto D(3), Pecchioli G(7), Chiavelli C(8), Dominici
M(1)(8), Bertolini F(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Oncology, Department of Oncology and Hematology, University
Hospital of Modena.
(2)PhD Program Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Department of Biomedical,
Metabolic and Neural Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena.
(3)Radiation Oncology Unit, Azienda Ospedaliera-Universitaria Careggi.
(4)Department of Biomedical, Experimental and Clinical Sciences 'Mario Serio',
University of Florence, Florence.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, San Raffaele University Health Institute Milan,
Milan.
(6)Division of Radiotherapy, Department of Oncology and Hematology, University
Hospital of Modena, Modena.
(7)Neurosurgery Unit, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Careggi, Florence.
(8)Laboratory of Cellular Therapy, Division of Oncology, Department of Medical
and Surgical Sciences for Children & Adults, University of Modena and Reggio
Emilia, Modena, Italy.

Metastatic spread to the central nervous system (CNS) is frequent in anaplastic
lymphoma kinase ( ALK )-rearranged non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and has an
important impact on patient prognosis and quality of life. Leptomeningeal
involvement may occur in up to 10% of cases of ALK-positive NSCLC. Lorlatinib is
a third-generation ALK inhibitor that has excellent CNS penetrability and
demonstrated its efficacy both in pretreated and treatment-naive patients.
Herein, we present the case of a 34-year-old patient diagnosed with stage IV
ALK-rearranged NSCLC who received two lines of ALK inhibitors (crizotinib
followed by alectinib) and several courses of brain stereotactic ablative
radiotherapy until leptomeningeal involvement was detected. Third-line
lorlatinib was then administered, and 2 months later encephalic MRI documented
complete regression of the leptomeningeal involvement that is still maintained
after 36 months while treatment with lorlatinib is still ongoing with good
tolerability. To the best of our knowledge, this is the longer intracranial
response reported in the literature, underlining the importance of the most
appropriate choice of systemic treatments and their integration with
loco-regional approaches to improve outcomes.

Copyright © 2024 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/CAD.0000000000001637
PMCID: PMC11410147
PMID: 39008537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: G.G. reported advisory fees from Roche.
Editorial fees from Novartis. Travels and accomodations from AstraZeneca, BMS,
MSD and Novartis all outside the current paper. A.B. reported speaker’s fees
from Astra Zeneca, Jannssen, Ipsen, and MSD. Travel accomodations from Astra
Zeneca, Janssen, all outside the current paper. For the remaining authors, there
are no relevant conflicts of interest on the current work.
