---
reference_id: "PMID:17188796"
title: "N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor function and excitotoxicity in Huntington's disease."
authors:
- Fan MM
- Raymond LA
journal: Prog Neurobiol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2006.11.003
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Excitatory Amino Acids/toxicity
- Humans
- "Huntington Disease/metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- Neurons/drug effects
- "Receptors, N-Methyl-D-Aspartate/physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor function and excitotoxicity in Huntington's disease.
**Authors:** Fan MM, Raymond LA
**Journal:** Prog Neurobiol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pneurobio.2006.11.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2006.11.003)

## Content

1. Prog Neurobiol. 2007 Apr;81(5-6):272-93. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2006.11.003.
 Epub 2006 Dec 22.

N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor function and excitotoxicity in Huntington's 
disease.

Fan MM(1), Raymond LA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry/Kinsmen Laboratories of Neurological Research, Brain 
Research Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Many lines of evidence support a role for neuronal damage arising as a result of 
excessive activation of glutamate receptors by excitatory amino acids in the 
pathogenesis of Huntington disease. The N-methyl-d-aspartate subclass of 
ionotropic glutamate receptors (NMDARs) is more selective and effective than the 
other subclasses in mediating this damage. As well, neurons expressing high 
levels of NMDARs are lost early from the striatum of individuals affected with 
Huntington's disease (HD), and injection of NMDAR agonists into the striatum of 
rodents or non-human primates recapitulates the pattern of neuronal damage 
observed in HD. Altered NMDAR function has been reported in corticostriatal 
synapses in one mouse model of HD, and NMDAR-mediated current and/or toxicity 
have been found to be potentiated in striatal neurons from several HD mouse 
models as well as heterologous cells expressing the mutant huntingtin protein. 
Changes in NMDAR activity have been correlated with altered calcium homeostasis, 
mitochondrial membrane depolarization and caspase activation. NMDAR stimulation 
is also closely linked to mitochondrial activity, as treatment with 
mitochondrial toxins has been demonstrated to produce striatal damage that can 
be reversed by the addition of NMDAR antagonists. Recent efforts have focused on 
the elucidation of molecular pathways linking huntingtin to NMDARs, as well as 
the mechanisms which underlie the enhancement of NMDAR activity by mutant 
huntingtin. Here, we review the literature to date and recent findings 
concerning the role of NMDARs in HD pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2006.11.003
PMID: 17188796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]