---
reference_id: "PMID:24651298"
title: "Diagnosis of Carrion's disease by direct blood PCR in thin blood smear negative samples."
authors:
- del Valle Mendoza J
- Silva Caso W
- Tinco Valdez C
- Pons MJ
- del Valle LJ
- Oré VC
- Michelena DC
- Mayra JB
- Gavidea VZ
- Vargas M
- Ruiz J
journal: PLoS One
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092283
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Bartonella/isolation & purification"
- "Bartonella Infections/blood, diagnosis, microbiology"
- Child
- Female
- Geography
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Peru
- Polymerase Chain Reaction/methods
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis of Carrion's disease by direct blood PCR in thin blood smear negative samples.
**Authors:** del Valle Mendoza J, Silva Caso W, Tinco Valdez C, Pons MJ, del Valle LJ, Oré VC, Michelena DC, Mayra JB, Gavidea VZ, Vargas M, Ruiz J
**Journal:** PLoS One (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0092283](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0092283)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 20;9(3):e92283. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092283.
eCollection 2014.

Diagnosis of Carrion's disease by direct blood PCR in thin blood smear negative
samples.

del Valle Mendoza J(1), Silva Caso W(2), Tinco Valdez C(3), Pons MJ(4), del
Valle LJ(5), Oré VC(1), Michelena DC(2), Mayra JB(6), Gavidea VZ(6), Vargas
M(7), Ruiz J(4).

Author information:
(1)Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud. Universidad Peruana de Ciencias Aplicadas -
UPC, Lima, Peru; Instituto de Investigación Nutricional, Lima, Peru.
(2)Facultad de Ciencias de la Salud. Universidad Peruana de Ciencias Aplicadas -
UPC, Lima, Peru.
(3)Instituto de Investigación Nutricional, Lima, Peru.
(4)Barcelona Centre for International Health Research (CRESIB, Hospital Clínic -
Universitat de Barcelona), Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Universidad Politécnica de Catalunya (UPC), Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Dirección Regional de Salud de Cajamarca (DIRESA-Cajamarca), Cajamarca, Peru.
(7)Fundación Clinic, IDIBAPS, Hospital Clinic i Provincial de Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain.

Bartonella bacilliformis is the etiologic agent of Carrion's disease. This
disease has two well established phases, the most relevant being the so called
Oroya Fever, in which B. bacilliformis infect the erythrocytes resulting in
severe anemia and transient immunosuppression, with a high lethality in the
absence of adequate antibiotic treatment. The presence of B. bacilliformis was
studied in 113 blood samples suspected of Carrion's disease based on clinical
criteria, despite the absence of a positive thin blood smear, by two different
PCR techniques (using Bartonella-specific and universal 16S rRNA gene primers),
and by bacterial culture. The specific 16S rRNA gene primers revealed the
presence of 21 B. bacilliformis and 1 Bartonella elizabethae, while universal
primers showed both the presence of 3 coinfections in which a concomitant
pathogen was detected plus Bartonella, in addition to the presence of infections
by other microorganisms such as Agrobacterium or Bacillus firmus. These data
support the need to implement molecular tools to diagnose Carrion's disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092283
PMCID: PMC3961319
PMID: 24651298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.
