---
reference_id: "PMID:38600563"
title: "Association of circulating biomarkers with illness severity measures differentiates myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome and post-COVID-19 condition: a prospective pilot cohort study."
authors:
- Domingo JC
- Battistini F
- Cordobilla B
- Zaragozá MC
- Sanmartin-Sentañes R
- Alegre-Martin J
- Cambras T
- Castro-Marrero J
journal: J Transl Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12967-024-05148-0
keywords:
- Humans
- "Fatigue Syndrome, Chronic/epidemiology"
- Post-Acute COVID-19 Syndrome
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Pilot Projects
- Prospective Studies
- COVID-19
- Cohort Studies
- Patient Acuity
- Biomarkers
- Inflammation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of circulating biomarkers with illness severity measures differentiates myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome and post-COVID-19 condition: a prospective pilot cohort study.
**Authors:** Domingo JC, Battistini F, Cordobilla B, Zaragozá MC, Sanmartin-Sentañes R, Alegre-Martin J, Cambras T, Castro-Marrero J
**Journal:** J Transl Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12967-024-05148-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12967-024-05148-0)

## Content

1. J Transl Med. 2024 Apr 10;22(1):343. doi: 10.1186/s12967-024-05148-0.

Association of circulating biomarkers with illness severity measures 
differentiates myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome and 
post-COVID-19 condition: a prospective pilot cohort study.

Domingo JC(1), Battistini F(2), Cordobilla B(1), Zaragozá MC(3), 
Sanmartin-Sentañes R(4)(5), Alegre-Martin J(4)(5), Cambras T(#)(6), 
Castro-Marrero J(#)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biomedicine, Faculty of Biology, 
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, 08028, Spain.
(2)Molecular Modelling and Bioinformatics Group, Institute for Research in 
Biomedicine, Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, 08028, 
Spain.
(3)Clinical Research Department, Laboratorios Viñas, Barcelona, 08012, Spain.
(4)Division of Rheumatology, Clinical Unit in ME/CFS and Long COVID, Vall 
d'Hebron University Hospital, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, 
08035, Spain.
(5)Division of Rheumatology, Research Unit in ME/CFS and Long COVID, Vall 
d'Hebron Research Institute, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, 
08035, Spain.
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Physiology, Faculty of Pharmacy and Food 
Sciences, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, 08028, Spain. cambras@ub.edu.
(7)Division of Rheumatology, Research Unit in ME/CFS and Long COVID, Vall 
d'Hebron Research Institute, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, 
08035, Spain. jesus.castro@vhir.org.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Accumulating evidence suggests that autonomic dysfunction and 
persistent systemic inflammation are common clinical features in myalgic 
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) and long COVID. However, 
there is limited knowledge regarding their potential association with 
circulating biomarkers and illness severity in these conditions.
METHODS: This single-site, prospective, cross-sectional, pilot cohort study 
aimed to distinguish between the two patient populations by using self-reported 
outcome measures and circulating biomarkers of endothelial function and systemic 
inflammation status. Thirty-one individuals with ME/CFS, 23 individuals with 
long COVID, and 31 matched sedentary healthy controls were included. All study 
participants underwent non-invasive cardiovascular hemodynamic challenge testing 
(10 min NASA lean test) for assessment of orthostatic intolerance. Regression 
analysis was used to examine associations between outcome measures and 
circulating biomarkers in the study participants. Classification across groups 
was based on principal component and discriminant analyses.
RESULTS: Four ME/CFS patients (13%), 1 with long COVID (4%), and 1 healthy 
control (3%) presented postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) using 
the 10-min NASA lean test. Compared with matched healthy controls, ME/CFS and 
long COVID subjects showed higher levels of ET-1 (p < 0.05) and VCAM-1 
(p < 0.001), and lower levels of nitrites (NOx assessed as NO2- + NO3-) 
(p < 0.01). ME/CFS patients also showed higher levels of serpin E1 (PAI-1) and 
E-selectin than did both long COVID and matched control subjects (p < 0.01 in 
all cases). Long COVID patients had lower TSP-1 levels than did ME/CFS patients 
and matched sedentary healthy controls (p < 0.001). As for inflammation 
biomarkers, both long COVID and ME/CFS subjects had higher levels of TNF-α than 
did matched healthy controls (p < 0.01 in both comparisons). Compared with 
controls, ME/CFS patients had higher levels of IL-1β (p < 0.001), IL-4 
(p < 0.001), IL-6 (p < 0.01), IL-10 (p < 0.001), IP-10 (p < 0.05), and leptin 
(p < 0.001). Principal component analysis supported differentiation between 
groups based on self-reported outcome measures and biomarkers of endothelial 
function and inflammatory status in the study population.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings revealed that combining biomarkers of endothelial 
dysfunction and inflammation with outcome measures differentiate ME/CFS and Long 
COVID using robust discriminant analysis of principal components. Further 
research is needed to provide a more comprehensive characterization of these 
underlying pathomechanisms, which could be promising targets for therapeutic and 
preventive strategies in these conditions.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12967-024-05148-0
PMCID: PMC11005215
PMID: 38600563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of financial or 
non-financial interests. The funders had no role in the design of the study, in 
the collection, analysis or interpretation of data, in the writing of the 
manuscript or in the decision to publish the results.