---
reference_id: "PMID:25782658"
title: Pancreatic Enzyme Replacement Therapy and Coefficient of Fat Absorption in Children and Adolescents With Cystic Fibrosis.
authors:
- Woestenenk JW
- van der Ent CK
- Houwen RH
journal: J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1097/MPG.0000000000000784
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- "Cystic Fibrosis/complications, physiopathology"
- Diet Records
- "Enzyme Replacement Therapy/statistics & numerical data"
- "Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency/drug therapy, etiology"
- Fats/metabolism
- Female
- Gastrointestinal Absorption/drug effects
- Humans
- Infant
- "Lipase/administration & dosage"
- Male
- Pancreas/enzymology
- Retrospective Studies
- "Statistics, Nonparametric"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pancreatic Enzyme Replacement Therapy and Coefficient of Fat Absorption in Children and Adolescents With Cystic Fibrosis.
**Authors:** Woestenenk JW, van der Ent CK, Houwen RH
**Journal:** J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MPG.0000000000000784](https://doi.org/10.1097/MPG.0000000000000784)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2015 Sep;61(3):355-60. doi:
10.1097/MPG.0000000000000784.

Pancreatic Enzyme Replacement Therapy and Coefficient of Fat Absorption in
Children and Adolescents With Cystic Fibrosis.

Woestenenk JW(1), van der Ent CK, Houwen RH.

Author information:
(1)*Internal Medicine and Dermatology, Dietetics †Department of Paediatric
Pulmonology ‡Department of Paediatric Gastroenterology, Cystic Fibrosis Centre
Utrecht, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands.

OBJECTIVES: Pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy (PERT) is the proven therapy
to substantially reduce fat malabsorption in patients with cystic fibrosis (CF).
Few details of the daily practice regarding PERT and the resulting coefficient
of fat absorption (CFA) are known. We therefore recorded the PERT and CFA in a
large cohort of pancreatic insufficient pediatric patients with CF.
METHODS: We retrospectively studied 1719 completed 3-day dietary food records,
including the pancreatic enzyme intake registrations, and 1373 CFA assessments
of 224 patients with CF, ages 0-17 years. The clinical characteristics, PERT,
expressed as an intake of lipase unit (LU) per gram of fat per day and LU per
kilogram per day, and the CFA were described for the group as a whole and
separately for those on enteral tube feeding. Cross-sectional relationship
between the CFA and the LU per gram of fat per day and LU per kilogram per day
were determined for each year of age. We also addressed the effect of the
interventions done in patients with CFA outcomes <85%.
RESULTS: The LU per gram of fat per day was relatively stable throughout the age
groups, whereas the LU per kilogram per day fell markedly with age. The median
CFA in the age group 17 varied between 86% and 91%, however, with a CFA below
85% in 325 of 1373 (24%) of the measurements. No relationship was found between
PERT and CFA. The patients with persistent CFA less than 85% had significant
lower z scores weight for age and weight for height (P = 0.01) than those with
CFA at least 85%.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study population, no correlation between an enzyme dosage
and the degree of fat malabsorption was found; however, a CFA below 85% was
found in 24% of the measurements.

DOI: 10.1097/MPG.0000000000000784
PMID: 25782658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
