---
reference_id: "PMID:21208440"
title: "Polymorphisms of CD16A and CD32 Fcγ receptors and circulating immune complexes in Ménière's disease: a case-control study."
authors:
- Lopez-Escamez JA
- Saenz-Lopez P
- Gazquez I
- Moreno A
- Gonzalez-Oller C
- Soto-Varela A
- Santos S
- Aran I
- Perez-Garrigues H
- Ibañez A
- Lopez-Nevot MA
journal: BMC Med Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-12-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Polymorphisms of CD16A and CD32 Fcγ receptors and circulating immune complexes in Ménière's disease: a case-control study.
**Authors:** Lopez-Escamez JA, Saenz-Lopez P, Gazquez I, Moreno A, Gonzalez-Oller C, Soto-Varela A, Santos S, Aran I, Perez-Garrigues H, Ibañez A, Lopez-Nevot MA
**Journal:** BMC Med Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1471-2350-12-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2350-12-2)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genet. 2011 Jan 5;12:2. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-12-2.

Polymorphisms of CD16A and CD32 Fcγ receptors and circulating immune complexes 
in Ménière's disease: a case-control study.

Lopez-Escamez JA(1), Saenz-Lopez P, Gazquez I, Moreno A, Gonzalez-Oller C, 
Soto-Varela A, Santos S, Aran I, Perez-Garrigues H, Ibañez A, Lopez-Nevot MA.

Author information:
(1)Otology & Neurotology Group CTS495, Department of Otolaryngology, Hospital de 
Poniente, El Ejido, Almería, Spain. antonio.lopezescamez@ephpo.es

BACKGROUND: Autoimmune diseases with elevated circulating autoantibodies drive 
tissue damage and the onset of disease. The Fcγ receptors bind IgG subtypes 
modulating the clearance of circulating immune complexes (CIC). The inner ear 
damage in Ménière's disease (MD) could be mediated by an immune response driven 
by CIC. We examined single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) in the CD16A and CD32 
genes in patients with MD which may determine a Fcγ receptor with lower binding 
to CIC.
METHODS: The functional CD16A (FcγRIIIa*559A > C, rs396991) and CD32A 
(FcγRIIa*519A > G, rs1801274) SNPs were analyzed using PCR-based TaqMan 
Genotyping Assay in two cohorts of 156 mediterranean and 112 Galicia patients in 
a case-control study. Data were analyzed by χ2 with Fisher's exact test and 
Cochran-Armitage trend test (CATT). CIC were measured by ELISA for C1q-binding 
CIC.
RESULTS: Elevated CIC were found in 7% of patients with MD during the 
intercrisis period. No differences were found in the allelic frequency for 
rs396991 or rs1801274 in controls subjects when they were compared with patients 
with MD from the same geographic area. However, the frequency of AA and AC 
genotypes of CD16A (rs396991) differed among mediterranean and Galicia controls 
(Fisher's test, corrected p = 6.9 × 10-4 for AA; corrected p = 0.02 for AC). 
Although genotype AC of the CD16A receptor was significantly more frequent in 
mediterranean controls than in patients, [Fisher's test corrected p = 0.02; OR = 
0.63 (0.44-0.91)], a genetic additive effect for the allele C was not observed 
(CATT, p = 0.23). Moreover, no differences were found in genotype frequencies 
for rs396991 between patients with MD and controls from Galicia (CATT, p = 
0.14). The allelic frequency of CD32 (rs1801274) was not different between 
patients and controls either in mediterranean (p = 0.51) or Galicia population 
(p = 0.11).
CONCLUSIONS: Elevated CIC are not found in most of patients with MD. Functional 
polymorphisms of CD16A and CD32 genes are not associated with onset of MD.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2350-12-2
PMCID: PMC3022798
PMID: 21208440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]