---
reference_id: "PMID:9804090"
title: "Satoyoshi's syndrome in an adult: a review of the literature of adult onset cases."
authors:
- Ikeda K
- Satoyoshi E
- Kinoshita M
- Wakata N
- Iwasaki Y
journal: Intern Med
year: '1998'
doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.37.784
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Satoyoshi's syndrome in an adult: a review of the literature of adult onset cases.
**Authors:** Ikeda K, Satoyoshi E, Kinoshita M, Wakata N, Iwasaki Y
**Journal:** Intern Med (1998)
**DOI:** [10.2169/internalmedicine.37.784](https://doi.org/10.2169/internalmedicine.37.784)

## Content

1. Intern Med. 1998 Sep;37(9):784-7. doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.37.784.

Satoyoshi's syndrome in an adult: a review of the literature of adult onset 
cases.

Ikeda K(1), Satoyoshi E, Kinoshita M, Wakata N, Iwasaki Y.

Author information:
(1)Fourth Department of Internal Medicine, Toho University Ohashi Hospital, 
Tokyo.

Satoyoshi syndrome consists of painful intermittent muscle spasms, alopecia and 
diarrhea. The age of onset is commonly less than 20 years of age. Adult onset of 
this syndrome is rare. We report a 65-year-old Japanese woman with Satoyoshi's 
syndrome of adult onset. Satoyoshi's syndrome of adult onset shows no skeletal 
abnormalities, in comparison with the classical pediatric cases. The clinical 
features in our patient revealed the benign and long-term course of muscle spasm 
and alopecia. This progression differed markedly from the other patients of 
adult onset. Thus, the severity of Satoyoshi's syndrome is variable in adult 
onset cases, and this diagnosis should be considered in adults with various and 
unexplained muscle spasms.

DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.37.784
PMID: 9804090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]