---
reference_id: "PMID:21194154"
title: "Reversible infantile respiratory chain deficiency: a clinical and molecular study."
authors:
- Mimaki M
- Hatakeyama H
- Komaki H
- Yokoyama M
- Arai H
- Kirino Y
- Suzuki T
- Nishino I
- Nonaka I
- Goto Y
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1002/ana.22111
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Brain/pathology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- DNA Mutational Analysis/methods
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/genetics"
- Electron Transport Complex IV/genetics
- Female
- Glutamic Acid/genetics
- Humans
- Infant
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- "Mitochondria, Muscle/enzymology, pathology"
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/pathology"
- Mutation/genetics
- "RNA, Transfer/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Reversible infantile respiratory chain deficiency: a clinical and molecular study.
**Authors:** Mimaki M, Hatakeyama H, Komaki H, Yokoyama M, Arai H, Kirino Y, Suzuki T, Nishino I, Nonaka I, Goto Y
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.22111](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.22111)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 2010 Dec;68(6):845-54. doi: 10.1002/ana.22111.

Reversible infantile respiratory chain deficiency: a clinical and molecular 
study.

Mimaki M(1), Hatakeyama H, Komaki H, Yokoyama M, Arai H, Kirino Y, Suzuki T, 
Nishino I, Nonaka I, Goto Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Mental Retardation and Birth Defect Research, National 
Institute of Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, 
Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize the clinical features and clarify the pathogenicity 
of "benign cytochrome c oxidase deficiency myopathy."
METHODS: The study included 8 patients with the phenotype of this disease. Six 
patients underwent muscle biopsies and all the 8 underwent mitochondrial DNA 
analyses. To confirm the pathogenicity of the detected mitochondrial DNA 
mutation, we performed northern blot analysis, using muscle specimens, and blue 
native polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and respiratory chain enzyme activity 
assay of transmitochondrial cell lines (cybrids).
RESULTS: Clinical symptoms were limited to skeletal muscle and improved 
spontaneously in all cases; however, 2 siblings had basal ganglia lesions. In 
all patients, we identified a homoplasmic m.14674T>C or m.14674T>G mitochondrial 
transfer RNA-glutamate mutation. Northern blot analysis revealed decreased 
levels of mitochondrial transfer RNA-glutamate molecules. Muscle specimens and 
cybrids derived from patients showed decreased activity of respiratory complexes 
IV, and/or I, III; however, this was normal in naive myoblasts.
INTERPRETATION: Identification of a novel m.14674T>G mutation in addition to 
m.14674T>C indicated the importance of this site for disease causation. Analyses 
of cybrids revealed the pathogenicity of m.14674T>C mutation, which resulted in 
defects of cytochrome c oxidase and multiple respiratory chain enzymes. 
Furthermore, patients with basal ganglia lesions provided new insights into this 
disease, in which only skeletal muscle was thought to be affected. Normal 
respiratory chain enzyme activities in naive myoblasts suggested the 
compensatory influence of nuclear factors, which may be a clue to understanding 
the mechanisms of spontaneous recovery and low penetrance in families carrying 
the mutation.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.22111
PMID: 21194154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]