---
reference_id: "PMID:9732973"
title: "5-Aminolevulinic acid dehydratase deficiency porphyria: a twenty-year clinical and biochemical follow-up."
authors:
- Gross U
- Sassa S
- Jacob K
- Deybach JC
- Nordmann Y
- Frank M
- Doss MO
journal: Clin Chem
year: '1998'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Aminolevulinic Acid/urine
- Arginine/therapeutic use
- Biomarkers/urine
- "Erythrocytes/enzymology, metabolism"
- Follow-Up Studies
- Glucose/therapeutic use
- Heme/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- "Porphobilinogen Synthase/blood, deficiency, genetics"
- "Porphyria, Acute Intermittent/blood, enzymology, genetics, urine"
- "Porphyrins/blood, urine"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 5-Aminolevulinic acid dehydratase deficiency porphyria: a twenty-year clinical and biochemical follow-up.
**Authors:** Gross U, Sassa S, Jacob K, Deybach JC, Nordmann Y, Frank M, Doss MO
**Journal:** Clin Chem (1998)

## Content

1. Clin Chem. 1998 Sep;44(9):1892-6.

5-Aminolevulinic acid dehydratase deficiency porphyria: a twenty-year clinical
and biochemical follow-up.

Gross U(1), Sassa S, Jacob K, Deybach JC, Nordmann Y, Frank M, Doss MO.

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Biochemistry, Philipps University Hospital, Marburg,
Germany. Ulrich.Gross@rhein-main.netsurf.de

5-Aminolevulinic acid dehydratase (ALAD) activity in two patients with compound
heterozygous 5-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase deficiency porphyria was studied
over the last 20 years. The patients' enzyme activity was <10% from 1977 to
1997. An acute crisis in each patient was successfully treated by infusion of
glucose and heme arginate. After this therapy both urinary 5-aminolevulinic acid
(ALA) and total porphyrins were diminished to 65% in patient B. In patient H,
ALA was decreased to 80%, and total porphyrins were reduced to 15% after
treatment with heme arginate and glucose. The patients remained free of symptoms
after this therapy. Family studies of patient B showed cross-reactive
immunological material (CRIM), in which the maternal mutation is CRIM(+),
whereas the paternal mutation is CRIM(-). Incubation of erythrocyte lysates with
ALA decreased porphyrin formation, whereas incubation with porphobilinogen
produced porphyrin concentrations within reference values in both patients,
confirming that ALAD activity is rate-limiting in these cells.

PMID: 9732973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
