---
reference_id: "PMID:10763209"
title: "[Aspirin and antiphospholipid syndrome]."
authors:
- Hachulla E
- Piette AM
- Hatron PY
- Blétry O
journal: Rev Med Interne
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1016/s0248-8663(00)88729-9
keywords:
- Adult
- "Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Non-Steroidal/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Anticoagulants/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Antiphospholipid Syndrome/complications, drug therapy"
- "Arteriosclerosis/prevention & control"
- "Aspirin/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Cyclooxygenase Inhibitors/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Female
- "Fetal Death/prevention & control"
- "Fibrinolytic Agents/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Humans
- Male
- "Platelet Aggregation Inhibitors/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Pregnancy
- Pregnancy Complications/drug therapy
- Primary Prevention
- Recurrence
- Risk Factors
- "Thrombosis/prevention & control"
- "Warfarin/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Aspirin and antiphospholipid syndrome].
**Authors:** Hachulla E, Piette AM, Hatron PY, Blétry O
**Journal:** Rev Med Interne (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0248-8663(00)88729-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0248-8663(00)88729-9)

## Content

1. Rev Med Interne. 2000 Mar;21 Suppl 1:83s-88s. doi: 
10.1016/s0248-8663(00)88729-9.

[Aspirin and antiphospholipid syndrome].

[Article in French]

Hachulla E(1), Piette AM, Hatron PY, Blétry O.

Author information:
(1)Service de médecine interne, hôpital Huriez, CHRU, Lille, France.

Antiphospholipid syndrome is the most frequent cause of acquired thrombophilia. 
Aspirin may have some indications. CURRENT KONWLEDGE AND KEY POINTS: The 
usefulness of low doses of aspirin is now well demonstrated in the prevention of 
obstetric complications associated with antiphospholipid antibodies (especially 
pregnancy loss). When heparin is combined with low-dose aspirin, the recurrent 
rate of fetal loss is lower than 30%. In patients with arterial or venous 
thrombosis, there is a high rate of recurrence during the two first years except 
if high-dose warfarin was used (i.e., INR > or = 3). The association 
warfarin-aspirin in secondary prevention of thrombosis may be evaluated in 
prospective studies. It is not so clear in the literature and in our experience 
that warfarin is superior to aspirin in stroke recurrence prevention in patients 
with antiphospholipid antibodies, except in Sneddon's syndrome. There are no 
guidelines in primary thrombosis prevention in patients with antiphospholipid 
antibodies. In lupus patients, aspirin may not be sufficient after many years of 
follow-up in preventing a first episode of thrombosis. Prospective studies may 
be undertaken. Atherosclerotic patients with antiphospholipid antibodies are 
particularly exposed to the risk of thrombosis after revascularisation or 
angioplasty and stent implantation. Aspirin may have a place in those patients 
but these must be evaluated. FUTUR PROSPECTS AND PROJECTS: Except in prevention 
of obstetric complications, the usefulness of aspirin in patients with 
antiphospholipid antibodies must be evaluated in prospective studies.

DOI: 10.1016/s0248-8663(00)88729-9
PMID: 10763209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]