---
reference_id: "PMID:31907286"
title: Clinical recommendations to guide physical therapy practice for Huntington disease.
authors:
- Quinn L
- Kegelmeyer D
- Kloos A
- Rao AK
- Busse M
- Fritz NE
journal: Neurology
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000008887
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical recommendations to guide physical therapy practice for Huntington disease.
**Authors:** Quinn L, Kegelmeyer D, Kloos A, Rao AK, Busse M, Fritz NE
**Journal:** Neurology (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0000000000008887](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000008887)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2020 Feb 4;94(5):217-228. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000008887. Epub 
2020 Jan 6.

Clinical recommendations to guide physical therapy practice for Huntington 
disease.

Quinn L(1), Kegelmeyer D(1), Kloos A(1), Rao AK(1), Busse M(1), Fritz NE(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Biobehavioral Sciences (L.Q.), Teachers College, 
Columbia University, New York, NY; Physical Therapy Division (D.K., A.K.), 
School of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus; Program in Physical Therapy (A.K.R.), Department of Rehabilitative and 
Regenerative Medicine, G.H. Sergievsky Center, Columbia University, New York, 
NY; Centre for Trials Research (M.B.), College of Biomedical and Life Sciences, 
Cardiff University, United Kingdom; and Program in Physical Therapy (N.E.F.), 
Wayne State University, Detroit, MI.
(2)From the Department of Biobehavioral Sciences (L.Q.), Teachers College, 
Columbia University, New York, NY; Physical Therapy Division (D.K., A.K.), 
School of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus; Program in Physical Therapy (A.K.R.), Department of Rehabilitative and 
Regenerative Medicine, G.H. Sergievsky Center, Columbia University, New York, 
NY; Centre for Trials Research (M.B.), College of Biomedical and Life Sciences, 
Cardiff University, United Kingdom; and Program in Physical Therapy (N.E.F.), 
Wayne State University, Detroit, MI. nora.fritz@wayne.edu.

OBJECTIVE: In the past decade, an increasing number of studies have examined the 
efficacy of physical therapy interventions in people with Huntington disease 
(HD).
METHODS: We performed a mixed-methods systematic review using Joanna Briggs 
Institute (JBI) methodology and included experimental and observational study 
designs. The search resulted in 23 quantitative studies and 3 qualitative 
studies from which we extracted data using JBI standardized extraction tools. 
Results of this review suggested that physical therapy interventions may improve 
motor impairments and activity limitations in people with HD. Here, we expand on 
the review findings to provide specific recommendations to guide clinical 
practice.
RESULTS: We recommend the following specific physical therapy interventions for 
people with HD: aerobic exercise (grade A evidence), alone or in combination 
with resistance training to improve fitness and motor function, and supervised 
gait training (grade A evidence) to improve spatiotemporal features of gait. In 
addition, there is weak (grade B) evidence that exercise training improves 
balance but does not show a reduction in the frequency of falls; inspiratory and 
expiratory training improves breathing function and capacity; and training of 
transfers, getting up from the floor, and providing strategies to caregivers for 
involvement in physical activity in the midstages of HD may improve performance. 
There is expert consensus for the use of positioning devices, seating 
adaptations, and caregiver training in late stages of HD.
CONCLUSIONS: There is strong evidence to support physical therapy interventions 
to improve fitness, motor function, and gait in persons with HD.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of the American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000008887
PMCID: PMC7080285
PMID: 31907286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]