---
reference_id: "PMID:27258773"
title: Toward an Earlier Diagnosis of Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia. Which Patients Should Undergo Detailed Diagnostic Testing?
authors:
- Kuehni CE
- Lucas JS
journal: Ann Am Thorac Soc
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201605-331PS
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Toward an Earlier Diagnosis of Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia. Which Patients Should Undergo Detailed Diagnostic Testing?
**Authors:** Kuehni CE, Lucas JS
**Journal:** Ann Am Thorac Soc (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1513/AnnalsATS.201605-331PS](https://doi.org/10.1513/AnnalsATS.201605-331PS)

## Content

1. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2016 Aug;13(8):1239-43. doi:
10.1513/AnnalsATS.201605-331PS.

Toward an Earlier Diagnosis of Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia. Which Patients Should 
Undergo Detailed Diagnostic Testing?

Kuehni CE(1), Lucas JS(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)1 Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine, University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland.
(2)2 Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia Centre, University Hospital Southampton National 
Health Service Foundation Trust, Southampton, United Kingdom; and.
(3)3 National Institute for Health Research Southampton Respiratory Biomedical 
Research Unit, University of Southampton and University Hospital Southampton 
National Health Service Foundation Trust, Southampton, United Kingdom.

Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is a rare, heterogeneous, recessive, genetic 
disorder of motile cilia, leading to chronic upper and lower respiratory 
symptoms. Prevalence is estimated at around 1:10,000, but many patients remain 
undiagnosed, whereas others receive the label incorrectly. Proper diagnosis is 
complicated by the fact that the key symptoms, such as wet cough, chronic 
rhinitis, and recurrent upper and lower respiratory infection, are common and 
nonspecific. There is no single gold standard test to diagnose PCD. Currently, 
the diagnosis is made in patients with a compatible medical history after a 
demanding combination of tests including nasal nitric oxide, high-speed video 
microscopy, and transmission electron microscopy and genetic and ciliary culture 
testing. These tests are costly and need sophisticated equipment and experienced 
staff, restricting use to highly specialized centers. Therefore, it would be 
desirable to have a screening test for identifying those patients who should 
undergo detailed diagnostic testing. Three recent studies focused on potential 
screening tools: one study assessed the validity of nasal nitric oxide for 
screening, and two studies developed new symptom-based screening tools. These 
simple tools are welcome, and it is hoped that they will assist physicians in 
determining whom to refer for definitive testing. However, they have been 
developed in tertiary care settings, where 10 to 50% of tested patients have 
PCD. The sensitivity and specificity of the tools are reasonable, but positive 
and negative predictive values may be poor in primary or secondary care 
settings. Although these studies are an important step toward an earlier 
diagnosis of PCD, more remains to be done before we have tools tailored to 
different health care settings.

DOI: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201605-331PS
PMID: 27258773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]