---
reference_id: "PMID:36568994"
title: "Atypical Whipple's disease with special endoscopic manifestations: A case report."
authors:
- Chen S
- Zhou YC
- Si S
- Liu HY
- Zhang QR
- Yin TF
- Xie CX
- Yao SK
- Du SY
journal: World J Clin Cases
year: '2022'
doi: 10.12998/wjcc.v10.i35.13044
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atypical Whipple's disease with special endoscopic manifestations: A case report.
**Authors:** Chen S, Zhou YC, Si S, Liu HY, Zhang QR, Yin TF, Xie CX, Yao SK, Du SY
**Journal:** World J Clin Cases (2022)
**DOI:** [10.12998/wjcc.v10.i35.13044](https://doi.org/10.12998/wjcc.v10.i35.13044)

## Content

1. World J Clin Cases. 2022 Dec 16;10(35):13044-13051. doi: 
10.12998/wjcc.v10.i35.13044.

Atypical Whipple's disease with special endoscopic manifestations: A case 
report.

Chen S(1), Zhou YC(2), Si S(3), Liu HY(4), Zhang QR(1), Yin TF(2), Xie CX(5), 
Yao SK(1), Du SY(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing 
100029, China.
(2)Peking University China-Japan Friendship School of Clinical Medicine, Peking 
University, Beijing 100029, China.
(3)Department of General Surgery, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing 
100029, China.
(4)Department of Pathology, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing 100029, 
China.
(5)Graduate School, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing 100029, 
China.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing 
100029, China. shiyudu1975@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Whipple's disease is a rare systemic infection caused by Tropheryma 
whipplei. Most patients present with nonspecific symptoms, and routine 
laboratory and imaging examination results also lack specificity. The diagnosis 
often relies on invasive manipulation, pathological examination, and molecular 
techniques. These difficulties in diagnosing Whipple's disease often result in 
misdiagnosis and inappropriate treatments.
CASE SUMMARY: This paper reports on the case of a 58-year-old male patient who 
complained of fatigue and decreased exercise capacity. The results of routine 
blood tests indicated hypochromic microcytic anemia. Results of gastroscopy and 
capsule endoscopy showed multiple polypoid bulges distributed in the duodenal 
and proximal jejunum. A diagnosis of small intestinal adenomatosis was initially 
considered; hence, the Whipple procedure, a pylorus-preserving 
pancreaticoduodenectomy, was performed. Pathological manifestations showed many 
periodic acid-Schiff-positive macrophages aggregated in the intestinal mucosa of 
the duodenum, upper jejunum, and surrounding lymph nodes. Based on comprehensive 
analysis of symptoms, laboratory findings, and pathological manifestations, the 
patient was finally diagnosed with Whipple's disease. After receiving 1 mo of 
antibiotic treatment, the fatigue and anemia were significantly improved.
CONCLUSION: This case presented with atypical gastrointestinal manifestations 
and small intestinal polypoid bulges, which provided new insight on the 
diagnosis of Whipple's disease.

©The Author(s) 2022. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.12998/wjcc.v10.i35.13044
PMCID: PMC9782934
PMID: 36568994

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All the authors 
report no relevant conflicts of interest for this article.