---
reference_id: "PMID:25032975"
title: "Oroya fever and verruga peruana: bartonelloses unique to South America."
authors:
- Minnick MF
- Anderson BE
- Lima A
- Battisti JM
- Lawyer PG
- Birtles RJ
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002919
keywords:
- Animals
- Bartonella Infections
- Bartonella bacilliformis
- Host-Pathogen Interactions
- Humans
- Insect Vectors
- Neglected Diseases
- Psychodidae
- South America
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oroya fever and verruga peruana: bartonelloses unique to South America.
**Authors:** Minnick MF, Anderson BE, Lima A, Battisti JM, Lawyer PG, Birtles RJ
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0002919](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0002919)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2014 Jul 17;8(7):e2919. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002919.
 eCollection 2014 Jul.

Oroya fever and verruga peruana: bartonelloses unique to South America.

Minnick MF(1), Anderson BE(2), Lima A(2), Battisti JM(1), Lawyer PG(3), Birtles
RJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of Montana, Missoula, Montana,
United States of America.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, Morsani College of Medicine, University of
South Florida, Tampa, Florida, United States of America.
(3)Laboratory of Parasitic Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United
States of America.
(4)School of Environment and Life Sciences, University of Salford, Salford,
United Kingdom.

Bartonella bacilliformis is the bacterial agent of Carrión's disease and is
presumed to be transmitted between humans by phlebotomine sand flies. Carrión's
disease is endemic to high-altitude valleys of the South American Andes, and the
first reported outbreak (1871) resulted in over 4,000 casualties. Since then,
numerous outbreaks have been documented in endemic regions, and over the last
two decades, outbreaks have occurred at atypical elevations, strongly suggesting
that the area of endemicity is expanding. Approximately 1.7 million South
Americans are estimated to be at risk in an area covering roughly 145,000 km2 of
Ecuador, Colombia, and Peru. Although disease manifestations vary, two disparate
syndromes can occur independently or sequentially. The first, Oroya fever,
occurs approximately 60 days following the bite of an infected sand fly, in
which infection of nearly all erythrocytes results in an acute hemolytic anemia
with attendant symptoms of fever, jaundice, and myalgia. This phase of Carrión's
disease often includes secondary infections and is fatal in up to 88% of
patients without antimicrobial intervention. The second syndrome, referred to as
verruga peruana, describes the endothelial cell-derived, blood-filled tumors
that develop on the surface of the skin. Verrugae are rarely fatal, but can
bleed and scar the patient. Moreover, these persistently infected humans provide
a reservoir for infecting sand flies and thus maintaining B. bacilliformis in
nature. Here, we discuss the current state of knowledge regarding this
life-threatening, neglected bacterial pathogen and review its host-cell
parasitism, molecular pathogenesis, phylogeny, sand fly vectors, diagnostics,
and prospects for control.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002919
PMCID: PMC4102455
PMID: 25032975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
