---
reference_id: "PMID:38054139"
title: A Case of Multi-Organ Failure Secondary to Malabsorption Occurring in the Presence of Acute-on-Chronic Pancreatitis.
authors:
- Dar S
- Dar KH
- Hussain U
- Rafiq I
- Zuhair HMU
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.48274
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Case of Multi-Organ Failure Secondary to Malabsorption Occurring in the Presence of Acute-on-Chronic Pancreatitis.
**Authors:** Dar S, Dar KH, Hussain U, Rafiq I, Zuhair HMU
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.48274](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.48274)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Nov 4;15(11):e48274. doi: 10.7759/cureus.48274. eCollection 2023 
Nov.

A Case of Multi-Organ Failure Secondary to Malabsorption Occurring in the 
Presence of Acute-on-Chronic Pancreatitis.

Dar S(1), Dar KH(2), Hussain U(2), Rafiq I(3), Zuhair HMU(2).

Author information:
(1)Family Medicine, Doctors Medical Center, Modesto, USA.
(2)Medicine, Faisalabad Medical University, Faisalabad, PAK.
(3)Internal Medicine, Faisalabad Medical University, Faisalabad, PAK.

This case report highlights a concerning and complex case of a middle-aged 
female presenting with severe malabsorption, diarrhea, and subsequent 
malnutrition. The patient's weight dramatically dropped from 85 lbs to 50 lbs 
over the course of two to four months. The medical history included ongoing 
pancreatitis, esophageal ulcers, and previous surgeries for a dermoid cyst in 
the brain and cervical neoplasia. Upon admission to the hospital, the patient 
received total parenteral nutrition (TPN) on the first day, but this led to 
delirium due to refeeding syndrome. Refeeding syndrome is a well-known condition 
that can occur when malnourished individuals receive too much nutrition too 
quickly, causing metabolic imbalances and potentially serious complications. 
Subsequently, during the second hospitalization, the patient did not receive TPN 
but was instead administered 5% dextrose with 20 mEq of potassium chloride 
(KCl). Unfortunately, her condition worsened, leading to multiorgan failure. 
During the third hospitalization, TPN was reintroduced under consultation and 
hospitalist evaluation, and the patient's symptoms improved. Overall, this case 
report outlines a complex case with multiple medical issues, including severe 
malnutrition, which required careful management and consideration of the 
patient's unique needs. It underscores the importance of cautious nutritional 
support for severely malnourished individuals to avoid complications such as 
refeeding syndrome. The case also emphasizes the value of interdisciplinary 
collaboration and continuous monitoring to achieve successful outcomes in such 
complex situations.

Copyright © 2023, Dar et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.48274
PMCID: PMC10695694
PMID: 38054139

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.