---
reference_id: "PMID:34427831"
title: A Novel STK4 Mutation Impairs T Cell Immunity Through Dysregulation of Cytokine-Induced Adhesion and Chemotaxis Genes.
authors:
- Guennoun A
- Bougarn S
- Khan T
- Mackeh R
- Rahman M
- Al-Ali F
- Ata M
- Aamer W
- Prosser D
- Habib T
- Chin-Smith E
- Al-Darwish K
- Zhang Q
- Al-Shakaki A
- Robay A
- Crystal RG
- Fakhro K
- Al-Naimi A
- Al Maslamani E
- Tuffaha A
- Janahi I
- Janahi M
- Love DR
- Karim MY
- Lo B
- Hassan A
- Adeli M
- Marr N
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-021-01115-2
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Bacterial/blood"
- "Antibodies, Viral/blood"
- Cell Adhesion/genetics
- Chemotaxis/genetics
- Cytokines/genetics
- Dendritic Cells/immunology
- "Epstein-Barr Virus Infections/blood, genetics"
- Humans
- "Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/blood, genetics"
- "Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/deficiency, genetics"
- "Killer Cells, Natural/immunology"
- Male
- Mutation
- "Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/deficiency, genetics"
- T-Lymphocytes/immunology
- Transcriptome
- "Tuberculosis, Pulmonary/blood, genetics"
- Hippo Kinases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Novel STK4 Mutation Impairs T Cell Immunity Through Dysregulation of Cytokine-Induced Adhesion and Chemotaxis Genes.
**Authors:** Guennoun A, Bougarn S, Khan T, Mackeh R, Rahman M, Al-Ali F, Ata M, Aamer W, Prosser D, Habib T, Chin-Smith E, Al-Darwish K, Zhang Q, Al-Shakaki A, Robay A, Crystal RG, Fakhro K, Al-Naimi A, Al Maslamani E, Tuffaha A, Janahi I, Janahi M, Love DR, Karim MY, Lo B, Hassan A, Adeli M, Marr N
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-021-01115-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-021-01115-2)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2021 Nov;41(8):1839-1852. doi: 10.1007/s10875-021-01115-2.
Epub  2021 Aug 24.

A Novel STK4 Mutation Impairs T Cell Immunity Through Dysregulation of 
Cytokine-Induced Adhesion and Chemotaxis Genes.

Guennoun A(1), Bougarn S(1), Khan T(1), Mackeh R(1), Rahman M(1)(2), Al-Ali 
F(1), Ata M(1), Aamer W(1), Prosser D(3), Habib T(1)(4), Chin-Smith E(1), 
Al-Darwish K(1), Zhang Q(5), Al-Shakaki A(6), Robay A(6), Crystal RG(7), Fakhro 
K(1)(6)(8), Al-Naimi A(9), Al Maslamani E(9), Tuffaha A(9), Janahi I(9), Janahi 
M(9), Love DR(3), Karim MY(3), Lo B(1)(8), Hassan A(9), Adeli M(9), Marr 
N(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Research Branch, Sidra Medicine, PO BOX 26999, Doha, Qatar.
(2)Translational Cancer and Immunity Center, Qatar Biomedical Research 
Institute, Doha, Qatar.
(3)Department of Pathology, Sidra Medicine, Doha, Qatar.
(4)Bioinformatics Core, Weill Cornell Medicine-Qatar, Doha, Qatar.
(5)St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller 
Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA.
(6)Weill Cornell Medicine-Qatar, Doha, Qatar.
(7)Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
(8)College of Health and Life Sciences, Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Doha, 
Qatar.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Sidra Medicine, Doha, Qatar.
(10)Research Branch, Sidra Medicine, PO BOX 26999, Doha, Qatar. nmarr@sidra.org.
(11)College of Health and Life Sciences, Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Doha, 
Qatar. nmarr@sidra.org.

PURPOSE: Human serine/threonine kinase 4 (STK4) deficiency is a rare, autosomal 
recessive genetic disorder leading to combined immunodeficiency; however, the 
extent to which immune signaling and host defense are impaired is unclear. We 
assessed the functional consequences of a novel, homozygous nonsense STK4 
mutation (NM_006282.2:c.871C > T, p.Arg291*) identified in a pediatric patient 
by comparing his innate and adaptive cell-mediated and humoral immune responses 
with those of three heterozygous relatives and unrelated controls.
METHODS: The genetic etiology was verified by whole genome and Sanger 
sequencing. STK4 gene and protein expression was measured by quantitative RT-PCR 
and immunoblotting, respectively. Cellular abnormalities were assessed by 
high-throughput RT-RCR, RNA-Seq, ELISA, and flow cytometry. Antibody responses 
were assessed by ELISA and phage immunoprecipitation-sequencing.
RESULTS: The patient exhibited partial loss of STK4 expression and complete loss 
of STK4 function combined with recurrent viral and bacterial infections, notably 
persistent Epstein-Barr virus viremia and pulmonary tuberculosis. Cellular and 
molecular analyses revealed abnormal fractions of T cell subsets, plasmacytoid 
dendritic cells, and NK cells. The transcriptional responses of the patient's 
whole blood and PBMC samples indicated dysregulated interferon signaling, 
impaired T cell immunity, and increased T cell apoptosis as well as impaired 
regulation of cytokine-induced adhesion and leukocyte chemotaxis genes. 
Nonetheless, the patient had detectable vaccine-specific antibodies and IgG 
responses to various pathogens, consistent with a normal CD19 + B cell fraction, 
albeit with a distinctive antibody repertoire, largely driven by herpes virus 
antigens.
CONCLUSION: Patients with STK4 deficiency can exhibit broad impairment of immune 
function extending beyond lymphoid cells.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-021-01115-2
PMCID: PMC8604862
PMID: 34427831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.