---
reference_id: "PMID:37022461"
title: "DNA methylation signatures for chromatinopathies: current challenges and future applications."
authors:
- Awamleh Z
- Goodman S
- Choufani S
- Weksberg R
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-023-02544-2
keywords:
- Humans
- "Chromatin/genetics, metabolism"
- DNA Methylation
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Neurodevelopmental Disorders/genetics
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DNA methylation signatures for chromatinopathies: current challenges and future applications.
**Authors:** Awamleh Z, Goodman S, Choufani S, Weksberg R
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-023-02544-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-023-02544-2)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2024 Apr;143(4):551-557. doi: 10.1007/s00439-023-02544-2. Epub 2023
 Apr 6.

DNA methylation signatures for chromatinopathies: current challenges and future 
applications.

Awamleh Z(1), Goodman S(1), Choufani S(1), Weksberg R(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Genome Biology Program, Research Institute, The Hospital for 
Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada.
(2)Genetics and Genome Biology Program, Research Institute, The Hospital for 
Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. rweksb@sickkids.ca.
(3)Department of Paediatrics, Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, The 
Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Ave, Toronto, ON, M5G 1X8, Canada. 
rweksb@sickkids.ca.
(4)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 
rweksb@sickkids.ca.
(5)Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. 
rweksb@sickkids.ca.

Pathogenic variants in genes that encode epigenetic regulators are the cause for 
more than 100 rare neurodevelopmental syndromes also termed "chromatinopathies". 
DNA methylation signatures, syndrome-specific patterns of DNA methylation 
alterations, serve as both a research avenue for elucidating disease 
pathophysiology and a clinical diagnostic tool. The latter is well established, 
especially for the classification of variants of uncertain significance (VUS). 
In this perspective, we describe the seminal DNA methylation signature research 
in chromatinopathies; the complex relationships between genotype, phenotype and 
DNA methylation, and the future applications of DNA methylation signatures.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-023-02544-2
PMCID: PMC11078831
PMID: 37022461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.