---
reference_id: "PMID:41199529"
title: "Transcriptomic profiling reveals the role of Hedgehog signaling as a biomarker and in the pathogenesis of Ménétrier's disease."
authors:
- Shin M
- Gabriel TT
- Ofosu FK
- Zhang J
- Wang TT
- Bechard ME
- Coffey RJ
- Huh WJ
journal: J Pathol
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1002/path.6488
keywords:
- Humans
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- Animals
- "Hedgehog Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- Gene Expression Profiling/methods
- Mice
- Transcriptome
- Female
- "Zinc Finger Protein GLI1/genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Biomarkers/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcriptomic profiling reveals the role of Hedgehog signaling as a biomarker and in the pathogenesis of Ménétrier's disease.
**Authors:** Shin M, Gabriel TT, Ofosu FK, Zhang J, Wang TT, Bechard ME, Coffey RJ, Huh WJ
**Journal:** J Pathol (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1002/path.6488](https://doi.org/10.1002/path.6488)

## Content

1. J Pathol. 2026 Jan;268(1):65-76. doi: 10.1002/path.6488. Epub 2025 Nov 6.

Transcriptomic profiling reveals the role of Hedgehog signaling as a biomarker 
and in the pathogenesis of Ménétrier's disease.

Shin M(1), Gabriel TT(1), Ofosu FK(1), Zhang J(1), Wang TT(1), Bechard ME(2), 
Coffey RJ(2), Huh WJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, 
USA.

Both Ménétrier's disease (MD) and juvenile polyposis syndrome (JPS) are rare 
premalignant conditions that can lead to gastric cancer. MD is an acquired 
disease without known causative mutations that is characterized by increased 
expression of an EGF receptor (EGFR) ligand, transforming growth factor-alpha 
(TGFα), in the stomach. JPS is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern and is 
caused by BMPR1A or SMAD4 mutations. Although there are distinct 
clinico-pathological features that differ between the two diseases, they also 
share similar features that often lead to misdiagnosis. To identify diagnostic 
markers for MD and to better understand the pathogenesis of the disease, we 
performed transcriptomic profiling of stomach tissues from normal (NL), MD, and 
JPS patients. Comparative analysis between MD and JPS revealed both common and 
differential gene signatures. Common gene signatures included estrogen receptor 
signaling, integrin signaling, mTOR signaling, and others, which may be 
responsible for histopathological similarities. Among differential gene 
signatures, we found that Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is upregulated in MD and 
confirmed that protein expression of Hh signaling downstream targets, GLI1 
(glioma-associated oncogene homolog 1) and HHIP (Hedgehog-interacting protein), 
is higher in MD than in JPS, particularly in foveolar cells by 
immunohistochemistry. We also demonstrated that treatment with an Hh pathway 
inhibitor partially rescued the histopathological phenotypes in an MD mouse 
model. This study provides valuable insights into the potential mechanisms 
underlying the similar clinico-pathological features observed in MD and JPS. We 
also identified GLI1 and HHIP as diagnostic markers that can help to distinguish 
MD from JPS. Furthermore, Hh signaling was shown to play an important role in 
the pathogenesis of MD and may serve as a potential therapeutic target. © 2025 
The Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

© 2025 The Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

DOI: 10.1002/path.6488
PMID: 41199529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]