---
reference_id: "PMID:38504242"
title: Biallelic and monoallelic pathogenic variants in CYP24A1 and SLC34A1 genes cause idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia.
authors:
- Wang Q
- Chen JJ
- Wei LY
- Ding Y
- Liu M
- Li WJ
- Su C
- Gong CX
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03135-8
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- Hypercalcemia/genetics
- Hypercalciuria/genetics
- "Infant, Newborn, Diseases"
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors"
- Mutation/genetics
- Nephrocalcinosis/genetics
- Retrospective Studies
- "Sodium-Phosphate Cotransporter Proteins, Type IIa/genetics"
- "Vitamin D3 24-Hydroxylase/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biallelic and monoallelic pathogenic variants in CYP24A1 and SLC34A1 genes cause idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia.
**Authors:** Wang Q, Chen JJ, Wei LY, Ding Y, Liu M, Li WJ, Su C, Gong CX
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-024-03135-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-024-03135-8)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 Mar 19;19(1):126. doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03135-8.

Biallelic and monoallelic pathogenic variants in CYP24A1 and SLC34A1 genes cause
idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia.

Wang Q(1), Chen JJ(1), Wei LY(1), Ding Y(1), Liu M(1), Li WJ(1), Su C(1), Gong
CX(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Genetics and Metabolism, Beijing Children's
Hospital, 56# Nan Lishi Road, west district, Beijing, 100045, China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Genetics and Metabolism, Beijing Children's
Hospital, 56# Nan Lishi Road, west district, Beijing, 100045, China.
chunxiugong@sina.com.

OBJECTIVE: Idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia (IIH) is a rare disorder of
PTH-independent hypercalcemia. CYP24A1 and SLC34A1 gene mutations cause two
forms of hereditary IIH. In this study, the clinical manifestations and
molecular aspects of six new Chinese patients were investigated.
METHODS: The clinical manifestations and laboratory study of six patients with
idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia were analyzed retrospectively.
RESULTS: Five of the patients were diagnosed with hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria,
and bilateral medullary nephrocalcinosis. Their clinical symptoms and
biochemical abnormalities improved after treatment. One patient presented at age
11 years old with arterial hypertension, hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis,
but normal serum calcium. Gene analysis showed that two patients had compound
heterozygous mutations of CYP24A1, one patient had a monoallelic CYP24A1
variant, and three patients had a monoallelic SLC34A1 variant. Four novel
CYP24A1 variants (c.116G > C, c.287T > A, c.476G > A and c.1349T > C) and three
novel SLC34A1 variants (c.1322 A > G, c.1697_1698insT and c.1726T > C) were
found in these patients.
CONCLUSIONS: A monoallelic variant of CYP24A1 or SLC34A1 gene contributes to
symptomatic hypercalcemia, hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis. Manifestations
of IIH vary with onset age. Hypercalcemia may not necessarily present after
infancy and IIH should be considered in patients with nephrolithiasis either in
older children or adults.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-024-03135-8
PMCID: PMC10953066
PMID: 38504242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors do not have any conflict of
interest. There is not any financial relationship with any organisation for the
study. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests
or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work
reported in this paper.
