---
reference_id: "PMID:27264001"
title: IgE in the diagnosis and treatment of allergic disease.
authors:
- Platts-Mills TAE
- Schuyler AJ
- Erwin EA
- Commins SP
- Woodfolk JA
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2016.04.010
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IgE in the diagnosis and treatment of allergic disease.
**Authors:** Platts-Mills TAE, Schuyler AJ, Erwin EA, Commins SP, Woodfolk JA
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2016.04.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2016.04.010)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2016 Jun;137(6):1662-1670. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2016.04.010. Epub 2016 Apr 27.

IgE in the diagnosis and treatment of allergic disease.

Platts-Mills TAE(1), Schuyler AJ(2), Erwin EA(3), Commins SP(4), Woodfolk JA(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Virginia, Asthma and Allergy Disease Center, Charlottesville, 
Va. Electronic address: tap2z@virginia.edu.
(2)University of Virginia, Asthma and Allergy Disease Center, Charlottesville, 
Va.
(3)Nationwide Children's Hospital, Center for Innovation in Pediatric Practice, 
Columbus, Ohio.
(4)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and Immunology, University of North 
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.

Traditionally, the concept of allergy implied an abnormal response to an 
otherwise benign agent (eg, pollen or food), with an easily identifiable 
relationship between exposure and disease. However, there are syndromes in which 
the relationship between exposure to the relevant allergen and the "allergic" 
disease is not clear. In these cases the presence of specific IgE antibodies can 
play an important role in identifying the relevant allergen and provide a guide 
to therapy. Good examples include chronic asthma and exposure to perennial 
indoor allergens and asthma related to fungal infection. Finally, we are 
increasingly aware of forms of food allergy in which the relationship between 
exposure and the disease is delayed by 3 to 6 hours or longer. Three forms of 
food allergy with distinct clinical features are now well recognized. These are 
(1) anaphylactic sensitivity to peanut, (2) eosinophilic esophagitis related to 
cow's milk, and (3) delayed anaphylaxis to red meat. In these syndromes the 
immunology of the response is dramatically different. Peanut and galactose 
α-1,3-galactose (alpha-gal) are characterized by high- or very high-titer IgE 
antibodies for Ara h 2 and alpha-gal, respectively. By contrast, eosinophilic 
esophagitis is characterized by low levels of IgE specific for milk proteins 
with high- or very high-titer IgG4 to the same proteins. The recent finding is 
that patients with alpha-gal syndrome do not have detectable IgG4 to the 
oligosaccharide. Thus the serum results not only identify relevant antigens but 
also provide a guide to the nature of the immune response.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2016.04.010
PMCID: PMC5406226
PMID: 27264001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of potential conflict of interest: T. 
A. E. Platts-Mills has received a grant from ThermoFisher/Phadia. E. A. Erwin is 
employed by Nationwide Children’s Hospital; has received royalties from 
UpToDate; and has received travel support from the American College of Allergy, 
Asthma, and Immunology. S. P. Commins has received personal fees from Genentech 
and UpToDate and has received a grant from the National Institutes of Health. J. 
A. Woodfolk has received grants from the National Institutes of Health/National 
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and the National Institutes of 
Health/National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases. A. 
J. Schuyler declares no relevant conflicts of interest.