---
reference_id: "PMID:23369989"
title: Alteration of proteoglycan sulfation affects bone growth and remodeling.
authors:
- Gualeni B
- de Vernejoul MC
- Marty-Morieux C
- De Leonardis F
- Franchi M
- Monti L
- Forlino A
- Houillier P
- Rossi A
- Geoffroy V
journal: Bone
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2013.01.036
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alteration of proteoglycan sulfation affects bone growth and remodeling.
**Authors:** Gualeni B, de Vernejoul MC, Marty-Morieux C, De Leonardis F, Franchi M, Monti L, Forlino A, Houillier P, Rossi A, Geoffroy V
**Journal:** Bone (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bone.2013.01.036](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2013.01.036)

## Content

1. Bone. 2013 May;54(1):83-91. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2013.01.036. Epub 2013 Jan 28.

Alteration of proteoglycan sulfation affects bone growth and remodeling.

Gualeni B(1), de Vernejoul MC, Marty-Morieux C, De Leonardis F, Franchi M, Monti 
L, Forlino A, Houillier P, Rossi A, Geoffroy V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Section of Biochemistry, University of 
Pavia, Pavia, Italy.

Diastrophic dysplasia (DTD) is a chondrodysplasia caused by mutations in the 
SLC26A2 gene, leading to reduced intracellular sulfate pool in chondrocytes, 
osteoblasts and fibroblasts. Hence, proteoglycans are undersulfated in the 
cartilage and bone of DTD patients. To characterize the bone phenotype of this 
skeletal dysplasia we used the Slc26a2 knock-in mouse (dtd mouse), that was 
previously validated as an animal model of DTD in humans. X-rays, bone 
densitometry, static and dynamic histomorphometry, and in vitro studies revealed 
a primary bone defect in the dtd mouse model. We showed in vivo that this 
primary bone defect in dtd mice is due to decreased bone accrual associated with 
a decreased trabecular and periosteal appositional rate at the cell level in one 
month-old mice. Although the osteoclast number evaluated by histomorphometry was 
not different in dtd compared to wild-type mice, urine analysis of 
deoxypyridinoline cross-links and serum levels of type I collagen C-terminal 
telopeptides showed a higher resorption rate in dtd mice compared to wild-type 
littermates. Electron microscopy studies showed that collagen fibrils in bone 
were thinner and less organized in dtd compared to wild-type mice. These data 
suggest that the low bone mass observed in mutant mice could possibly be linked 
to the different bone matrix compositions/organizations in dtd mice triggering 
changes in osteoblast and osteoclast activities. Overall, these results suggest 
that proteoglycan undersulfation not only affects the properties of hyaline 
cartilage, but can also lead to unbalanced bone modeling and remodeling 
activities, demonstrating the importance of proteoglycan sulfation in bone 
homeostasis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2013.01.036
PMCID: PMC3607217
PMID: 23369989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]