---
reference_id: "PMID:29654216"
title: "Glycine Amidinotransferase (GATM), Renal Fanconi Syndrome, and Kidney Failure."
authors:
- Reichold M
- Klootwijk ED
- Reinders J
- Otto EA
- Milani M
- Broeker C
- Laing C
- Wiesner J
- Devi S
- Zhou W
- Schmitt R
- Tegtmeier I
- Sterner C
- Doellerer H
- Renner K
- Oefner PJ
- Dettmer K
- Simbuerger JM
- Witzgall R
- Stanescu HC
- Dumitriu S
- Iancu D
- Patel V
- Mozere M
- Tekman M
- Jaureguiberry G
- Issler N
- Kesselheim A
- Walsh SB
- Gale DP
- Howie AJ
- Martins JR
- Hall AM
- Kasgharian M
- "O'Brien K"
- Ferreira CR
- Atwal PS
- Jain M
- Hammers A
- Charles-Edwards G
- Choe CU
- Isbrandt D
- Cebrian-Serrano A
- Davies B
- Sandford RN
- Pugh C
- Konecki DS
- Povey S
- Bockenhauer D
- Lichter-Konecki U
- Gahl WA
- Unwin RJ
- Warth R
- Kleta R
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2017111179
keywords:
- Aged
- "Amidinotransferases/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- Computer Simulation
- "Fanconi Syndrome/complications, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Inflammasomes/metabolism
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/etiology, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mitochondria/metabolism, pathology"
- Molecular Conformation
- Mutation
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- Reactive Oxygen Species/metabolism
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glycine Amidinotransferase (GATM), Renal Fanconi Syndrome, and Kidney Failure.
**Authors:** Reichold M, Klootwijk ED, Reinders J, Otto EA, Milani M, Broeker C, Laing C, Wiesner J, Devi S, Zhou W, Schmitt R, Tegtmeier I, Sterner C, Doellerer H, Renner K, Oefner PJ, Dettmer K, Simbuerger JM, Witzgall R, Stanescu HC, Dumitriu S, Iancu D, Patel V, Mozere M, Tekman M, Jaureguiberry G, Issler N, Kesselheim A, Walsh SB, Gale DP, Howie AJ, Martins JR, Hall AM, Kasgharian M, O'Brien K, Ferreira CR, Atwal PS, Jain M, Hammers A, Charles-Edwards G, Choe CU, Isbrandt D, Cebrian-Serrano A, Davies B, Sandford RN, Pugh C, Konecki DS, Povey S, Bockenhauer D, Lichter-Konecki U, Gahl WA, Unwin RJ, Warth R, Kleta R
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2017111179](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2017111179)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2018 Jul;29(7):1849-1858. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2017111179. Epub
2018 Apr 13.

Glycine Amidinotransferase (GATM), Renal Fanconi Syndrome, and Kidney Failure.

Reichold M(1), Klootwijk ED(2), Reinders J(3), Otto EA(4), Milani M(5), Broeker
C(1), Laing C(2), Wiesner J(1), Devi S(6), Zhou W(6), Schmitt R(1), Tegtmeier
I(1), Sterner C(1), Doellerer H(1), Renner K(7), Oefner PJ(3), Dettmer K(3),
Simbuerger JM(3), Witzgall R(8), Stanescu HC(2), Dumitriu S(2), Iancu D(2),
Patel V(2), Mozere M(2), Tekman M(2), Jaureguiberry G(2), Issler N(2),
Kesselheim A(2), Walsh SB(2), Gale DP(2), Howie AJ(2), Martins JR(9), Hall
AM(9), Kasgharian M(10), O'Brien K(11), Ferreira CR(11), Atwal PS(12), Jain
M(13), Hammers A(14), Charles-Edwards G(15), Choe CU(16), Isbrandt D(17),
Cebrian-Serrano A(18), Davies B(18), Sandford RN(19), Pugh C(20), Konecki
DS(21), Povey S(22), Bockenhauer D(2), Lichter-Konecki U(23), Gahl WA(11), Unwin
RJ(2), Warth R(24), Kleta R(25).

Author information:
(1)Medical Cell Biology.
(2)Centre for Nephrology and.
(3)Institute of Functional Genomics.
(4)Division of Nephrology and.
(5)Italian National Research Council (CNR), Institute of Biophysics, Milan,
Italy.
(6)Department of Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine III, and.
(8)Molecular and Cellular Anatomy, University Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
(9)Institute of Anatomy, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
(10)Department of Pathology, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut.
(11)NHGRI, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(12)Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida.
(13)Department of Bone and OI, Kennedy Krieger Institute, Baltimore, Maryland.
(14)King's College London and Guy's and St. Thomas' PET Centre, London, United
Kingdom.
(15)Medical Physics, Guy's and St. Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, United
Kingdom.
(16)Department of Neurology, University Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany.
(17)Deutsches Zentrum für Neurodegenerative Erkrankungen (DZNE), Research Group
Experimental Neurophysiology, Bonn, Germany, and University of Cologne, Cologne,
Germany.
(18)Wellcome Centre for Human Genetics and.
(19)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United
Kingdom.
(20)Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom.
(21)GeneDX, Gaithersburg, Maryland; and.
(22)Genetics, Evolution and Environment, University College London, London,
United Kingdom.
(23)Division of Medical Genetics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania.
(24)Medical Cell Biology, richard.warth@ur.de r.kleta@ucl.ac.uk.
(25)Centre for Nephrology and richard.warth@ur.de r.kleta@ucl.ac.uk.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Nephrol. 2018 Jul;14(7):414. doi: 10.1038/s41581-018-0017-3.
    J Am Soc Nephrol. 2018 Jul;29(7):1787-1789. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2018040450.
    Ann Transl Med. 2018 Aug;6(16):315. doi: 10.21037/atm.2018.07.09.

Background For many patients with kidney failure, the cause and underlying
defect remain unknown. Here, we describe a novel mechanism of a genetic order
characterized by renal Fanconi syndrome and kidney failure.Methods We clinically
and genetically characterized members of five families with autosomal dominant
renal Fanconi syndrome and kidney failure. We performed genome-wide linkage
analysis, sequencing, and expression studies in kidney biopsy specimens and
renal cells along with knockout mouse studies and evaluations of mitochondrial
morphology and function. Structural studies examined the effects of recognized
mutations.Results The renal disease in these patients resulted from monoallelic
mutations in the gene encoding glycine amidinotransferase (GATM), a renal
proximal tubular enzyme in the creatine biosynthetic pathway that is otherwise
associated with a recessive disorder of creatine deficiency. In silico analysis
showed that the particular GATM mutations, identified in 28 members of the five
families, create an additional interaction interface within the GATM protein and
likely cause the linear aggregation of GATM observed in patient biopsy specimens
and cultured proximal tubule cells. GATM aggregates-containing mitochondria were
elongated and associated with increased ROS production, activation of the NLRP3
inflammasome, enhanced expression of the profibrotic cytokine IL-18, and
increased cell death.Conclusions In this novel genetic disorder, fully penetrant
heterozygous missense mutations in GATM trigger intramitochondrial fibrillary
deposition of GATM and lead to elongated and abnormal mitochondria. We speculate
that this renal proximal tubular mitochondrial pathology initiates a response
from the inflammasome, with subsequent development of kidney fibrosis.

Copyright © 2018 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2017111179
PMCID: PMC6050927
PMID: 29654216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
