---
reference_id: "PMID:11572777"
title: A murine model of Holt-Oram syndrome defines roles of the T-box transcription factor Tbx5 in cardiogenesis and disease.
authors:
- Bruneau BG
- Nemer G
- Schmitt JP
- Charron F
- Robitaille L
- Caron S
- Conner DA
- Gessler M
- Nemer M
- Seidman CE
- Seidman JG
journal: Cell
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00493-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A murine model of Holt-Oram syndrome defines roles of the T-box transcription factor Tbx5 in cardiogenesis and disease.
**Authors:** Bruneau BG, Nemer G, Schmitt JP, Charron F, Robitaille L, Caron S, Conner DA, Gessler M, Nemer M, Seidman CE, Seidman JG
**Journal:** Cell (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00493-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00493-7)

## Content

1. Cell. 2001 Sep 21;106(6):709-21. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00493-7.

A murine model of Holt-Oram syndrome defines roles of the T-box transcription 
factor Tbx5 in cardiogenesis and disease.

Bruneau BG(1), Nemer G, Schmitt JP, Charron F, Robitaille L, Caron S, Conner DA, 
Gessler M, Nemer M, Seidman CE, Seidman JG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Heterozygous Tbx5(del/+) mice were generated to study the mechanisms by which 
TBX5 haploinsufficiency causes cardiac and forelimb abnormalities seen in 
Holt-Oram syndrome. Tbx5 deficiency in homozygous mice (Tbx5(del/del)) decreased 
expression of multiple genes and caused severe hypoplasia of posterior domains 
in the developing heart. Surprisingly, Tbx5 haploinsufficiency also markedly 
decreased atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) and connexin 40 (cx40) transcription, 
implicating these as Tbx5 target genes and providing a mechanism by which 50% 
reduction of T-box transcription factors cause disease. Direct and cooperative 
transactivation of the ANF and cx40 promoters by Tbx5 and the homeodomain 
transcription factor Nkx2-5 was also demonstrated. These studies provide one 
potential explanation for Holt-Oram syndrome conduction system defects, suggest 
mechanisms for intrafamilial phenotypic variability, and account for related 
cardiac malformations caused by other transcription factor mutations.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(01)00493-7
PMID: 11572777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]