---
reference_id: PMID:24738919
title: Unusual 4p16.3 deletions suggest an additional chromosome region for the Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome-associated seizures disorder.
authors:
- Zollino M
- Orteschi D
- Ruiter M
- Pfundt R
- Steindl K
- Cafiero C
- Ricciardi S
- Contaldo I
- Chieffo D
- Ranalli D
- Acquafondata C
- Murdolo M
- Marangi G
- Asaro A
- Battaglia D
journal: Epilepsia
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1111/epi.12617
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Calcium-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 4/genetics"
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Humans
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis
- Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Seizures/genetics
- Wolf-Hirschhorn Syndrome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unusual 4p16.3 deletions suggest an additional chromosome region for the Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome-associated seizures disorder.
**Authors:** Zollino M, Orteschi D, Ruiter M, Pfundt R, Steindl K, Cafiero C, Ricciardi S, Contaldo I, Chieffo D, Ranalli D, Acquafondata C, Murdolo M, Marangi G, Asaro A, Battaglia D
**Journal:** Epilepsia (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1111/epi.12617](https://doi.org/10.1111/epi.12617)

## Content

1. Epilepsia. 2014 Jun;55(6):849-57. doi: 10.1111/epi.12617. Epub 2014 Apr 16.

Unusual 4p16.3 deletions suggest an additional chromosome region for the 
Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome-associated seizures disorder.

Zollino M(1), Orteschi D, Ruiter M, Pfundt R, Steindl K, Cafiero C, Ricciardi S, 
Contaldo I, Chieffo D, Ranalli D, Acquafondata C, Murdolo M, Marangi G, Asaro A, 
Battaglia D.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics, Catholic University, University Hospital A. 
Gemelli, Roma, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: Seizure disorder is one of the most relevant clinical manifestations 
in Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) and it acts as independent prognostic factor 
for the severity of intellectual disability (ID). LETM1, encoding a 
mitochondrial protein playing a role in K(+) /H(+) exchange and in Ca(2+) 
homeostasis, is currently considered the major candidate gene. However, whether 
haploinsufficiency limited to LETM1 is enough to cause epilepsy is still 
unclear. The main purpose of the present research is to define the 4p chromosome 
regions where genes for seizures reside.
METHODS: Comparison of our three unusual 4p16.3 deletions with 13 literature 
reports. Array-comparative genomic hybridization (a-CGH). Real-time polymerase 
chain reaction (RT-PCR) on messanger RNA (mRNA) of LETM1 and CPLX1. Direct 
sequencing of LETM1.
RESULTS: Three unusual 4p16.3 deletions were detected by array-CGH in absence of 
a obvious clinical diagnosis of WHS. Two of these, encompassing LETM1, were 
found in subjects who never had seizures. The deletions were interstitial, 
spanning 1.1 Mb with preservation of the terminal 1.77 Mb region in one case and 
0.84 Mb with preservation of the terminal 1.07 Mb region in the other. The other 
deletion was terminal, affecting a 0.564 Mb segment, with preservation of LETM1, 
and it was associated with seizures and learning difficulties. Upon evaluating 
our patients along with literature reports, we noted that six of eight subjects 
with terminal 4p deletions preserving LETM1 had seizures, whereas seven of seven 
with interstitial deletions including LETM1 and preserving the terminal 1 Mb 
region on 4p did not. An additional chromosome region for seizures is suggested, 
falling within the terminal 1.5 Mb on 4p, not including LETM1.
SIGNIFICANCE: We consider that haploinsufficiency not limited to LETM1 but 
including other genes acts as a risk factor for the WHS-associated seizure 
disorder, according to a comorbidity model of pathogenesis. Additional candidate 
genes reside in the terminal 1.5 Mb region on 4p, most likely distal to LETM1. A 
PowerPoint slide summarizing this article is available for download in the 
Supporting Information section here.

Wiley Periodicals, Inc. © 2014 International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1111/epi.12617
PMID: 24738919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]