---
reference_id: "PMID:20301361"
title: PLP1-Related Disorders.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Wolf NI
- van Spaendonk RML
- Hobson GM
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PLP1-Related Disorders.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Wolf NI, van Spaendonk RML, Hobson GM

## Content

1. PLP1-Related Disorders.

Wolf NI(1), van Spaendonk RML(2), Hobson GM(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
1999 Jun 15 [updated 2025 Jun 12].

Author information:
(1)Department of Child Neurology, Amsterdam University Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
(2)Department of Human Genetics, Amsterdam University Medical Center, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands
(3)Nemours Biomedical Research, Nemours Hospital for Children, Wilmington, 
Delaware

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: PLP1-related disorders of central nervous system 
myelin formation include a range of phenotypes from Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease 
(PMD) to spastic paraplegia 2 (SPG2). PMD typically manifests in infancy or 
early childhood with nystagmus, hypotonia, and cognitive impairment; the 
findings progress to severe spasticity and ataxia. Life span is shortened. SPG2 
manifests as spastic paraparesis with or without CNS involvement and usually 
normal life span. Intrafamilial variation of phenotypes can be observed, but the 
clinical manifestations are usually fairly consistent within families. 
Heterozygous females may manifest mild-to-moderate features of the disease.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of a PLP1-related disorder is established in a 
male proband by identification of a hemizygous pathogenic variant involving 
PLP1. The diagnosis of a PLP1-related disorder is usually established in a 
female with neurologic signs, a family history of a PLP1-related disorder, and a 
heterozygous pathogenic variant in PLP1 identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: A multidisciplinary team comprising 
specialists in neurology, physical medicine, orthopedics, pulmonary medicine, 
and gastroenterology is optimal for care. Treatment may include respiratory 
support as needed; gastrostomy for individuals with severe dysphagia; routine 
management of spasticity including physical therapy, exercise, medications 
(baclofen, diazepam, tizanidine), orthotics, and surgery for joint contractures; 
anti-seizure medication for seizures; developmental, educational, and 
neurobehavioral support; physical and occupational therapy for ataxia with 
adaptive devices as needed; individuals with scoliosis benefit from proper 
wheelchair seating and physical therapy; surgery may be required for severe 
scoliosis; management of ocular manifestations as per ophthalmology; management 
of spastic urinary bladder as per urology; treatment of osteopenia as per 
endocrinologist. Surveillance: Growth, nutrition, and feeding assessment at each 
visit; neurologic evaluation for weakness, hypotonia, spasticity, ataxia, and 
ambulation every six to 12 months; EEG as needed; developmental and educational 
assessment every six to 12 months in children and adolescents; cognitive 
assessment every six to 12 months in older individuals; orthopedic assessment of 
scoliosis, contractures, presence of joint dislocations, and physical medicine, 
occupational and physical therapy assessment of mobility and self-help skills 
every six to 12 months; assess for low bone density as needed; ophthalmologic 
evaluation to assess for nystagmus and visual impairment as recommended by 
ophthalmology; assess for urinary dysfunction as recommended by urology; assess 
family and social work needs. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Elevated body 
temperature, as with fever, may cause neurologic manifestations to transiently 
worsen.
GENETIC COUNSELING: PLP1-related disorders are inherited in an X-linked manner. 
De novo pathogenic variants have been reported. The risk to sibs of a male 
proband depends on the genetic status of the mother: if the mother of the 
proband has a PLP1 pathogenic variant, the chance of transmitting the pathogenic 
variant in each pregnancy is 50%. Males who inherit the pathogenic variant will 
be affected; females who inherit the pathogenic variant may be asymptomatic or 
manifest mild-to-moderate signs of the disorder. Heterozygous female sibs are 
more likely to develop neurologic signs if the phenotype in affected males is 
relatively mild. Once the PLP1 pathogenic variant has been identified in an 
affected family member, heterozygote detection and prenatal and preimplantation 
genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301361