---
reference_id: "PMID:35276551"
title: Elucidating the metabolic characteristics of pancreatic β-cells from patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D) using a genome-scale metabolic modeling.
authors:
- Paul A
- Azhar S
- Das PN
- Bairagi N
- Chatterjee S
journal: Comput Biol Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2022.105365
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Elucidating the metabolic characteristics of pancreatic β-cells from patients with type 2 diabetes (T2D) using a genome-scale metabolic modeling.
**Authors:** Paul A, Azhar S, Das PN, Bairagi N, Chatterjee S
**Journal:** Comput Biol Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.compbiomed.2022.105365](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2022.105365)

## Content

1. Comput Biol Med. 2022 May;144:105365. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2022.105365. 
Epub 2022 Mar 6.

Elucidating the metabolic characteristics of pancreatic β-cells from patients 
with type 2 diabetes (T2D) using a genome-scale metabolic modeling.

Paul A(1), Azhar S(2), Das PN(3), Bairagi N(4), Chatterjee S(5).

Author information:
(1)Complex Analysis Group, Translational Health Science and Technology 
Institute, NCR Biotech Science Cluster, 3rd Milestone, Faridabad-Gurgaon 
Expressway, Faridabad, 121001, India.
(2)Geriatric Research, Education and Clinical Center, VA Palo Alto Health Care 
System, Palo Alto, CA, 94304, USA; Division of Endocrinology, Gerontology and 
Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA, 94304, USA.
(3)Department of Mathematics, Ramakrishna Mission Vivekananda Centenary College, 
Rahara, Kolkata, 700118, India.
(4)Centre for Mathematical Biology and Ecology, Department of Mathematics, 
Jadavpur University, Kolkata, 700032, India.
(5)Complex Analysis Group, Translational Health Science and Technology 
Institute, NCR Biotech Science Cluster, 3rd Milestone, Faridabad-Gurgaon 
Expressway, Faridabad, 121001, India. Electronic address: 
samrat.chatterjee@thsti.res.in.

Diabetes is a global health problem caused primarily by the inability of 
pancreatic β-cells to secrete adequate insulin. Despite extensive research, the 
identity of factors contributing to the dysregulated metabolism-secretion 
coupling in the β-cells remains elusive. The present study attempts to capture 
some of these factors responsible for the impaired β-cell metabolism-secretion 
coupling that contributes to diabetes pathogenesis. The metabolic-flux profiles 
of pancreatic β-cells were predicted using genome-scale metabolic modeling for 
ten diabetic patients and ten control subjects. Analysis of these flux states 
shows reduction in the mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation and mitochondrial 
oxidative phosphorylation pathways, that leads to decreased insulin secretion in 
diabetes. We also observed elevated reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation 
through peroxisomal fatty acid β-oxidation. In addition, cellular antioxidant 
defense systems were found to be attenuated in diabetes. Our analysis also 
uncovered the possible changes in the plasma metabolites in diabetes due to the 
β-cells failure. These efforts subsequently led to the identification of seven 
metabolites associated with cardiovascular disease (CVD) pathogenesis, thus 
establishing its link as a secondary complication of diabetes.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2022.105365
PMID: 35276551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]