---
reference_id: "PMID:31620869"
title: Predominant role of innate pro-inflammatory cytokines in vitiligo disease.
authors:
- Gholijani N
- Yazdani MR
- Dastgheib L
journal: Arch Dermatol Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s00403-019-01996-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predominant role of innate pro-inflammatory cytokines in vitiligo disease.
**Authors:** Gholijani N, Yazdani MR, Dastgheib L
**Journal:** Arch Dermatol Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00403-019-01996-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00403-019-01996-9)

## Content

1. Arch Dermatol Res. 2020 Mar;312(2):123-131. doi: 10.1007/s00403-019-01996-9. 
Epub 2019 Oct 16.

Predominant role of innate pro-inflammatory cytokines in vitiligo disease.

Gholijani N(1), Yazdani MR(2), Dastgheib L(3).

Author information:
(1)Autoimmune Diseases Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, 
Shiraz, Iran. gholijani@yahoo.com.
(2)Autoimmune Diseases Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, 
Shiraz, Iran.
(3)Molecular Dermatology Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, 
Shiraz, Iran.

Vitiligo is a skin disorder with melanocyte destruction and an autoimmune basis. 
Given the importance of cytokines in autoimmunity, we aimed to find the cytokine 
profile of innate and adaptive immunity in vitiligo patients, and correlate them 
with clinical parameters. The serum levels of innate immunity 
[interleukin(IL)-1α, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-8, IL-12, IL-15 and tumor necrosis factor 
(TNF)-α] and T helper(Th)1 [IL-2, interferon (IFN)-γ, TNF-β], Th2 (IL-4, IL-5, 
IL-10, IL-13) and Th17 (IL-17, IL-23) cytokines in 44 vitiligo patients were 
measured by multiplex cytokine assay and compared with 44 healthy subjects. All 
innate immunity (p < 0.04), Th1 (p < 0.01), Th2 (p < 0.05) and Th17 (p < 0.001) 
cytokines were higher in patients than controls. Total summation levels of 
innate immunity and adaptive immunity cytokines showed a remarkable 
up-regulation in the patients (p < 0.0001). The ratio of innate immunity to Th1 
(p = 0.03), Th2 (p = 0.01) and Th17 (p = 0.03) cytokines was significantly 
higher in patients vs. controls. We found significant higher ratio of Th1 to Th2 
cytokines and TNF-β elevated levels in patients with a family history of 
autoimmunity (p < 0.05). IL-4 and IL-13 (p < 0.04) levels were lower in patients 
with amelanotic hair. Increased IL-10 level was observed in patients with stable 
disease (p = 0.02).In conclusion, the profile of cytokines in patients showed a 
dominant role of innate immunity pro-inflammatory cytokines in vitiligo, which 
suggests the potential of targeting these cytokines for vitiligo treatment. 
While a higher ratio of Th1/Th2 cytokines was observed in the patients, 
association of decreased Th2 cytokines with disease complications suggests a 
protective role for Th2 pathway.

DOI: 10.1007/s00403-019-01996-9
PMID: 31620869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]