---
reference_id: "PMID:11338097"
title: MRI of primary non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the palatine tonsil.
authors:
- King AD
- Lei KI
- Ahuja AT
journal: Br J Radiol
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1259/bjr.74.879.740226
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MRI of primary non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the palatine tonsil.
**Authors:** King AD, Lei KI, Ahuja AT
**Journal:** Br J Radiol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1259/bjr.74.879.740226](https://doi.org/10.1259/bjr.74.879.740226)

## Content

1. Br J Radiol. 2001 Mar;74(879):226-9. doi: 10.1259/bjr.74.879.740226.

MRI of primary non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of the palatine tonsil.

King AD(1), Lei KI, Ahuja AT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Diagnostic Radiology and Organ Imaging, Faculty of Medicine, 
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, New 
Territories, Hong Kong SAR, China.

Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) arising primarily in the palatine tonsil is 
uncommon. The aims of the study were to describe the appearances on MRI and to 
identify the features that help to distinguish NHL from other tonsillar tumours. 
The clinical records and MR images of eight patients with primary NHL of the 
palatine tonsil were reviewed. Patients had a short duration of symptoms (mean 1 
month). Systemic symptoms (fever, weight loss or night sweats) occurred in two 
patients. Tumours were round or lobulated and ranged in size from 30 mm to 70 
mm. The signal intensity on T2 weighted, T1 weighted and T1 weighted contrast 
enhanced images was homogeneous and similar to that of normal tonsil in six 
patients. Two large tumours were mildly heterogeneous and one of these showed 
small foci of necrosis. NHL of the tonsil displaced rather than invaded local 
structures in seven patients and locally invaded the soft palate in only one 
patient. Lymphadenopathy was present in five patients and the nodes were of 
similar signal intensity to the primary tumour. There was involvement of the 
ipsilateral upper internal jugular chain in all cases of lymphadenopathy. The 
posterior triangle was involved in two patients, the periparotid node in one 
patient and the retro-oropharyngeal region in one patient. The presence of a 
large tumour without deep invasion together with homogeneous non-necrotic nodes 
suggests the diagnosis of NHL. As NHL frequently has similar signal intensity to 
normal tonsil, MRI may not be able to detect lymphomatous involvement in the 
non-enlarged tonsil.

DOI: 10.1259/bjr.74.879.740226
PMID: 11338097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]