---
reference_id: "PMID:38174187"
title: A Saudi Girl With Co-occurring CHD1 (Pilarowski-Bjornsson Syndrome) and ASH1L Gene Variants.
authors:
- Al-Aamri M
- Alshaqaq M
- Al-Abdi SY
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.49905
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Saudi Girl With Co-occurring CHD1 (Pilarowski-Bjornsson Syndrome) and ASH1L Gene Variants.
**Authors:** Al-Aamri M, Alshaqaq M, Al-Abdi SY
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.49905](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.49905)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Dec 4;15(12):e49905. doi: 10.7759/cureus.49905. eCollection 2023
Dec.

A Saudi Girl With Co-occurring CHD1 (Pilarowski-Bjornsson Syndrome) and ASH1L
Gene Variants.

Al-Aamri M(1), Alshaqaq M(2), Al-Abdi SY(3).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Nephrology, Maternity and Children Hospital Alahsa, Alahsa, SAU.
(2)Pediatric Neurology, Maternity and Children Hospital Alahsa, Alhasa, SAU.
(3)Pediatrics/Neonatology, Al Ahsa Hospital, Alahsa, SAU.

Pilarowski-Bjornsson Syndrome (PBS) is a recently identified and rare genetic
disorder. PBS is caused by missense variants in the CHD1 gene, a chromatin
remodeler and helicase DNA-binding protein. In this report, we present the first
case of PBS in Saudi Arabia. The patient exhibits a phenotype and genotype that
are consistent with previously reported cases of PBS. Notably, this case is
unique due to the coexisting presence of an absent, small, and homeotic disks
protein 1 homolog like a histone lysine methyltransferase (ASH1L) variant and
developmental dissociation. The ASH1L variant may contribute to the
developmental dissociation observed in the patient. Furthermore, since the
patient is female, this case contributes to the female-skewed distribution of
PBS, although the exact cause of this phenomenon requires further investigation.
This report highlights the importance of identifying and characterizing rare
genetic disorders such as PBS. Understanding the genetic basis of these
disorders can lead to improved diagnosis, treatment, and management strategies.
Continued research on the genetic and molecular mechanisms underlying PBS and
related disorders is crucial for advancing our knowledge and developing
effective therapies.

Copyright © 2023, Al-Aamri et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.49905
PMCID: PMC10763589
PMID: 38174187

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
