---
reference_id: "PMID:23347903"
title: "Distinguishing hairy cell leukemia variant from hairy cell leukemia: development and validation of diagnostic criteria."
authors:
- Shao H
- Calvo KR
- Grönborg M
- Tembhare PR
- Kreitman RJ
- Stetler-Stevenson M
- Yuan CM
journal: Leuk Res
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2012.11.021
keywords:
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Flow Cytometry
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Immunophenotyping
- "Leukemia, Hairy Cell/diagnosis, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distinguishing hairy cell leukemia variant from hairy cell leukemia: development and validation of diagnostic criteria.
**Authors:** Shao H, Calvo KR, Grönborg M, Tembhare PR, Kreitman RJ, Stetler-Stevenson M, Yuan CM
**Journal:** Leuk Res (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.leukres.2012.11.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leukres.2012.11.021)

## Content

1. Leuk Res. 2013 Apr;37(4):401-409. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2012.11.021. Epub
2013  Jan 22.

Distinguishing hairy cell leukemia variant from hairy cell leukemia: development
and validation of diagnostic criteria.

Shao H(1), Calvo KR(2), Grönborg M(3), Tembhare PR(3), Kreitman RJ(4),
Stetler-Stevenson M(3), Yuan CM(5).

Author information:
(1)Hematopathology and Laboratory Medicine, H Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and
Research Institute, Tampa, FL, USA.
(2)Hematology Section, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Clinical Center,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)Laboratories of Molecular Biology and Clinical Pathology, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
MD, USA.
(5)Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. Electronic address:
yuanc@mail.nih.gov.

Hairy cell leukemia (HCL) and hairy cell leukemia-variant (HCL-v) are rare
diseases with overlapping clinico-pathological features. We performed flow
cytometry analysis (FCM) of 213 cases (169 HCL, 35 HCL-v, 9 splenic marginal
zone lymphoma (SMZL)), correlating results with available corresponding clinical
and morphological data. FCM distinguished HCL-v from HCL and SMZL based solely
upon expression of four antigens (CD11c, CD25, CD103, CD123) combined with
B-cell markers (CD19, CD20, CD22). HCL-v expressed bright CD20, bright CD22,
CD11c(100%), CD103(100%), dim(40%) or negative(60%) CD123, and uniformly lacked
CD25(100%). HCL expressed bright CD20, bright CD22, bright CD11c, bright CD25,
CD103, and bright homogeneous CD123(100%). Aberrant expression of CD5(2%/3%),
CD10(12%/3%), CD23(21%/11%), CD38(14%/0%), CD2(2%/9%), CD4(0.5%/0%) and
CD13(0.5%/3%), was observed in HCL/HCL-v, respectively. SMZL cases were CD103(-)
and CD123(-) except for one case with dim CD123. HCL showed significantly
greater marrow infiltration over HCL-v. Prominent nucleoli were observed in most
HCL-v but rarely in HCL. A third of HCL and HCL-v marrows were hypocellular or
aplastic-appearing. Detection of BRAFV600E mutation and annexin A1 were examined
in a subset of cases to further validate FCM diagnostic criteria. HCL-v was
negative for both annexin A1 (100%) and BRAFV600E mutation (100%), in contrast
to HCL (74% positive for annexin A1; 76% positive for BRAFV600E mutation). HCL-v
is resistant to traditional HCL therapy, making accurate diagnosis imperative.
We have defined FCM criteria for differentiation of HCL-v from HCL and SMZL.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.leukres.2012.11.021
PMCID: PMC5575750
PMID: 23347903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: the authors have no
competing interests.
