---
reference_id: "PMID:25398656"
title: "Spinal cord ischemia: aetiology, clinical syndromes and imaging features."
authors:
- Weidauer S
- Nichtweiß M
- Hattingen E
- Berkefeld J
journal: Neuroradiology
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s00234-014-1464-6
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Aneurysm/complications, pathology"
- "Atherosclerosis/complications, pathology"
- Child
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Female
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Spinal Cord/pathology
- "Spinal Cord Ischemia/etiology, pathology"
- Syndrome
- Vascular Surgical Procedures/adverse effects
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spinal cord ischemia: aetiology, clinical syndromes and imaging features.
**Authors:** Weidauer S, Nichtweiß M, Hattingen E, Berkefeld J
**Journal:** Neuroradiology (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00234-014-1464-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00234-014-1464-6)

## Content

1. Neuroradiology. 2015 Mar;57(3):241-57. doi: 10.1007/s00234-014-1464-6. Epub
2014  Nov 16.

Spinal cord ischemia: aetiology, clinical syndromes and imaging features.

Weidauer S(1), Nichtweiß M, Hattingen E, Berkefeld J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Sankt Katharinen Hospital, Teaching Hospital of the
Goethe - University, Frankfurt / Main, Seckbacher Landstraße 65, D 60389,
Frankfurt / Main, Germany, stefan.weidauer@sankt-katharinen-ffm.de.

INTRODUCTION: The purpose of this study was to analyse MR imaging features and
lesion patterns as defined by compromised vascular territories, correlating them
to different clinical syndromes and aetiological aspects.
METHODS: In a 19.8-year period, clinical records and magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) features of 55 consecutive patients suffering from spinal cord ischemia
were evaluated.
RESULTS: Aetiologies of infarcts were arteriosclerosis of the aorta and
vertebral arteries (23.6%), aortic surgery or interventional aneurysm repair
(11%) and aortic and vertebral artery dissection (11%), and in 23.6%, aetiology
remained unclear. Infarcts occurred in 38.2% at the cervical and thoracic level,
respectively, and 49% of patients suffered from centromedullar syndrome caused
by anterior spinal artery ischemia. MRI disclosed hyperintense pencil-like
lesion pattern on T2WI in 98.2%, cord swelling in 40%, enhancement on
post-contrast T1WI in 42.9% and always hyperintense signal on diffusion-weighted
imaging (DWI) when acquired.
CONCLUSION: The most common clinical feature in spinal cord ischemia is a
centromedullar syndrome, and in contrast to anterior spinal artery ischemia,
infarcts in the posterior spinal artery territory are rare. The exclusively
cervical location of the spinal sulcal artery syndrome seems to be a likely
consequence of anterior spinal artery duplication which is observed
preferentially here.

DOI: 10.1007/s00234-014-1464-6
PMID: 25398656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
