---
reference_id: "PMID:22241104"
title: Argininosuccinate lyase deficiency.
authors:
- Nagamani SC
- Erez A
- Lee B
journal: Genet Med
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1038/gim.2011.1
keywords:
- "Arginine/metabolism, therapeutic use"
- Argininosuccinate Lyase/genetics
- "Argininosuccinic Acid/blood, metabolism, urine"
- "Argininosuccinic Aciduria/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Citrulline/blood
- "Cognition Disorders/enzymology, genetics"
- "Diet, Protein-Restricted"
- Fumarates/metabolism
- Genetic Testing
- Glucose/therapeutic use
- Humans
- "Hyperammonemia/enzymology, genetics"
- "Hypertension/enzymology, genetics"
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Lipids/therapeutic use
- "Liver Diseases/enzymology, genetics"
- Liver Transplantation
- Neonatal Screening
- Phenylbutyrates/therapeutic use
- Sodium Benzoate/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Argininosuccinate lyase deficiency.
**Authors:** Nagamani SC, Erez A, Lee B
**Journal:** Genet Med (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/gim.2011.1](https://doi.org/10.1038/gim.2011.1)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2012 May;14(5):501-7. doi: 10.1038/gim.2011.1. Epub 2012 Jan 5.

Argininosuccinate lyase deficiency.

Nagamani SC(1), Erez A, Lee B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, USA. Sandesh C.S. Nagamani

The urea cycle consists of six consecutive enzymatic reactions that convert 
waste nitrogen into urea. Deficiencies of any of these enzymes of the cycle 
result in urea cycle disorders (UCDs), a group of inborn errors of hepatic 
metabolism that often result in life-threatening hyperammonemia. 
Argininosuccinate lyase (ASL) catalyzes the fourth reaction in this cycle, 
resulting in the breakdown of argininosuccinic acid to arginine and fumarate. 
ASL deficiency (ASLD) is the second most common UCD, with a prevalence of ~1 in 
70,000 live births. ASLD can manifest as either a severe neonatal-onset form 
with hyperammonemia within the first few days after birth or as a late-onset 
form with episodic hyperammonemia and/or long-term complications that include 
liver dysfunction, neurocognitive deficits, and hypertension. These long-term 
complications can occur in the absence of hyperammonemic episodes, implying that 
ASL has functions outside of its role in ureagenesis and the tissue-specific 
lack of ASL may be responsible for these manifestations. The biochemical 
diagnosis of ASLD is typically established with elevation of plasma citrulline 
together with elevated argininosuccinic acid in the plasma or urine. Molecular 
genetic testing of ASL and assay of ASL enzyme activity are helpful when the 
biochemical findings are equivocal. However, there is no correlation between the 
genotype or enzyme activity and clinical outcome. Treatment of acute metabolic 
decompensations with hyperammonemia involves discontinuing oral protein intake, 
supplementing oral intake with intravenous lipids and/or glucose, and use of 
intravenous arginine and nitrogen-scavenging therapy. Dietary restriction of 
protein and dietary supplementation with arginine are the mainstays in long-term 
management. Orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT) is best considered only in 
patients with recurrent hyperammonemia or metabolic decompensations resistant to 
conventional medical therapy.

DOI: 10.1038/gim.2011.1
PMCID: PMC3709024
PMID: 22241104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]