---
reference_id: "PMID:39762237"
title: A novel UBA1 gene mutation in a patient with infantile respiratory distress syndrome.
authors:
- Miyata M
- Kojima A
- Kawai Y
- Uchida H
- Boda H
- Ishihara N
- Inagaki H
- Yoshikawa T
- Kurahashi H
journal: Hum Genome Var
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1038/s41439-024-00307-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel UBA1 gene mutation in a patient with infantile respiratory distress syndrome.
**Authors:** Miyata M, Kojima A, Kawai Y, Uchida H, Boda H, Ishihara N, Inagaki H, Yoshikawa T, Kurahashi H
**Journal:** Hum Genome Var (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41439-024-00307-7](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41439-024-00307-7)

## Content

1. Hum Genome Var. 2025 Jan 6;12(1):2. doi: 10.1038/s41439-024-00307-7.

A novel UBA1 gene mutation in a patient with infantile respiratory distress 
syndrome.

Miyata M(1), Kojima A(1), Kawai Y(1), Uchida H(1), Boda H(1), Ishihara N(1), 
Inagaki H(2), Yoshikawa T(1), Kurahashi H(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Fujita Health University School of Medicine, 
Toyoake, Aichi, Japan.
(2)Division of Molecular Genetics, Center for Medical Science, Fujita Health 
University Hospital, Toyoake, Aichi, Japan.
(3)Division of Molecular Genetics, Center for Medical Science, Fujita Health 
University Hospital, Toyoake, Aichi, Japan. kura@fujita-hu.ac.jp.
(4)Department of Clinical Genetics, Fujita Health University Hospital, Toyoake, 
Aichi, Japan. kura@fujita-hu.ac.jp.

UBA1 is an E1 ubiquitin-activating enzyme that initiates the ubiquitylation of 
target proteins and is thus a key component of the ubiquitin signaling pathway. 
Three disorders are associated with pathogenic variants of the UBA1 gene: 
vacuoles, E1 enzyme, X-linked, autoinflammatory, somatic (VEXAS) syndrome, lung 
cancer in never smokers (LCINS), and X-linked spinal muscular atrophy (XL-SMA, 
SMAX2). We here report a case of infantile respiratory distress syndrome 
followed by continuing neuromuscular symptoms. We identified a de novo 
hemizygous mutation, c.1660 C > T (p.Pro554Ser), in exon 15 of the UBA1 gene in 
this baby. This missense mutation was located with the AAD (active adenylation 
domain) of the protein, a known hotspot of SMAX2 mutations. This case lends 
support to the genotype-phenotype correlation regarding the UBA1 mutation and 
its related diseases.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41439-024-00307-7
PMCID: PMC11704066
PMID: 39762237

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
competing interests.