---
reference_id: "PMID:37661676"
title: Pattern of hereditary renal tubular disorders in Egyptian children.
authors:
- M-Osman MA
- B-Abd-Elrehim GA
- Abdelkreem E
- Abosdera MM
- Kassem MA
journal: Turk J Pediatr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.24953/turkjped.2022.688
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- Child
- Infant
- Female
- "Acidosis, Renal Tubular/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- "Bartter Syndrome/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Egypt/epidemiology
- "Fanconi Syndrome/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics"
- Cystinosis
- Delayed Diagnosis
- Fanconi Anemia
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pattern of hereditary renal tubular disorders in Egyptian children.
**Authors:** M-Osman MA, B-Abd-Elrehim GA, Abdelkreem E, Abosdera MM, Kassem MA
**Journal:** Turk J Pediatr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.24953/turkjped.2022.688](https://doi.org/10.24953/turkjped.2022.688)

## Content

1. Turk J Pediatr. 2023;65(4):611-619. doi: 10.24953/turkjped.2022.688.

Pattern of hereditary renal tubular disorders in Egyptian children.

M-Osman MA(1), B-Abd-Elrehim GA(1), Abdelkreem E(1), Abosdera MM(1), Kassem
MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Sohag University, Sohag,
Egypt.

BACKGROUND: Hereditary renal tubular disorders (HRTD) represent a group of
genetic diseases characterized by disturbances in fluid, electrolyte, and
acid-base homeostasis. There is a paucity of studies on pediatric HRTD in Egypt.
In this study, we aimed to study the pattern, characteristics, and growth
outcome of HRTD at an Egyptian medical center.
METHODS: This study included children from one month to < 18-years of age with
HRTD who were diagnosed and followed up at the Pediatric Nephrology Unit of
Sohag University Hospital from January 2015 to December 2021. Data on patients`
demographics, clinical features, growth profiles, and laboratory characteristics
were collected.
RESULTS: Fifty-eight children (57% males; 72% parental consanguinity; 60%
positive family history) were diagnosed with seven HRTD types. The most commonly
encountered disorders were distal renal tubular acidosis (distal renal tubular
acidosis [RTA] 27 cases, 46.6%) and Bartter syndrome (16 cases 27.6%). Other
identified disorders were Fanconi syndrome (6 cases with cystinosis), isolated
proximal RTA (4 cases), nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (3 cases), and one case
for each RTA type IV and Gitelman syndrome. The median age at diagnosis was 17
months with a variable diagnostic delay. The most common presenting features
were failure to thrive (91.4%), developmental delay (79.3%), and dehydration
episodes (72.4%). Most children showed marked improvement in growth parameters
in response to appropriate management, except for cases with Fanconi syndrome.
Last, only one case (with cystinosis) developed end-stage kidney disease.
CONCLUSIONS: HRTD (most commonly distal RTA and Bartter syndrome) could be
relatively common among Egyptian children, and the diagnosis seems challenging
and often delayed.

DOI: 10.24953/turkjped.2022.688
PMID: 37661676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
