---
reference_id: "PMID:22581971"
title: Mutations in WNT10A are present in more than half of isolated hypodontia cases.
authors:
- van den Boogaard MJ
- Créton M
- Bronkhorst Y
- van der Hout A
- Hennekam E
- Lindhout D
- Cune M
- Ploos van Amstel HK
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-100750
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Anodontia/genetics
- Axin Protein/genetics
- Child
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Humans
- MSX1 Transcription Factor/genetics
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- PAX9 Transcription Factor/genetics
- Phenotype
- Wnt Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in WNT10A are present in more than half of isolated hypodontia cases.
**Authors:** van den Boogaard MJ, Créton M, Bronkhorst Y, van der Hout A, Hennekam E, Lindhout D, Cune M, Ploos van Amstel HK
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-100750](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-100750)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2012 May;49(5):327-31. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-100750.

Mutations in WNT10A are present in more than half of isolated hypodontia cases.

van den Boogaard MJ(1), Créton M, Bronkhorst Y, van der Hout A, Hennekam E, 
Lindhout D, Cune M, Ploos van Amstel HK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, 
The Netherlands. m.j.h.vandenboogaard@umcutrecht.nl

BACKGROUND: Dental agenesis is the most common, often heritable, developmental 
anomaly in humans. Mutations in MSX1, PAX9, AXIN2 and the ectodermal dysplasia 
genes EDA, EDAR and EDARADD have been detected in familial severe tooth 
agenesis. However, until recently, in the majority of cases (∼90%) the genetic 
factor could not be identified, implying that other genes must be involved. 
Recent insights into the role of Wnt10A in tooth development, and the finding of 
hypodontia in carriers of the autosomal recessive disorder, odontooncychodermal 
dysplasia, due to mutations in WNT10A (OMIM 257980; OODD), make WNT10A an 
interesting candidate gene for dental agenesis.
METHODS: In a panel of 34 patients with isolated hypodontia, the candidate gene 
WNT10A and the genes MSX1, PAX9, IRF6 and AXIN2 have been sequenced. The 
probands all had isolated agenesis of between six and 28 teeth.
RESULTS: WNT10A mutations were identified in 56% of the cases with non-syndromic 
hypodontia. MSX1, PAX9 and AXIN2 mutations were present in 3%, 9% and 3% of the 
cases, respectively.
CONCLUSION: The authors identified WNT10A as a major gene in the aetiology of 
isolated hypodontia. By including WNT10A in the DNA diagnostics of isolated 
tooth agenesis, the yield of molecular testing in this condition was 
significantly increased from 15% to 71%.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-100750
PMID: 22581971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]