---
reference_id: "PMID:39272796"
title: "Minimally Invasive Management of Inguinal Lymph Nodes in Penile Cancer: Recent Progress and Remaining Challenges."
authors:
- Aydin AM
- Biben E
- Yu A
- Chakiryan NH
- Mehrazin R
- Spiess PE
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/cancers16172935
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Minimally Invasive Management of Inguinal Lymph Nodes in Penile Cancer: Recent Progress and Remaining Challenges.
**Authors:** Aydin AM, Biben E, Yu A, Chakiryan NH, Mehrazin R, Spiess PE
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers16172935](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers16172935)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2024 Aug 23;16(17):2935. doi: 10.3390/cancers16172935.

Minimally Invasive Management of Inguinal Lymph Nodes in Penile Cancer: Recent 
Progress and Remaining Challenges.

Aydin AM(1), Biben E(1), Yu A(2), Chakiryan NH(3), Mehrazin R(4), Spiess PE(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little 
Rock, AR 72205, USA.
(2)Department of Genitourinary Oncology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL 33612, 
USA.
(3)Department of Urology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR 
97239, USA.
(4)Department of Urology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 
10029, USA.

The diagnosis of occult inguinal lymph node metastasis in clinically 
node-negative invasive penile squamous cell carcinoma (PSCC) has remained a 
challenge, with substantial perioperative complications. The recent refinements 
in the technique of dynamic sentinel lymph node biopsy (DSLNB) demonstrated high 
diagnostic accuracy with considerably lower morbidity compared to conventional 
open modified/superficial inguinal lymph node dissection (ILND). Although DSLNB, 
if available, has been endorsed as the preferred method for nodal staging in 
patients with invasive PSCC and no palpable inguinal lymphadenopathy in the 
recent penile cancer guidelines, its utilization has been quite limited so far. 
Laparoscopic and robotic-assisted ILND have emerged as alternatives for nodal 
staging in this patient population and are shown to improve the rate of wound 
infections and postoperative pain. For management of nodal metastasis in 
patients with clinically palpable inguinal lymph nodes, minimally invasive ILND 
has shown promising results as well. Nonetheless, given the rarity of PSCC and 
the absence of prospective studies and clinical trials, nodal staging and 
treatment of nodal metastasis in clinical practice will likely continue to vary 
across the medical centers in the following years. In this review, we first 
summarize the evolution of DSLNB and minimally invasive ILND and discuss the 
advantages and drawbacks of each management strategy. We further discuss the 
remaining challenges and future perspectives in the management of inguinal lymph 
nodes in patients with PSCC.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers16172935
PMCID: PMC11394048
PMID: 39272796

Conflict of interest statement: P.E.S. is the president of “Global Society of 
Rare Genitourinary Tumors”, vice-chair of NCCN bladder and penile cancer panel, 
and member of ASCO-EAU penile cancer panel. The other authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.