---
reference_id: "PMID:24748325"
title: "Viral CNS infections in children from a malaria-endemic area of Malawi: a prospective cohort study."
authors:
- Mallewa M
- Vallely P
- Faragher B
- Banda D
- Klapper P
- Mukaka M
- Khofi H
- Pensulo P
- Taylor T
- Molyneux M
- Solomon T
journal: Lancet Glob Health
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/S2214-109X(13)70060-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Viral CNS infections in children from a malaria-endemic area of Malawi: a prospective cohort study.
**Authors:** Mallewa M, Vallely P, Faragher B, Banda D, Klapper P, Mukaka M, Khofi H, Pensulo P, Taylor T, Molyneux M, Solomon T
**Journal:** Lancet Glob Health (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2214-109X(13)70060-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2214-109X(13)70060-3)

## Content

1. Lancet Glob Health. 2013 Sep;1(3):e153-60. doi: 10.1016/S2214-109X(13)70060-3.

Viral CNS infections in children from a malaria-endemic area of Malawi: a 
prospective cohort study.

Mallewa M, Vallely P, Faragher B, Banda D, Klapper P, Mukaka M, Khofi H, Pensulo 
P, Taylor T, Molyneux M, Solomon T.

Comment in
    Lancet Glob Health. 2013 Sep;1(3):e121-2. doi: 
10.1016/S2214-109X(13)70071-8.

BACKGROUND: Fever with reduced consciousness is an important cause of hospital 
admission of children in sub-Saharan Africa, with high mortality. Cerebral 
malaria, diagnosed when acute Plasmodium falciparum infection and coma are 
recorded with no other apparent reason, is one important cause. We investigated 
whether viruses could also be an important cause of CNS infection in such 
patients, and examined the relative contribution of viral pathogens and malaria 
parasitaemia.
METHODS: We did a prospective cohort study in Blantyre, Malawi. From March 1, 
2002, to Aug 31, 2004, we enrolled children aged between 2 months and 15 years 
who were admitted to hospital with suspected non-bacterial CNS infections. 
Children with a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) white cell count of less than 1000 
cells per μL and negative bacterial microscopy and culture were deemed to have 
suspected viral CNS infection. Blood was examined for asexual forms of P 
falciparum. PCR was done on CSF or on post-mortem brain biopsy specimens to 
detect 15 viruses known to cause CNS infection.
FINDINGS: Full outcome data were available for 513 children with suspected viral 
CNS infection, of whom 94 (18%) died. 163 children (32%) had P falciparum 
parasitaemia, of whom 34 (21%) died. At least one virus was detected in the CNS 
in 133 children (26%), of whom 43 (33%) died. 12 different viruses were 
detected; adenovirus was the most common, affecting 42 children; mumps, human 
herpes virus 6, rabies, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus 1, and enterovirus 
were also important. 45 (9%) of the 513 children had both parasitaemia and viral 
infection, including 27 (35%) of 78 diagnosed clinically with cerebral malaria. 
Children with dual infection were more likely to have seizures than were those 
with parasitaemia alone, viral infection only, or neither (p<0·0001). 17 (38%) 
of the 45 children with dual infection died, compared with 26 (30%) of 88 with 
viral infection only, 17 (14%) of 118 with parasitaemia only, and 34 (13%) of 
262 with neither (p<0·0001). Logistic regression showed children with a viral 
CNS infection had a significantly higher mortality than did those who did not 
have a viral CNS infection (p=0·001).
INTERPRETATION: Viral CNS infections are an important cause of hospital 
admission and death in children in Malawi, including in children whose coma 
might be attributed solely to cerebral malaria. Interaction between viral 
infection and parasitaemia could increase disease severity.
FUNDING: Wellcome Trust, US National Institutes of Health, and UK Medical 
Research Council.

DOI: 10.1016/S2214-109X(13)70060-3
PMCID: PMC3986031
PMID: 24748325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]