---
reference_id: "PMID:27048628"
title: Association of human leukocyte antigen alleles with chronic lung diseases in rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Oka S
- Furukawa H
- Shimada K
- Sugii S
- Hashimoto A
- Komiya A
- Fukui N
- Suda A
- Tsunoda S
- Ito S
- Katayama M
- Nakamura T
- Saisho K
- Sano H
- Migita K
- Nagaoka S
- Tsuchiya N
- Tohma S
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/kew025
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association of human leukocyte antigen alleles with chronic lung diseases in rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Oka S, Furukawa H, Shimada K, Sugii S, Hashimoto A, Komiya A, Fukui N, Suda A, Tsunoda S, Ito S, Katayama M, Nakamura T, Saisho K, Sano H, Migita K, Nagaoka S, Tsuchiya N, Tohma S
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/kew025](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/kew025)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2016 Jul;55(7):1301-7. doi:
10.1093/rheumatology/kew025.  Epub 2016 Apr 5.

Association of human leukocyte antigen alleles with chronic lung diseases in 
rheumatoid arthritis.

Oka S(1), Furukawa H(2), Shimada K(3), Sugii S(4), Hashimoto A(5), Komiya A(1), 
Fukui N(1), Suda A(6), Tsunoda S(7), Ito S(8), Katayama M(9), Nakamura T(10), 
Saisho K(11), Sano H(1), Migita K(12), Nagaoka S(4), Tsuchiya N(13), Tohma S(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Center for Allergy and Rheumatology, Sagamihara Hospital, 
National Hospital Organization, Sagamihara.
(2)Clinical Research Center for Allergy and Rheumatology, Sagamihara Hospital, 
National Hospital Organization, Sagamihara Molecular and Genetic Epidemiology 
Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba 
furukawa-tky@umin.org.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, Sagamihara Hospital, National Hospital 
Organization, Sagamihara Department of Rheumatic Diseases, Tokyo Metropolitan 
Tama Medical Center, Fuchu.
(4)Department of Rheumatology, Yokohama Minami Kyosai Hospital.
(5)Department of Rheumatology, Sagamihara Hospital, National Hospital 
Organization, Sagamihara.
(6)Department of Rheumatology, Yokohama Minami Kyosai Hospital Center for 
Rheumatic Diseases, Yokohama City University Medical Center, Yokohama.
(7)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Hyogo College of 
Medicine, Nishinomiya.
(8)Department of Rheumatology, Niigata Rheumatic Center, Shibata.
(9)Department of Internal Medicine, Nagoya Medical Center, National Hospital 
Organization, Nagoya.
(10)Department of Rheumatology, Kumamoto Shinto General Hospital, Kumamoto.
(11)Department of Orthopedics/Rheumatology, Miyakonojo Hospital, National 
Hospital Organization, Miyakonojo.
(12)Clinical Research Center, Nagasaki Medical Center, National Hospital 
Organization, Omura, Japan.
(13)Molecular and Genetic Epidemiology Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba.

OBJECTIVES: Chronic lung diseases including interstitial lung disease and airway 
disease (AD) occur in RA patients. Interstitial lung disease and AD in RA are 
extra-articular manifestations that influence the prognosis quoad vitam of RA. 
Studies on associations of HLA alleles with RA have been carried out, and shared 
epitopes of several alleles are reported to be associated with RA 
susceptibility. Few association studies in RA subpopulations with chronic lung 
diseases have been conducted. The aim of the study was to identify HLA alleles 
predisposing to RA phenotypes including the presence of AD.
METHODS: Associations of HLA-DRB1 and DQB1 alleles with chronic lung diseases in 
RA were analysed.
RESULTS: A positive association was found between the DR4 serological group and 
resistance to usual interstitial pneumonia [P = 0.0250, odds ratio (OR) 0.62, 
95% CI: 0.41, 0.93]. The DR2 serological group was associated with 
susceptibility to usual interstitial pneumonia (P = 0.0036, OR = 1.86, 95% CI: 
1.23, 2.81). An association was found for shared epitopes alleles with 
bronchiolitic AD (P = 0.0040, OR = 2.06, 95% CI: 1.24, 3.41). DQB1*03:01 was 
associated with bronchiectatic AD (P = 0.0021, corrected P-value (Pc) = 0.0315, 
OR = 1.99, 95% CI: 1.30, 3.06), as well as with emphysema (P = 0.0007, Pc = 
0.0104, OR = 2.43, 95% CI: 1.49, 3.95). In combined analysis, a predisposing 
association of DQB1*03:01 (P = 1.94 ×10(-5), Pc = 0.0003, OR = 2.16, 95% CI: 
1.53, 3.06) and a negative association of DQB1*03:02 (P = 0.0008, Pc = 0.0117, 
OR = 0.33, 95% CI: 0.17, 0.67) with bronchiectatic AD or emphysema were observed 
in RA.
CONCLUSION: The present study identified an association of HLA-DQB1*03:01 with 
predisposition to, and DQB1*03:02 with resistance to, bronchiectatic AD or 
emphysema in RA.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/kew025
PMID: 27048628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]