---
reference_id: "PMID:40268755"
title: "Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease: an overview of recent genetic and clinical advances."
authors:
- Borghol AH
- Bou Antoun MT
- Hanna C
- Salih M
- Rahbari-Oskoui FF
- Chebib FT
journal: Ren Fail
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1080/0886022X.2025.2492374
keywords:
- Humans
- "Polycystic Kidney, Autosomal Dominant/genetics, diagnosis, complications, therapy, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Tolvaptan/therapeutic use
- Antidiuretic Hormone Receptor Antagonists/therapeutic use
- Prognosis
- Disease Progression
- Genetic Testing
- Pregnancy
- Quality of Life
- Female
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease: an overview of recent genetic and clinical advances.
**Authors:** Borghol AH, Bou Antoun MT, Hanna C, Salih M, Rahbari-Oskoui FF, Chebib FT
**Journal:** Ren Fail (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1080/0886022X.2025.2492374](https://doi.org/10.1080/0886022X.2025.2492374)

## Content

1. Ren Fail. 2025 Dec;47(1):2492374. doi: 10.1080/0886022X.2025.2492374. Epub
2025  Apr 23.

Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease: an overview of recent genetic and 
clinical advances.

Borghol AH(1)(2), Bou Antoun MT(1)(2), Hanna C(3)(4), Salih M(5), Rahbari-Oskoui 
FF(6), Chebib FT(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 
Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(2)Mayo Clinic Florida PKD Center of Excellence, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(3)Division of Pediatric Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Pediatric 
and Adolescent Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(4)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN, USA.
(5)Division of Nephrology and Transplantation, Department of Internal Medicine, 
Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(6)Renal Division, Department of Medicine, Emory University School of Medicine, 
Atlanta, GA, USA.

Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease (ADPKD) is the most common 
inherited kidney disease, characterized by the progressive development of 
multiple kidney cysts, leading to a gradual decline in kidney function. ADPKD is 
also the fourth leading cause of kidney failure (KF) in adults. In addition to 
kidney manifestations, ADPKD is associated with various extrarenal features, 
including liver cysts, cardiovascular abnormalities, intracranial aneurysms, and 
chronic pain with significant impact on patients' quality of life. While several 
disease-modifying agents have been tested in ADPKD, tolvaptan remains the only 
approved drug by the US Food and Drug Administration. The Mayo Imaging 
Classification is currently the most practical tool for predicting rate of 
kidney disease progression in ADPKD. This review provides a comprehensive 
overview of ADPKD, focusing on its genetics, pathophysiology, clinical 
presentation, management, and prognostic tools. Advances in diagnostic imaging 
and genetic testing have improved the early detection of ADPKD, allowing better 
classification of patients and prediction of KF. The review also discusses 
current therapeutic approaches to ADPKD, including tolvaptan, a vasopressin 
V2-receptor antagonist. Additionally, we address specific issues in children and 
pregnant individuals with ADPKD. Despite substantial progress in understanding 
ADPKD, there is a large need for additional effective treatments and prognostic 
markers to provide a more personalized care for these patients.

DOI: 10.1080/0886022X.2025.2492374
PMCID: PMC12020221
PMID: 40268755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: FTC received research funding from Otsuka 
pharmaceuticals, Regulus, and Natera Inc, has a patent on ‘Probenecid as a 
treatment in ADPKD’ and he is a member of Board of directors in the PKD 
foundation. All the other authors declared no competing interests. FRO received 
research funding from NIH, Otsuka, Kadmon, Sanofi, Alnylam, Oxford, and Duke 
University. He serves as an Unbranded Speaker bureau for Otsuka. He receives 
authorship royalties from UpTODate and has served as an advisory board member to 
Kadmon, Sanofi and Regulus. MS received research unrestricted funding from 
Otsuka pharmaceuticals.