---
reference_id: "PMID:40860794"
title: "Congenital granular cell epulis in a neonate: a case report and review of diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis."
authors:
- Guidone PC
- Seccia R
- Fabrocini LA
- Troiano G
- Maffei G
- Pedicillo MC
- Pannone G
- Lo Muzio L
- Zamparese R
- Mori G
- De Stefano IS
journal: Front Oral Health
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3389/froh.2025.1548291
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital granular cell epulis in a neonate: a case report and review of diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis.
**Authors:** Guidone PC, Seccia R, Fabrocini LA, Troiano G, Maffei G, Pedicillo MC, Pannone G, Lo Muzio L, Zamparese R, Mori G, De Stefano IS
**Journal:** Front Oral Health (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3389/froh.2025.1548291](https://doi.org/10.3389/froh.2025.1548291)

## Content

1. Front Oral Health. 2025 Aug 11;6:1548291. doi: 10.3389/froh.2025.1548291. 
eCollection 2025.

Congenital granular cell epulis in a neonate: a case report and review of 
diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis.

Guidone PC(1), Seccia R(2), Fabrocini LA(1), Troiano G(3)(4), Maffei G(5), 
Pedicillo MC(2), Pannone G(2), Lo Muzio L(3), Zamparese R(6), Mori G(7), De 
Stefano IS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Surgery, Policlinico Riuniti Foggia, Foggia, Italy.
(2)Pathological Anatomy Unit, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, 
University of Foggia, Foggia, Italy.
(3)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Foggia, 
Foggia, Italy.
(4)Department of Medicine and Surgery, LUM University, Casamassima, Italy.
(5)Neonatology end Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Policlinico Riuniti Foggia, 
Foggia, Italy.
(6)Legal Medicine Unit, Ascoli Piceno Hospital C-G. Mazzoni, Ascoli Piceno, 
Italy.
(7)Pathology Unit, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University 
of Foggia, Foggia, Italy.

Congenital granular cell epulis (CGCE) is a rare benign tumor typically 
presenting at birth and most commonly located on the maxillary alveolar ridge.
CASE PRESENTATION: We report the case of a five-day-old female with a smooth, 
multilobulated mass on the right maxillary alveolar ridge causing feeding 
difficulties. Surgical excision was performed under sedation. Histological and 
immunohistochemical analysis confirmed the diagnosis of CGCE. No recurrence was 
observed at one-month follow-up.
CONCLUSION: Early diagnosis and surgical treatment of CGCE are essential to 
avoid functional impairment. The prognosis is excellent following complete 
excision.

© 2025 Guidone, Seccia, Fabrocini, Troiano, Maffei, Pedicillo, Pannone, Lo 
Muzio, Zamparese, Mori and De Stefano.

DOI: 10.3389/froh.2025.1548291
PMCID: PMC12375573
PMID: 40860794

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.