---
reference_id: PMID:8934530
title: Upregulation of fibroblast growth factors and their receptors during multi-stage epidermal carcinogenesis in K14-HPV16 transgenic mice.
authors:
- Arbeit JM
- Olson DC
- Hanahan D
journal: Oncogene
year: '1996'
keywords:
- Animals
- Fibroblast Growth Factor 10
- "Fibroblast Growth Factor 2/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Fibroblast Growth Factor 7
- "Fibroblast Growth Factors/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Growth Substances/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Keratinocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Neoplasm Metastasis
- "Neoplasms, Squamous Cell/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Papillomaviridae/genetics
- "RNA, Messenger/biosynthesis"
- "Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 1"
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 2"
- "Receptors, Fibroblast Growth Factor/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Skin/metabolism, pathology"
- "Skin Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured"
- Up-Regulation/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Upregulation of fibroblast growth factors and their receptors during multi-stage epidermal carcinogenesis in K14-HPV16 transgenic mice.
**Authors:** Arbeit JM, Olson DC, Hanahan D
**Journal:** Oncogene (1996)

## Content

1. Oncogene. 1996 Nov 7;13(9):1847-57.

Upregulation of fibroblast growth factors and their receptors during multi-stage 
epidermal carcinogenesis in K14-HPV16 transgenic mice.

Arbeit JM(1), Olson DC, Hanahan D.

Author information:
(1)Hormone Research Institute, Department of Surgery, University of California, 
San Francisco, 94143-0534, USA.

Upregulation of acidic and basic fibroblast growth factors (FGF-1 and -2), and 
their cognate receptors FGFR-1 and -2, has been demonstrated in a variety of 
epithelial malignancies. However, the patterns of FGF/FGFR expression at 
specific stages of epithelial carcinogenesis have not been extensively 
characterized. In this report, the levels of FGF-1, FGF-2, FGF-7 mRNA and their 
receptors FGFR-1 and FGFR-2, were investigated during epidermal carcinogenesis 
in transgenic mice expressing the early region of the 'high risk' papillomavirus 
type 16 (HPV16) under control of the human keratin-14 enhancer/promoter 
(K14-HPV16 transgenic mice). FGF-1 was first upregulated in dysplasias, while 
FGF-2 was constitutively expressed in non-transgenic, neoplastic, and malignant 
keratinocytes throughout carcinogenesis. Expression of FGF-7 was undetectable in 
non-transgenic epidermis, and remained at threshold levels at all stages of 
progression. In well differentiated squamous cancers, FGFR-1 was upregulated and 
co-localized with angiogenic capillaries in the dermis underlying dysplastic 
lesions and within papillary fronds of invasive cancers. In contrast, FGFR-1 was 
upregulated specifically within the malignant squamous cells of moderate-poorly 
differentiated squamous cancers. The expression of FGFR-2 was essentially 
constitutive in both non-transgenic and neoplastic epidermis. Collectively the 
data suggest that the FGF/FGFR signaling pathways may potentially contribute to 
several facets of multi-stage epithelial carcinogenesis, including auto- or 
paracrine growth stimulation, upregulation of angiogenesis, and stromal 
remodeling.

PMID: 8934530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]