---
reference_id: "PMID:35672058"
title: "Diagnosis and management of primary vulvar adenocarcinoma of mammary gland type: report of two distinct cases."
authors:
- Morais M
- Vaz Silva J
- Tavares MV
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2021-245580
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma/diagnosis, surgery"
- Female
- Humans
- Lymph Node Excision
- "Mammary Glands, Human/pathology"
- Neoplasm Staging
- Sentinel Lymph Node Biopsy
- "Vulvar Neoplasms/diagnosis, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and management of primary vulvar adenocarcinoma of mammary gland type: report of two distinct cases.
**Authors:** Morais M, Vaz Silva J, Tavares MV
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2021-245580](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2021-245580)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2022 Jun 7;15(6):e245580. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2021-245580.

Diagnosis and management of primary vulvar adenocarcinoma of mammary gland type: 
report of two distinct cases.

Morais M(1), Vaz Silva J(2)(3), Tavares MV(4).

Author information:
(1)Obstetrics and Gynecology, Centro Hospitalar de Trás-os-montes e Alto Douro 
EPE, Vila Real, Portugal mariana.lira.morais@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pathology, Portuguese Oncology Institute of Porto (IPO-Porto), 
Cancer Biology and Epigenetics Group, Research Center of IPO Porto (CI-IPOP), 
RISE@CI-IPOP (Health Research Network), Porto Comprehensive Cancer Center 
(Porto.CCC), Porto, Portugal.
(3)Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Medicine, 
University of Minho, Braga, Portugal.
(4)Gynecology, Instituto Portugues de Oncologia do Porto Francisco Gentil EPE, 
Porto, Portugal.

Adenocarcinoma of mammary gland type (AMGT) of the vulva is extremely rare and 
its aetiopathogenesis is not fully understood. Low incidence is partly 
responsible for the lack of guidelines for patient management. Here, two cases 
of postmenopausal patients diagnosed with AMGT with different therapeutical 
approaches are reported. Histopathological patterns are considered essential for 
diagnosis. The triple-negative immunohistochemical (IHC) profile of one of the 
cases represented a diagnostic challenge. Interestingly, it presented an 
immunophenotypical profile similar to triple-negative breast cancers, supporting 
the molecular similarities between vulvar AMGT and breast carcinomas. Surgical 
procedures include radical vulvectomy or radical local excision. Lymphatic 
involvement may be assessed by sentinel lymph node biopsy or lymphadenectomy. 
Adjuvant treatment was dependent on the IHC profile and disease staging. 
Although both cases had similar features on clinical examination, pathological 
and molecular characteristics and treatment approach were distinct. That 
illustrates the diagnostic and therapeutical challenge of this rare entity.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2022. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No 
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2021-245580
PMCID: PMC9174835
PMID: 35672058 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.