---
reference_id: "PMID:39383459"
title: Lentiviral Gene Therapy for Cerebral Adrenoleukodystrophy.
authors:
- Eichler F
- Duncan CN
- Musolino PL
- Lund TC
- Gupta AO
- De Oliveira S
- Thrasher AJ
- Aubourg P
- Kühl JS
- Loes DJ
- Amartino H
- Smith N
- Folloni Fernandes J
- Sevin C
- Sankar R
- Hussain SA
- Gissen P
- Dalle JH
- Platzbecker U
- Downey GF
- McNeil E
- Demopoulos L
- Dietz AC
- Thakar HL
- Orchard PJ
- Williams DA
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2400442
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Humans
- Male
- "Adrenoleukodystrophy/diagnosis, genetics, mortality, therapy"
- "ATP Binding Cassette Transporter, Subfamily D, Member 1/genetics"
- "Brain/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Genetic Therapy/adverse effects, methods"
- "Genetic Vectors/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
- Lentivirus/genetics
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Follow-Up Studies
- Treatment Outcome
- "Myelodysplastic Syndromes/epidemiology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lentiviral Gene Therapy for Cerebral Adrenoleukodystrophy.
**Authors:** Eichler F, Duncan CN, Musolino PL, Lund TC, Gupta AO, De Oliveira S, Thrasher AJ, Aubourg P, Kühl JS, Loes DJ, Amartino H, Smith N, Folloni Fernandes J, Sevin C, Sankar R, Hussain SA, Gissen P, Dalle JH, Platzbecker U, Downey GF, McNeil E, Demopoulos L, Dietz AC, Thakar HL, Orchard PJ, Williams DA
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2400442](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2400442)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2024 Oct 10;391(14):1302-1312. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2400442.

Lentiviral Gene Therapy for Cerebral Adrenoleukodystrophy.

Eichler F(1), Duncan CN(1), Musolino PL(1), Lund TC(1), Gupta AO(1), De Oliveira
S(1), Thrasher AJ(1), Aubourg P(1), Kühl JS(1), Loes DJ(1), Amartino H(1), Smith
N(1), Folloni Fernandes J(1), Sevin C(1), Sankar R(1), Hussain SA(1), Gissen
P(1), Dalle JH(1), Platzbecker U(1), Downey GF(1), McNeil E(1), Demopoulos L(1),
Dietz AC(1), Thakar HL(1), Orchard PJ(1), Williams DA(1).

Author information:
(1)From Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School (F.E., P.L.M.)
and Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Harvard
Medical School (C.N.D., D.A.W.), Boston, Bluebird Bio, Somerville (G.F.D., L.D.,
A.C.D., H.L.T.), and McNeil Pediatrics Consultancy, Sudbury (E.M.) - all in
Massachusetts; the Division of Blood and Marrow Transplantation, Department of
Pediatrics, University of Minnesota (T.C.L., A.O.G., P.J.O.), and Midwest
Radiology (D.J.L.) - both in Minneapolis; David Geffen School of Medicine,
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles (S.D.O., R.S., S.A.H.);
University College London Great Ormond Street Hospital Institute of Child Health
and Great Ormond Street Hospital NHS Trust, London (A.J.T., P.G.); INSERM,
Université Paris-Saclay, Hôpital Kremlin-Bicêtre (P.A.), the Reference Center
for Leukodystrophies, Hôpital Kremlin-Bicêtre, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de
Paris, Université Paris-Saclay (C.S.), and Robert-Debre Hospital, GHU
Nord-Université de Paris (J.-H.D.) - all in Paris; the Departments of Pediatric
Oncology/Hematology/Hemostaseology (J.-S.K.) and Hematology, Cellular Therapy,
Hemostaseology and Infectious Diseases (U.P.), University Hospital Leipzig,
Leipzig, Germany; Instituto Neurogenia and Hospital Universitario Austral - both
in Buenos Aires (H.A.); Women's and Children's Health Network and the University
of Adelaide - both in Adelaide, SA, Australia (N.S.); ITACI/Instituto da
Criança-Hospital das Clínicas da Universidade de São Paulo, Sao Paulo (J.F.F.);
and Shape Therapeutics, Seattle (A.C.D.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2024 Dec 19;391(24):2382. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2414069.
    N Engl J Med. 2024 Dec 19;391(24):2382-2383. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2414069.
    N Engl J Med. 2024 Dec 19;391(24):2383-2384. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2414069.
    N Engl J Med. 2024 Dec 19;391(24):2384. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2414069.

BACKGROUND: Cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy is a severe form of X-linked
adrenoleukodystrophy characterized by white-matter disease, loss of neurologic
function, and early death. Elivaldogene autotemcel (eli-cel) gene therapy, which
consists of autologous CD34+ cells transduced with Lenti-D lentiviral vector
containing ABCD1 complementary DNA, is being tested in persons with cerebral
adrenoleukodystrophy.
METHODS: In a phase 2-3 study, we evaluated the efficacy and safety of eli-cel
therapy in boys with early-stage cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy and evidence of
active inflammation on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The primary efficacy
end point was survival without any of six major functional disabilities at month
24. The secondary end points included overall survival at month 24 and the
change from baseline to month 24 in the total neurologic function score.
RESULTS: A total of 32 patients received eli-cel; 29 patients (91%) completed
the 24-month study and are being monitored in the long-term follow-up study. At
month 24, none of these 29 patients had major functional disabilities; overall
survival was 94%. At the most recent assessment (median follow-up, 6 years), the
neurologic function score was stable as compared with the baseline score in 30
of 32 patients (94%); 26 patients (81%) had no major functional disabilities.
Four patients had adverse events that were directly related to eli-cel.
Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) with excess blasts developed in 1 patient at
month 92; the patient underwent allogeneic hematopoietic stem-cell
transplantation and did not have MDS at the most recent follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: At a median follow-up of 6 years after lentiviral gene therapy,
most patients with early cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy and MRI abnormalities had
no major functional disabilities. However, insertional oncogenesis is an ongoing
risk associated with the integration of viral vectors. (Funded by Bluebird Bio;
ALD-102 and LTF-304 ClinicalTrials.gov numbers NCT01896102 and NCT02698579,
respectively.).

Copyright © 2024 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2400442
PMCID: PMC12465018
PMID: 39383459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
