---
reference_id: "PMID:22982295"
title: "Hepatic veno-occlusive disease with immunodeficiency (VODI): first reported case in the U.S. and identification of a unique mutation in Sp110."
authors:
- Wang T
- Ong P
- Roscioli T
- Cliffe ST
- Church JA
journal: Clin Immunol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2012.07.016
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Bacterial/blood, immunology"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Hepatic Veno-Occlusive Disease/complications, drug therapy, genetics, immunology"
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulin G/blood, immunology"
- "Immunoglobulin M/blood, immunology"
- "Immunoglobulins, Intravenous/administration & dosage"
- Infant
- "Liver/immunology, pathology"
- "Lung/immunology, microbiology"
- Male
- Minor Histocompatibility Antigens
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, immunology"
- Pedigree
- Pneumocystis carinii/immunology
- "Pneumonia, Pneumocystis/complications, drug therapy, genetics, immunology"
- "Severe Combined Immunodeficiency/complications, drug therapy, genetics, immunology"
- "Trimethoprim, Sulfamethoxazole Drug Combination/administration & dosage"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatic veno-occlusive disease with immunodeficiency (VODI): first reported case in the U.S. and identification of a unique mutation in Sp110.
**Authors:** Wang T, Ong P, Roscioli T, Cliffe ST, Church JA
**Journal:** Clin Immunol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clim.2012.07.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clim.2012.07.016)

## Content

1. Clin Immunol. 2012 Nov;145(2):102-7. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2012.07.016. Epub
2012  Aug 7.

Hepatic veno-occlusive disease with immunodeficiency (VODI): first reported case 
in the U.S. and identification of a unique mutation in Sp110.

Wang T(1), Ong P, Roscioli T, Cliffe ST, Church JA.

Author information:
(1)Division of General Pediatrics, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Keck School 
of Medicine, University Southern California, 4650 West Sunset Boulevard, Los 
Angeles, CA 90027, USA.

Familial hepatic veno-occlusive disease with immunodeficiency (VODI, OMIM: 
235550), a rare form of severe combined immune deficiency, was first described 
in Australian Lebanese patients as being associated with homozygous mutations in 
SP110, a gene encoding a PML nuclear body-associated protein. We present the 
first case of confirmed VODI in the United States, and identify the first novel 
missense mutation in SP110. The 3-year-old daughter of Hispanic parents without 
known consanguinity presented at age 5 months with fever, hepatomegaly, and 
pancytopenia. Her brother died at age 3 months from hepatic failure of 
undetermined etiology. Initial T- and B-cell counts were low, but eventually 
normalized. Serum IgG and IgM levels were low for age. Lymphoproliferation to 
mitogens and allogenic B-cells was normal, but absent to tetanus and candida 
antigens. Serum antibody levels against pneumococcal, Hib and tetanus antigens 
were low. Liver biopsies at ages 5 and 9 months were consistent with hepatic 
veno-occlusive disease or hVOD (also known as sinusoidal obstruction syndrome or 
SOS) and broncho-alveolar lavage detected Pneumocystis jiroveci. The patient 
recovered from her acute disease and has been clinically stable on 
immunoglobulin replacement therapy and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 
prophylaxis. T-Cell receptor excision circle (TREC) analysis suggests that VODI 
will not be detected by newborn screening for severe combined immunodeficiency 
that relies on this assay. DNA was obtained from the patient, 4 siblings, and 
both parents, and SP110 was sequenced. The first missense mutation, a homozygous 
deletion/insertion variation in exon 2 (NM_080424.2 (SP110):c.78_79delinsAT) was 
detected in the patient. This novel mutation segregated in the heterozygous 
state in other living unaffected family members. The mechanism by which this 
SP110 mutation associates with VODI is consistent with the normal length mutated 
SP110 protein being subject to enhanced proteosome degradation resulting in 
marked reductions in SP110 protein.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clim.2012.07.016
PMID: 22982295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]