---
reference_id: "PMID:23626591"
title: Modeling the Mycobacterium tuberculosis Granuloma - the Critical Battlefield in Host Immunity and Disease.
authors:
- Guirado E
- Schlesinger LS
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2013.00098
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modeling the Mycobacterium tuberculosis Granuloma - the Critical Battlefield in Host Immunity and Disease.
**Authors:** Guirado E, Schlesinger LS
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2013.00098](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2013.00098)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2013 Apr 22;4:98. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2013.00098. eCollection 
2013.

Modeling the Mycobacterium tuberculosis Granuloma - the Critical Battlefield in 
Host Immunity and Disease.

Guirado E(1), Schlesinger LS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbial Infection and Immunity, Center for Microbial 
Interface Biology, The Ohio State University Columbus, OH, USA.

Granulomas are the hallmark of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (M.tb) infection and 
thus sit at the center of tuberculosis (TB) immunopathogenesis. TB can result 
from either early progression of a primary granuloma during the infection 
process or reactivation of an established granuloma in a latently infected 
person. Granulomas are compact, organized aggregates of immune cells consisting 
of blood-derived infected and uninfected macrophages, foamy macrophages, 
epithelioid cells (uniquely differentiated macrophages), and multinucleated 
giant cells (Langerhans cells) surrounded by a ring of lymphocytes. The 
granuloma's main function is to localize and contain M.tb while concentrating 
the immune response to a limited area. However, complete eradication does not 
occur since M.tb has its own strategies to persist within the granuloma and to 
reactivate and escape under certain conditions. Thus M.tb-containing granulomas 
represent a unique battlefield for dictating both the host immune and bacterial 
response. The architecture, composition, function, and maintenance of granulomas 
are key aspects to study since they are expected to have a profound influence on 
M.tb physiology in this niche. Granulomas are not only present in mycobacterial 
infections; they can be found in many other infectious and non-infectious 
diseases and play a crucial role in immunity and disease. Here we review the 
models currently available to study the granulomatous response to M.tb.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2013.00098
PMCID: PMC3631743
PMID: 23626591