---
reference_id: "PMID:38740568"
title: "Use of pure recombinant human enzymes to assess the disease-causing potential of missense mutations in urea cycle disorders, applied to N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency."
authors:
- Gougeard N
- Sancho-Vaello E
- Fernández-Murga ML
- Martínez-Sinisterra B
- Loukili-Hassani B
- Häberle J
- Marco-Marín C
- Rubio V
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12747
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Use of pure recombinant human enzymes to assess the disease-causing potential of missense mutations in urea cycle disorders, applied to N-acetylglutamate synthase deficiency.
**Authors:** Gougeard N, Sancho-Vaello E, Fernández-Murga ML, Martínez-Sinisterra B, Loukili-Hassani B, Häberle J, Marco-Marín C, Rubio V
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12747](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12747)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2024 Nov;47(6):1194-1212. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12747. Epub 
2024 May 13.

Use of pure recombinant human enzymes to assess the disease-causing potential of 
missense mutations in urea cycle disorders, applied to N-acetylglutamate 
synthase deficiency.

Gougeard N(1)(2), Sancho-Vaello E(1), Fernández-Murga ML(1), Martínez-Sinisterra 
B(1), Loukili-Hassani B(1), Häberle J(3), Marco-Marín C(1)(2), Rubio V(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia, IBV-CSIC, Valencia, Spain.
(2)Group 739, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras, 
(CIBERER-ISCIII) at the IBV-CSIC, Valencia, Spain.
(3)University Children's Hospital Zurich and Children's Research Centre, Zurich, 
Switzerland.

N-acetylglutamate synthase (NAGS) makes acetylglutamate, the essential activator 
of the first, regulatory enzyme of the urea cycle, carbamoyl phosphate 
synthetase 1 (CPS1). NAGS deficiency (NAGSD) and CPS1 deficiency (CPS1D) present 
identical phenotypes. However, they must be distinguished, because NAGSD is 
cured by substitutive therapy with the N-acetyl-L-glutamate analogue 
N-carbamyl-L-glutamate, while curative therapy of CPS1D requires liver 
transplantation. Since their differentiation is done genetically, it is 
important to ascertain the disease-causing potential of CPS1 and NAGS genetic 
variants. With this goal, we previously carried out site-directed mutagenesis 
studies with pure recombinant human CPS1. We could not do the same with human 
NAGS (HuNAGS) because of enzyme instability, leading to our prior utilization of 
a bacterial NAGS as an imperfect surrogate of HuNAGS. We now use genuine HuNAGS, 
stabilized as a chimera of its conserved domain (cHuNAGS) with the maltose 
binding protein (MBP), and produced in Escherichia coli. MBP-cHuNAGS linker 
cleavage allowed assessment of the enzymatic properties and thermal stability of 
cHuNAGS, either wild-type or hosting each one of 23 nonsynonymous single-base 
changes found in NAGSD patients. For all but one change, disease causation was 
accounted by the enzymatic alterations identified, including, depending on the 
variant, loss of arginine activation, increased Km Glutamate, active site 
inactivation, decreased thermal stability, and protein misfolding. Our present 
approach outperforms experimental in vitro use of bacterial NAGS or in silico 
utilization of prediction servers (including AlphaMissense), illustrating with 
HuNAGS the value for UCDs of using recombinant enzymes for assessing 
disease-causation and molecular pathogenesis, and for therapeutic guidance.

© 2024 The Authors. Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12747
PMCID: PMC11586601
PMID: 38740568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Nadine Gougeard, Enea Sancho‐Vaello, María 
Leonor Fernández‐Murga, Borja Martínez‐Sinisterra, Badr Loukili‐Hassani, 
Johannes Häberle, Clara Marco‐Marín, and Vicente Rubio declare that they have no 
conflict of interest relative to this work.