---
reference_id: "PMID:11980459"
title: Skin and soft tissue infection.
authors:
- Sharma S
- Verma KK
journal: Indian J Pediatr
year: '2001'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Skin and soft tissue infection.
**Authors:** Sharma S, Verma KK
**Journal:** Indian J Pediatr (2001)

## Content

1. Indian J Pediatr. 2001 Jul;68 Suppl 3:S46-50.

Skin and soft tissue infection.

Sharma S(1), Verma KK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology and Venereology, All India Institute ofMedical 
Sciences, New Delhi.

Abstract. Normal skin is heavily colonized by bacterial flora. The most common 
are the various nonpathogenic gram-positive bacteria such as Staphylococcus 
epidermidis (coagulase-negative). Skin and soft tissue infections are usually 
caused by Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) and Streptococcus pyogenes. This 
article discusses common and some not so common bacterial skin infections, 
including impetigo, folliculitis, furncles and carbuncles, cellulitis and 
erysipelas, gangrenous cellulitis, staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome and 
scarlet fever. Impetigo and ecthyma are common bacterial infections of the skin 
commonly caused by S. aureus and / or Group A streptoccus. In mild and localized 
impetigo topical antibiotics whereas in widespread or severe one and in ecthyma 
systemic antibiotics like, cloxacillin, erythromycin, azithromycin or cephalexin 
should be used. Folliculitis, furunculosis and carbuncle are folliculocentric 
infections caused by S. aureus involving the variable depth and extent of the 
follicle(s) and surrounding tissue. These conditions can be treated with topical 
or systemic antibiotics like cloxacillin, cephalexin, erythromycin, 
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid or vancomycin. Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome 
is a toxin mediated exfoliative dermatosis caused by S. aureus of phase group 
II. Intravenous penicillinase-resistant anti-staphylococcal antibiotics like 
methicillin, cloxacillin, cephalosporin or erythromycin are required. Erysipelas 
and cellulitis are acute infections of dermal and subcutaneous tissues caused 
most frequently by Group A beta-hemolytic streptococci (erysipelas) or S. aureus 
requiring systemic antibiotics like oral or intravenous penicillin, 
erythromycin, cephalexin, cloxacillin, vacomycin, minocycline or ciprofloxacin 
depending upon the severity, suspected causative organism and 
culture/sensitivity results. Gangrenous cellulitis is characterized by infection 
with necrosis of skin and underlying subcutaneous tissue due to various 
pathogens occurring at different site. Ampicillin, gentamicin, and either 
metronidazole or clindamycin intravenously in standard doses are recommended for 
the treatment.

PMID: 11980459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]