---
reference_id: "PMID:37895150"
title: Neurohumoral Activation in Heart Failure.
authors:
- Manolis AA
- Manolis TA
- Manolis AS
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms242015472
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurohumoral Activation in Heart Failure.
**Authors:** Manolis AA, Manolis TA, Manolis AS
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms242015472](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms242015472)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Oct 23;24(20):15472. doi: 10.3390/ijms242015472.

Neurohumoral Activation in Heart Failure.

Manolis AA(1), Manolis TA(2), Manolis AS(3).

Author information:
(1)First Department of Cardiology, Evagelismos Hospital, 106 76 Athens, Greece.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Aiginiteio University Hospital, 115 28 Athens, 
Greece.
(3)First Department of Cardiology, Ippokrateio University Hospital, 115 27 
Athens, Greece.

In patients with heart failure (HF), the neuroendocrine systems of the 
sympathetic nervous system (SNS), the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system 
(RAAS) and the arginine vasopressin (AVP) system, are activated to various 
degrees producing often-observed tachycardia and concomitant increased systemic 
vascular resistance. Furthermore, sustained neurohormonal activation plays a key 
role in the progression of HF and may be responsible for the pathogenetic 
mechanisms leading to the perpetuation of the pathophysiology and worsening of 
the HF signs and symptoms. There are biomarkers of activation of these 
neurohormonal pathways, such as the natriuretic peptides, catecholamine levels 
and neprilysin and various newer ones, which may be employed to better 
understand the mechanisms of HF drugs and also aid in defining the subgroups of 
patients who might benefit from specific therapies, irrespective of the degree 
of left ventricular dysfunction. These therapies are directed against these 
neurohumoral systems (neurohumoral antagonists) and classically comprise beta 
blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors/angiotensin receptor 
blockers and vaptans. Recently, the RAAS blockade has been refined by the 
introduction of the angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitor (ARNI) 
sacubitril/valsartan, which combines the RAAS inhibition and neprilysin 
blocking, enhancing the actions of natriuretic peptides. All these issues 
relating to the neurohumoral activation in HF are herein reviewed, and the 
underlying mechanisms are pictorially illustrated.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms242015472
PMCID: PMC10607846
PMID: 37895150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.