---
reference_id: "PMID:2816972"
title: "Graves' disease: an analysis of thyroid hormone levels and hyperthyroid signs and symptoms."
authors:
- Trzepacz PT
- Klein I
- Roberts M
- Greenhouse J
- Levey GS
journal: Am J Med
year: '1989'
doi: 10.1016/s0002-9343(89)80614-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Graves' disease: an analysis of thyroid hormone levels and hyperthyroid signs and symptoms.
**Authors:** Trzepacz PT, Klein I, Roberts M, Greenhouse J, Levey GS
**Journal:** Am J Med (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0002-9343(89)80614-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0002-9343(89)80614-x)

## Content

1. Am J Med. 1989 Nov;87(5):558-61. doi: 10.1016/s0002-9343(89)80614-x.

Graves' disease: an analysis of thyroid hormone levels and hyperthyroid signs 
and symptoms.

Trzepacz PT(1), Klein I, Roberts M, Greenhouse J, Levey GS.

Author information:
(1)Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, University of Pittsburgh School of 
Medicine, Pennsylvania 15213.

PURPOSE: Assessment of disease severity for patients with hyperthyroidism 
involves clinical evaluation and laboratory testing. To determine if there is a 
correlation between symptoms and thyroid function test results, we prospectively 
studied hyperthyroid patients using a standardized symptom rating scale and 
serum thyroid function parameters.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We examined 25 patients with untreated, newly diagnosed 
Graves' disease using the Hyperthyroid Symptom Scale (HSS) and serum levels of 
thyroxine (T4), triiodothyronine (T3) relative insulin area (RIA), and estimates 
of free thyroxine index (FTI). In addition, we compared thyroid hormone levels 
with standard measures of depression and anxiety in these patients.
RESULTS: When regression analyses controlling for age were performed, none of 
these symptom ratings were associated with FTI or T3 RIA. The HSS was correlated 
with goiter size and anxiety ratings and was inversely correlated with age.
CONCLUSION: The present study suggests that there is no relationship between the 
clinical assessment of disease severity and serum levels of thyroid hormone in 
untreated Graves' disease.

DOI: 10.1016/s0002-9343(89)80614-x
PMID: 2816972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]