---
reference_id: "PMID:26060116"
title: "Ectopic clustering of Cajal-Retzius and subplate cells is an initial pathological feature in Pomgnt2-knockout mice, a model of dystroglycanopathy."
authors:
- Nakagawa N
- Yagi H
- Kato K
- Takematsu H
- Oka S
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/srep11163
keywords:
- Animals
- Basement Membrane/metabolism
- Brain/metabolism
- "Dystroglycans/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Muscular Dystrophies/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ectopic clustering of Cajal-Retzius and subplate cells is an initial pathological feature in Pomgnt2-knockout mice, a model of dystroglycanopathy.
**Authors:** Nakagawa N, Yagi H, Kato K, Takematsu H, Oka S
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/srep11163](https://doi.org/10.1038/srep11163)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2015 Jun 10;5:11163. doi: 10.1038/srep11163.

Ectopic clustering of Cajal-Retzius and subplate cells is an initial
pathological feature in Pomgnt2-knockout mice, a model of dystroglycanopathy.

Nakagawa N(1), Yagi H(2), Kato K(3), Takematsu H(1), Oka S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Human Health Sciences, Graduate School of
Medicine, Kyoto University, 53 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507,
Japan.
(2)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nagoya City University, 3-1
Tanabe-dori, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya 467-8603, Japan.
(3)1] Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nagoya City University, 3-1
Tanabe-dori, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya 467-8603, Japan [2] Okazaki Institute for
Integrative Bioscience and Institute for Molecular Science, National Institutes
of Natural Sciences, 5-1 Higashiyama Myodaiji, Okazaki 444-8787, Japan.

Aberrant glycosylation of dystroglycan causes congenital muscular dystrophies
associated with cobblestone lissencephaly, classified as dystroglycanopathy.
However, pathological features in the onset of brain malformations, including
the precise timing and primary cause of the pial basement membrane disruption
and abnormalities in the migration of pyramidal neurons, remain unexplored.
Using the Pomgnt2-knockout (KO) mouse as a dystroglycanopathy model, we show
that breaches of the pial basement membrane appeared at embryonic day 11.5,
coinciding with the ectopic clustering of Cajal-Retzius cells and subplate
neurons and prior to the migration onset of pyramidal neurons. Furthermore, in
the Pomgnt2-KO cerebral cortex, preplate splitting failure likely occurred due
to the aggregation of Cajal-Retzius and subplate cells, and migrating pyramidal
neurons lost polarity and radial orientation. Our findings demonstrate the
initial pathological events in dystroglycanopathy mice and contribute to our
understanding of how dystroglycan dysfunction affects brain development and
progresses to cobblestone lissencephaly.

DOI: 10.1038/srep11163
PMCID: PMC4461912
PMID: 26060116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
