---
reference_id: "PMID:36933415"
title: Cardiac hypertrophy simulations using parametric and echocardiography-based left ventricle model with shell finite elements.
authors:
- Milićević B
- Milošević M
- Simić V
- Trifunović D
- Stanković G
- Filipović N
- Kojić M
journal: Comput Biol Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2023.106742
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac hypertrophy simulations using parametric and echocardiography-based left ventricle model with shell finite elements.
**Authors:** Milićević B, Milošević M, Simić V, Trifunović D, Stanković G, Filipović N, Kojić M
**Journal:** Comput Biol Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.compbiomed.2023.106742](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compbiomed.2023.106742)

## Content

1. Comput Biol Med. 2023 May;157:106742. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2023.106742. 
Epub 2023 Mar 14.

Cardiac hypertrophy simulations using parametric and echocardiography-based left 
ventricle model with shell finite elements.

Milićević B(1), Milošević M(2), Simić V(3), Trifunović D(4), Stanković G(5), 
Filipović N(1), Kojić M(6).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Engineering, University of Kragujevac, Kragujevac, 34000, Serbia; 
Bioengineering Research and Development Center (BioIRC), Kragujevac, 34000, 
Serbia.
(2)Bioengineering Research and Development Center (BioIRC), Kragujevac, 34000, 
Serbia; Institute for Information Technologies, University of Kragujevac, 
Kragujevac, 34000, Serbia; Belgrade Metropolitan University, Belgrade, 11000, 
Serbia.
(3)Bioengineering Research and Development Center (BioIRC), Kragujevac, 34000, 
Serbia; Institute for Information Technologies, University of Kragujevac, 
Kragujevac, 34000, Serbia.
(4)Cardiology Department, University Clinical Center of Serbia, Visegradska 26, 
11000, Belgrade, Serbia.
(5)Cardiology Department, University Clinical Center of Serbia, Visegradska 26, 
11000, Belgrade, Serbia; Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Belgrade, 11000, 
Serbia.
(6)Bioengineering Research and Development Center (BioIRC), Kragujevac, 34000, 
Serbia; Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Belgrade, 11000, Serbia; Houston 
Methodist Research Institute, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. Electronic address: 
mkojic42@gmail.com.

In our paper, we simulated cardiac hypertrophy with the use of shell elements in 
parametric and echocardiography-based left ventricle (LV) models. The 
hypertrophy has an impact on the change in the wall thickness, displacement 
field and the overall functioning of the heart. We computed both eccentric and 
concentric hypertrophy effects and tracked changes in the ventricle shape and 
wall thickness. Thickening of the wall was developed under the influence of 
concentric hypertrophy, while the eccentric hypertrophy produces wall thinning. 
To model passive stresses we used the recently developed material modal based on 
the Holzapfel experiments. Also, our specific shell composite finite element 
models for heart mechanics are much smaller and simpler to use with respect to 
conventional 3D models. Furthermore, the presented modeling approach of the 
echocardiography-based LV can serve as the basis for practical applications 
since it relies on the true patient-specific geometry and experimental 
constitutive relationships. Our model gives an insight into hypertrophy 
development in realistic heart geometries, and it has the potential to test 
medical hypotheses regarding hypertrophy evolution in a healthy and heart with a 
disease, under the influence of different conditions and parameters.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2023.106742
PMID: 36933415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that there is no conflict of interest regarding the publication of this 
paper.