---
reference_id: "PMID:34722761"
title: "Prognostic Value of BIM Deletion in EGFR-Mutant NSCLC Patients Treated with EGFR-TKIs: A Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Lv F
- Sun L
- Yang Q
- Pan Z
- Zhang Y
journal: Biomed Res Int
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1155/2021/3621828
keywords:
- Apoptosis Regulatory Proteins/genetics
- "Bcl-2-Like Protein 11/genetics, metabolism"
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Disease-Free Survival
- "ErbB Receptors/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- Humans
- Lung Neoplasms/pathology
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mutation/drug effects
- Prognosis
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prognostic Value of BIM Deletion in EGFR-Mutant NSCLC Patients Treated with EGFR-TKIs: A Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Lv F, Sun L, Yang Q, Pan Z, Zhang Y
**Journal:** Biomed Res Int (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2021/3621828](https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/3621828)

## Content

1. Biomed Res Int. 2021 Oct 13;2021:3621828. doi: 10.1155/2021/3621828.
eCollection  2021.

Prognostic Value of BIM Deletion in EGFR-Mutant NSCLC Patients Treated with
EGFR-TKIs: A Meta-Analysis.

Lv F(1), Sun L(2), Yang Q(1), Pan Z(1), Zhang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory, Characteristic Medical Center of People's Armed
Police Force, Tianjin 300162, China.
(2)Department of Immunology, Characteristic Medical Center of People's Armed
Police Force, Tianjin 300162, China.

BACKGROUND: Resistance to epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (EGFR-TKIs) is inevitable in EGFR-mutant non-small-cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) patients. A germline 2903 bp deletion polymorphism of Bcl-2-like protein
11 (BIM) causes reduced expression of proapoptotic BH3-only BIM protein and
blocks TKI-induced apoptosis of tumor cells. Yet the association between the
deletion polymorphism and response to EGFR-TKI treatment remains inconsistent
among clinical observations. Thus, we performed the present meta-analysis.
METHODS: Eligible studies were identified by searching PubMed, Embase, and
ClinicalTrials.gov databases prior to March 31, 2021. Hazard ratios (HRs) and
95% confidence intervals (CIs) of progression-free survival (PFS) and overall
survival (OS) and odds ratios (ORs) and 95% CIs of objective response rate (ORR)
and disease control rate (DCR) were calculated by using a random effects model.
Sensitivity, metaregression, and publication bias analyses were also performed.
RESULTS: A total of 20 datasets (3003 EGFR-mutant NSCLC patients receiving
EGFR-TKIs from 18 studies) were included. There were 475 (15.8%) patients having
the 2903-bp intron deletion of BIM and 2528 (84.2%) wild-type patients. BIM
deletion predicted significantly shorter PFS (HR = 1.35, 95% CI: 1.10-1.64, P =
0.003) and a tendency toward an unfavorable OS (HR = 1.22, 95% CI: 0.99-1.50, P
= 0.068). Patients with deletion polymorphism had lower ORR (OR = 0.60, 95% CI:
0.42-0.85, P = 0.004) and DCR (OR = 0.59, 95% CI: 0.38-0.90, P = 0.014) compared
with those without deletion.
CONCLUSION: BIM deletion polymorphism may confer resistance to EGFR-TKIs and can
be used as a biomarker to predict treatment response to EGFR-TKIs in EGFR-mutant
NSCLC patients from Asian populations.

Copyright © 2021 Fangfang Lv et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/3621828
PMCID: PMC8551980
PMID: 34722761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no conflicts of interest.
