---
reference_id: "PMID:29383834"
title: "Nonsense mutations in FZD2 cause autosomal-dominant omodysplasia: Robinow syndrome-like phenotypes."
authors:
- Nagasaki K
- Nishimura G
- Kikuchi T
- Nyuzuki H
- Sasaki S
- Ogawa Y
- Saitoh A
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38623
keywords:
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Craniofacial Abnormalities/diagnosis
- Cytogenetic Analysis
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Dwarfism/diagnosis
- Facies
- Frizzled Receptors/genetics
- Genetic Association Studies/methods
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Humerus/abnormalities
- Infant
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/diagnosis"
- Male
- Metacarpal Bones/abnormalities
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnosis, genetics"
- Phenotype
- Radiography
- Urogenital Abnormalities/diagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nonsense mutations in FZD2 cause autosomal-dominant omodysplasia: Robinow syndrome-like phenotypes.
**Authors:** Nagasaki K, Nishimura G, Kikuchi T, Nyuzuki H, Sasaki S, Ogawa Y, Saitoh A
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.38623](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.38623)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2018 Mar;176(3):739-742. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38623. Epub
2018  Jan 31.

Nonsense mutations in FZD2 cause autosomal-dominant omodysplasia: Robinow 
syndrome-like phenotypes.

Nagasaki K(1), Nishimura G(2), Kikuchi T(3), Nyuzuki H(1), Sasaki S(1), Ogawa 
Y(1), Saitoh A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatrics, Department of Homeostatic Regulation and Development, 
Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata, 
Japan.
(2)Intractable Disease Center, Saitama Medical University Hospital, Saitama, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Saitama Medical University, Saitama, Japan.

Omodysplasia-2 (OMOD2; OMIM%16475) is a rare autosomal dominant (AD) skeletal 
dysplasia characterized by shortened humeri, short first metacarpal, 
craniofacial dysmorphism (frontal bossing, depressed nasal bridge, bifid nasal 
tip, and long philtrum), and variable degrees of genitourinary anomalies. This 
clinical phenotype overlaps with that of AD type Robinow syndrome. Recently, a 
mutation in FZD2 encoding a Frizzled Class Receptor 2 has been identified in a 
family with AD omodysplasia (an affected girl and her affected mother). Here, we 
present the second report on a heterozygous novel nonsense FZD2 mutation in 
OMOD2 or Robinow syndrome-like phenotype. The proband was a 16-year-old boy, who 
has been followed from infancy to adolescence. He presented with rhizomelic 
short stature with elbow restriction, mild facial dysmorphism (depressed broad 
bridge, short nose, anteverted nostrils, long philtrum, and low-set ears), and 
genital hypoplasia. Radiological examination in infancy showed short, broad 
humeri with relatively narrow distal ends, mildly broad femora, thick proximal 
ulnae with hypoplastic, dislocated proximal radii, and short first metacarpals. 
The abnormal skeletal pattern was persistent in adolescence; however, the humeri 
and femora became less undermodeled, while the humeri and radii became mildly 
bowed. Molecular analysis identified a de novo, heterozygous, nonsense mutation 
(c.1640C>A, p.S547*) in FZD2. The affected codon was next to the previously 
reported mutation (p.Trp548*). The results indicate that OMOD2 or Robinow 
syndome-like phenotype can be caused by a heterozygous nonsense FZD2 mutation 
impairing Wnt signaling. Further molecular studies will permit better 
clarification of the phenotypic spectrum in patients with OMOD2.

© 2018 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.38623
PMID: 29383834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]