---
reference_id: "PMID:21681813"
title: Smad6 is essential to limit BMP signaling during cartilage development.
authors:
- Estrada KD
- Retting KN
- Chin AM
- Lyons KM
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.443
keywords:
- Animals
- Apoptosis
- Base Sequence
- Bone Morphogenetic Proteins/metabolism
- "Cartilage/cytology, embryology"
- Cell Proliferation
- DNA Primers
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Signal Transduction
- Smad6 Protein/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Smad6 is essential to limit BMP signaling during cartilage development.
**Authors:** Estrada KD, Retting KN, Chin AM, Lyons KM
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.443](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.443)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2011 Oct;26(10):2498-510. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.443.

Smad6 is essential to limit BMP signaling during cartilage development.

Estrada KD(1), Retting KN, Chin AM, Lyons KM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling pathways regulate multiple aspects of
endochondral bone formation. The importance of extracellular antagonists as
regulators of BMP signaling has been defined. In vitro studies reveal that the
intracellular regulators, inhibitory Smads 6 and 7, can regulate BMP-mediated
effects on chondrocytes. Although in vivo studies in which inhibitory Smads were
overexpressed in cartilage have shown that inhibitory Smads have the potential
to limit BMP signaling in vivo, the physiological relevance of inhibitory Smad
activity in skeletal tissues is unknown. In this study, we have determined the
role of Smad6 in endochondral bone formation. Loss of Smad6 in mice leads to
defects in both axial and appendicular skeletal development. Specifically,
Smad6-/- mice exhibit a posterior transformation of the seventh cervical
vertebra, bilateral ossification centers in lumbar vertebrae, and bifid
sternebrae due to incomplete sternal band fusion. Histological analysis of
appendicular bones revealed delayed onset of hypertrophic differentiation and
mineralization at midgestation in Smad6-/- mice. By late gestation, however, an
expanded hypertrophic zone, associated with an increased pool of proliferating
cells undergoing hypertrophy, was evident in Smad6 mutant growth plates. The
mutant phenotype is attributed, at least in part, to increased BMP
responsiveness in Smad6-deficient chondrocytes. Overall, our results show that
Smad6 is required to limit BMP signaling during endochondral bone formation.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.443
PMCID: PMC3183270
PMID: 21681813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest The authors have no
conflict of interest.
