---
reference_id: "PMID:19278172"
title: "Refeeding syndrome: an important aspect of supportive oncology."
authors:
- Marinella MA
journal: J Support Oncol
year: '2009'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Refeeding syndrome: an important aspect of supportive oncology.
**Authors:** Marinella MA
**Journal:** J Support Oncol (2009)

## Content

1. J Support Oncol. 2009 Jan-Feb;7(1):11-6.

Refeeding syndrome: an important aspect of supportive oncology.

Marinella MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Wright State University School of Medicine, 
Dayton, Ohio, USA. Mmarinella@pol.net

Comment in
    J Support Oncol. 2009 Jan-Feb;7(1):19-20.
    J Support Oncol. 2009 Jan-Feb;7(1):20-1.

Refeeding syndrome (RFS) is an underappreciated, yet common and potentially 
dangerous, constellation of metabolic derangements that can occur upon 
reinstitution of any type of nutritional intervention. The typical patient who 
experiences RFS has been malnourished for days to weeks and develops 
hypophosphatemia and, occasionally, hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia when 
administered a carbohydrate load in the form of glucose-containing fluids, total 
parenteral nutrition (TPN), tube feedings, or an oral diet. The pathophysiology 
of RFS is complex but mainly results from an acute intracellular shift in 
electrolytes, increased phosphate demand during tissue anabolism, and formation 
of high-energy phosphate bonds. Potential complications of RFS include fatal 
cardiac arrhythmia, systolic heart failure, respiratory insufficiency, and 
hematologic derangements. Because supportive care of the cancer patient often 
involves nutritional and metabolic support, any clinician involved with 
providing acute or palliative oncologic care should be familiar with the risks, 
manifestations, and treatment of RFS.

PMID: 19278172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]