---
reference_id: "PMID:38700451"
title: "Cardiac conduction diseases: understanding the molecular mechanisms to uncover targets for future treatments."
authors:
- Li T
- Marashly Q
- Kim JA
- Li N
- Chelu MG
journal: Expert Opin Ther Targets
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/14728222.2024.2351501
keywords:
- Humans
- Animals
- Heart Conduction System/physiopathology
- "Cardiac Conduction System Disease/physiopathology, therapy, drug therapy"
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- Mutation
- Drug Development
- "Heart Failure/physiopathology, therapy, drug therapy"
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Sinoatrial Node/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac conduction diseases: understanding the molecular mechanisms to uncover targets for future treatments.
**Authors:** Li T, Marashly Q, Kim JA, Li N, Chelu MG
**Journal:** Expert Opin Ther Targets (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14728222.2024.2351501](https://doi.org/10.1080/14728222.2024.2351501)

## Content

1. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2024 May;28(5):385-400. doi: 
10.1080/14728222.2024.2351501. Epub 2024 May 13.

Cardiac conduction diseases: understanding the molecular mechanisms to uncover 
targets for future treatments.

Li T(1)(2), Marashly Q(3), Kim JA(4), Li N(1)(2), Chelu MG(2)(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (Section of Cardiovascular Research), Baylor College 
of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(2)Cardiovascular Research Institute, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 
USA.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Montefiore Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Division of CardiovasculMedicine, Jacobs School of Medicine and Biomedical 
Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA.
(5)Department of Medicine (Division of Cardiology), Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(6)Division of Cardiology, Baylor St. Luke's Medical Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(7)Division of Cardiology, Texas Heart Institute, Houston, TX, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The cardiac conduction system (CCS) is crucial for maintaining 
adequate cardiac frequency at rest and modulation during exercise. Furthermore, 
the atrioventricular node and His-Purkinje system are essential for maintaining 
atrioventricular and interventricular synchrony and consequently maintaining an 
adequate cardiac output.
AREAS COVERED: In this review article, we examine the anatomy, physiology, and 
pathophysiology of the CCS. We then discuss in detail the most common genetic 
mutations and the molecular mechanisms of cardiac conduction disease (CCD) and 
provide our perspectives on future research and therapeutic opportunities in 
this field.
EXPERT OPINION: Significant advancement has been made in understanding the 
molecular mechanisms of CCD, including the recognition of the heterogeneous 
signaling at the subcellular levels of sinoatrial node, the involvement of 
inflammatory and autoimmune mechanisms, and the potential impact of epigenetic 
regulations on CCD. However, the current treatment of CCD manifested as 
bradycardia still relies primarily on cardiovascular implantable electronic 
devices (CIEDs). On the other hand, an If specific inhibitor was developed to 
treat inappropriate sinus tachycardia and sinus tachycardia in heart failure 
patients with reduced ejection fraction. More work is needed to translate 
current knowledge into pharmacologic or genetic interventions for the management 
of CCDs.

DOI: 10.1080/14728222.2024.2351501
PMCID: PMC11395937
PMID: 38700451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: MG Chelu received research funding from Impulse 
Dynamics and Abbott and modest speaking honoraria from Impulse Dynamics. The 
authors have no other relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any 
organization or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict with 
the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript apart from those 
disclosed.