---
reference_id: "PMID:34196984"
title: Molecular diagnostics in drug-resistant focal epilepsy define new disease entities.
authors:
- Kobow K
- Baulac S
- von Deimling A
- Lee JH
journal: Brain Pathol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/bpa.12963
keywords:
- Brain/pathology
- "Brain Neoplasms/diagnosis, pathology"
- "Drug Resistant Epilepsy/diagnosis, pathology"
- "Epilepsies, Partial/diagnosis, pathology"
- Humans
- Malformations of Cortical Development/pathology
- "Pathology, Molecular/methods"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular diagnostics in drug-resistant focal epilepsy define new disease entities.
**Authors:** Kobow K, Baulac S, von Deimling A, Lee JH
**Journal:** Brain Pathol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bpa.12963](https://doi.org/10.1111/bpa.12963)

## Content

1. Brain Pathol. 2021 Jul;31(4):e12963. doi: 10.1111/bpa.12963.

Molecular diagnostics in drug-resistant focal epilepsy define new disease 
entities.

Kobow K(1), Baulac S(2), von Deimling A(3)(4), Lee JH(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, 
Friedrich-Alexander-University of Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Institut du Cerveau-Paris Brain Institute-ICM, Inserm, CNRS, Sorbonne 
Université, Paris, France.
(3)Department of Neuropathology, Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 
Germany.
(4)CCU Neuropathology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, 
Germany.
(5)Graduate School of Medical Science and Engineering, KAIST, Daejeon, Korea.
(6)SoVarGen, Inc, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.

Structural brain lesions, including the broad range of malformations of cortical 
development (MCD) and glioneuronal tumors, are among the most common causes of 
drug-resistant focal epilepsy. Epilepsy surgery can provide a curative treatment 
option in respective patients. The currently available pre-surgical multi-modal 
diagnostic armamentarium includes high- and ultra-high resolution magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) and intracerebral EEG to identify a focal structural 
brain lesion as epilepsy underlying etiology. However, specificity and accuracy 
in diagnosing the type of lesion have proven to be limited. Moreover, the 
diagnostic process does not stop with the decision for surgery. The 
neuropathological diagnosis remains the gold standard for disease classification 
and patient stratification, but is particularly complex with high inter-observer 
variability. Here, the identification of lesion-specific mosaic variants 
together with epigenetic profiling of lesional brain tissue became new tools to 
more reliably identify disease entities. In this review, we will discuss how the 
paradigm shifts from histopathology toward an integrated diagnostic approach in 
cancer and the more recent development of the DNA methylation-based brain tumor 
classifier have started to influence epilepsy diagnostics. Some examples will be 
highlighted showing how the diagnosis and our mechanistic understanding of 
difficult to classify structural brain lesions associated with focal epilepsy 
has improved with molecular genetic data being considered in decision making.

© 2021 The Authors. Brain Pathology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf 
of International Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/bpa.12963
PMCID: PMC8412082
PMID: 34196984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]