---
reference_id: "PMID:22072542"
title: "Concurrent CIC mutations, IDH mutations, and 1p/19q loss distinguish oligodendrogliomas from other cancers."
authors:
- Yip S
- Butterfield YS
- Morozova O
- Chittaranjan S
- Blough MD
- An J
- Birol I
- Chesnelong C
- Chiu R
- Chuah E
- Corbett R
- Docking R
- Firme M
- Hirst M
- Jackman S
- Karsan A
- Li H
- Louis DN
- Maslova A
- Moore R
- Moradian A
- Mungall KL
- Perizzolo M
- Qian J
- Roldan G
- Smith EE
- Tamura-Wells J
- Thiessen N
- Varhol R
- Weiss S
- Wu W
- Young S
- Zhao Y
- Mungall AJ
- Jones SJ
- Morin GB
- Chan JA
- Cairncross JG
- Marra MA
journal: J Pathol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/path.2995
keywords:
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis, genetics"
- "Brain Neoplasms/genetics, mortality, pathology"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 1/genetics"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 19/genetics"
- Disease-Free Survival
- Humans
- Isocitrate Dehydrogenase/genetics
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Grading
- "Oligodendroglioma/genetics, mortality, pathology"
- Repressor Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Concurrent CIC mutations, IDH mutations, and 1p/19q loss distinguish oligodendrogliomas from other cancers.
**Authors:** Yip S, Butterfield YS, Morozova O, Chittaranjan S, Blough MD, An J, Birol I, Chesnelong C, Chiu R, Chuah E, Corbett R, Docking R, Firme M, Hirst M, Jackman S, Karsan A, Li H, Louis DN, Maslova A, Moore R, Moradian A, Mungall KL, Perizzolo M, Qian J, Roldan G, Smith EE, Tamura-Wells J, Thiessen N, Varhol R, Weiss S, Wu W, Young S, Zhao Y, Mungall AJ, Jones SJ, Morin GB, Chan JA, Cairncross JG, Marra MA
**Journal:** J Pathol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/path.2995](https://doi.org/10.1002/path.2995)

## Content

1. J Pathol. 2012 Jan;226(1):7-16. doi: 10.1002/path.2995. Epub 2011 Nov 10.

Concurrent CIC mutations, IDH mutations, and 1p/19q loss distinguish 
oligodendrogliomas from other cancers.

Yip S(1), Butterfield YS, Morozova O, Chittaranjan S, Blough MD, An J, Birol I, 
Chesnelong C, Chiu R, Chuah E, Corbett R, Docking R, Firme M, Hirst M, Jackman 
S, Karsan A, Li H, Louis DN, Maslova A, Moore R, Moradian A, Mungall KL, 
Perizzolo M, Qian J, Roldan G, Smith EE, Tamura-Wells J, Thiessen N, Varhol R, 
Weiss S, Wu W, Young S, Zhao Y, Mungall AJ, Jones SJ, Morin GB, Chan JA, 
Cairncross JG, Marra MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, BC Cancer Agency, BC, 
Canada.

Oligodendroglioma is characterized by unique clinical, pathological, and genetic 
features. Recurrent losses of chromosomes 1p and 19q are strongly associated 
with this brain cancer but knowledge of the identity and function of the genes 
affected by these alterations is limited. We performed exome sequencing on a 
discovery set of 16 oligodendrogliomas with 1p/19q co-deletion to identify new 
molecular features at base-pair resolution. As anticipated, there was a high 
rate of IDH mutations: all cases had mutations in either IDH1 (14/16) or IDH2 
(2/16). In addition, we discovered somatic mutations and insertions/deletions in 
the CIC gene on chromosome 19q13.2 in 13/16 tumours. These discovery set 
mutations were validated by deep sequencing of 13 additional tumours, which 
revealed seven others with CIC mutations, thus bringing the overall mutation 
rate in oligodendrogliomas in this study to 20/29 (69%). In contrast, deep 
sequencing of astrocytomas and oligoastrocytomas without 1p/19q loss revealed 
that CIC alterations were otherwise rare (1/60; 2%). Of the 21 non-synonymous 
somatic mutations in 20 CIC-mutant oligodendrogliomas, nine were in exon 5 
within an annotated DNA-interacting domain and three were in exon 20 within an 
annotated protein-interacting domain. The remaining nine were found in other 
exons and frequently included truncations. CIC mutations were highly associated 
with oligodendroglioma histology, 1p/19q co-deletion, and IDH1/2 mutation (p < 
0.001). Although we observed no differences in the clinical outcomes of CIC 
mutant versus wild-type tumours, in a background of 1p/19q co-deletion, 
hemizygous CIC mutations are likely important. We hypothesize that the mutant 
CIC on the single retained 19q allele is linked to the pathogenesis of 
oligodendrogliomas with IDH mutation. Our detailed study of genetic aberrations 
in oligodendroglioma suggests a functional interaction between CIC mutation, 
IDH1/2 mutation, and 1p/19q co-deletion.

Copyright © 2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/path.2995
PMCID: PMC3246739
PMID: 22072542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]