---
reference_id: "PMID:16253912"
title: "Targeted mutational analysis of ankyrin-B in 541 consecutive, unrelated patients referred for long QT syndrome genetic testing and 200 healthy subjects."
authors:
- Sherman J
- Tester DJ
- Ackerman MJ
journal: Heart Rhythm
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2005.07.026
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Ankyrins/genetics, metabolism"
- Child
- "Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid"
- DNA/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis/methods
- Electrocardiography
- Female
- Genetic Markers
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genetic Testing/methods
- Humans
- "Long QT Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeted mutational analysis of ankyrin-B in 541 consecutive, unrelated patients referred for long QT syndrome genetic testing and 200 healthy subjects.
**Authors:** Sherman J, Tester DJ, Ackerman MJ
**Journal:** Heart Rhythm (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hrthm.2005.07.026](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hrthm.2005.07.026)

## Content

1. Heart Rhythm. 2005 Nov;2(11):1218-23. doi: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2005.07.026.

Targeted mutational analysis of ankyrin-B in 541 consecutive, unrelated patients
referred for long QT syndrome genetic testing and 200 healthy subjects.

Sherman J(1), Tester DJ, Ackerman MJ.

Author information:
(1)Mayo Medical School, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in ANK2-encoded ankyrin-B underlie long QT syndrome type 4
(LQT4) and various other dysrhythmia phenotypes.
OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to determine the prevalence and
spectrum of ankyrin-B mutations in a large cohort of unrelated patients referred
for LQTS genetic testing and among healthy control subjects.
METHODS: Between August 1997 and July 2004, 541 consecutive, unrelated patients
(358 females, average age at diagnosis 24 years, average QTc 482 ms) were
referred to Mayo Clinic's Sudden Death Genomics Laboratory for comprehensive
mutational analysis of the five cardiac channel genes implicated in LQTS: KCNQ1
(LQT1), KCNH2 (LQT2), SCN5A (LQT3), KCNE1 (LQT5), and KCNE2 (LQT6). Based on
this prior analysis, 269 of 541 cases lacked an identifiable mutation (genotype
negative). In this study, targeted mutational analysis of 10 ANK2 exons
(36,37,39-46) encoding the critical C-terminal regulatory domain or implicated
previously as hosting pathogenic mutations was performed on genomic DNA from 541
patients and 200 control subjects using polymerase chain reaction, denaturing
high-performance liquid chromatography, and direct DNA sequencing.
RESULTS: Overall, 14 distinct nonsynonymous variants (10 novel) were observed in
9 (3.3%) of 269 genotype-negative LQTS patients, 5 (1.8%) of 272
genotype-positive LQTS cases, 4 (4%) of 100 white controls, and 9 (9%) of 100
black controls. Four variants found in controls (L1622I, T1626N, R1788W, and
E1813K) were implicated previously as LQT4-associated mutations and displayed
functional perturbations in vitro. All genotype-negative LQTS cases hosting ANK2
variants had been diagnosed as "atypical" or "borderline" cases, most presenting
with normal QTc, nonexertional syncope, U waves, and/or sinus bradycardia.
CONCLUSION: Nonsynonymous ankyrin-B variants were detected in nearly 3% of
unrelated LQTS patients and nearly 7% of healthy control subjects.
Genotype-negative LQTS patients with a single ANK2 variant displayed
nonexertional syncope, U waves, sinus bradycardia, and extracardiac findings.
Whether the identification of previously reported functionally significant
variants residing in 2% of apparently healthy subjects suggests proarrhythmic
potential or potential misclassification warrants further scrutiny.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hrthm.2005.07.026
PMID: 16253912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
