---
reference_id: "PMID:20537182"
title: Congenital hypothyroidism.
authors:
- Rastogi MV
- LaFranchi SH
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-5-17
keywords:
- "Congenital Hypothyroidism/drug therapy, pathology"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Neonatal Screening
- "Thyroid Dysgenesis/drug therapy, pathology"
- Thyroid Function Tests
- Thyrotropin/blood
- "Thyroxine/blood, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital hypothyroidism.
**Authors:** Rastogi MV, LaFranchi SH
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-5-17](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-5-17)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2010 Jun 10;5:17. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-5-17.

Congenital hypothyroidism.

Rastogi MV(1), LaFranchi SH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Endocrinology, Oregon Health & Science 
University, 707 SW Gaines Street, Portland, OR, USA.

Congenital hypothyroidism (CH) occurs in approximately 1:2,000 to 1:4,000 
newborns. The clinical manifestations are often subtle or not present at birth. 
This likely is due to trans-placental passage of some maternal thyroid hormone, 
while many infants have some thyroid production of their own. Common symptoms 
include decreased activity and increased sleep, feeding difficulty, 
constipation, and prolonged jaundice. On examination, common signs include 
myxedematous facies, large fontanels, macroglossia, a distended abdomen with 
umbilical hernia, and hypotonia. CH is classified into permanent and transient 
forms, which in turn can be divided into primary, secondary, or peripheral 
etiologies. Thyroid dysgenesis accounts for 85% of permanent, primary CH, while 
inborn errors of thyroid hormone biosynthesis (dyshormonogeneses) account for 
10-15% of cases. Secondary or central CH may occur with isolated TSH deficiency, 
but more commonly it is associated with congenital hypopitiutarism. Transient CH 
most commonly occurs in preterm infants born in areas of endemic iodine 
deficiency. In countries with newborn screening programs in place, infants with 
CH are diagnosed after detection by screening tests. The diagnosis should be 
confirmed by finding an elevated serum TSH and low T4 or free T4 level. Other 
diagnostic tests, such as thyroid radionuclide uptake and scan, thyroid 
sonography, or serum thyroglobulin determination may help pinpoint the 
underlying etiology, although treatment may be started without these tests. 
Levothyroxine is the treatment of choice; the recommended starting dose is 10 to 
15 mcg/kg/day. The immediate goals of treatment are to rapidly raise the serum 
T4 above 130 nmol/L (10 ug/dL) and normalize serum TSH levels. Frequent 
laboratory monitoring in infancy is essential to ensure optimal neurocognitive 
outcome. Serum TSH and free T4 should be measured every 1-2 months in the first 
6 months of life and every 3-4 months thereafter. In general, the prognosis of 
infants detected by screening and started on treatment early is excellent, with 
IQs similar to sibling or classmate controls. Studies show that a lower 
neurocognitive outcome may occur in those infants started at a later age (> 30 
days of age), on lower l-thyroxine doses than currently recommended, and in 
those infants with more severe hypothyroidism.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-5-17
PMCID: PMC2903524
PMID: 20537182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]