---
reference_id: PMID:21859077
title: Large-scale identification of calcium oxalate monohydrate crystal-binding proteins on apical membrane of distal renal tubular epithelial cells.
authors:
- Fong-Ngern K
- Peerapen P
- Sinchaikul S
- Chen ST
- Thongboonkerd V
journal: J Proteome Res
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1021/pr2006878
keywords:
- Animals
- "Blotting, Western"
- Calcium Oxalate/chemistry
- Cell Line
- Cell Membrane/metabolism
- Crystallization
- Dogs
- "Electrophoresis, Polyacrylamide Gel"
- "Kidney Tubules/cytology, metabolism"
- "Microscopy, Confocal/methods"
- "Microscopy, Fluorescence/methods"
- Protein Binding
- Proteomics/methods
- Tandem Mass Spectrometry/methods
- Trypsin/chemistry
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Large-scale identification of calcium oxalate monohydrate crystal-binding proteins on apical membrane of distal renal tubular epithelial cells.
**Authors:** Fong-Ngern K, Peerapen P, Sinchaikul S, Chen ST, Thongboonkerd V
**Journal:** J Proteome Res (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1021/pr2006878](https://doi.org/10.1021/pr2006878)

## Content

1. J Proteome Res. 2011 Oct 7;10(10):4463-77. doi: 10.1021/pr2006878. Epub 2011
Sep  9.

Large-scale identification of calcium oxalate monohydrate crystal-binding 
proteins on apical membrane of distal renal tubular epithelial cells.

Fong-Ngern K(1), Peerapen P, Sinchaikul S, Chen ST, Thongboonkerd V.

Author information:
(1)Medical Proteomics Unit, Office for Research and Development, Faculty of 
Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

Adhesion of calcium oxalate monohydrate (COM) crystals onto apical surface of 
renal tubular epithelial cells is a crucial mechanism for crystal retention, 
leading to kidney stone formation. Various proteins on apical membrane may bind 
to COM crystals; however, these crystal-binding proteins remained unidentified. 
The present study therefore aimed to identify COM crystal-binding proteins on 
apical membrane of distal renal tubular epithelial cells. Madin-Darby Canine 
Kidney (MDCK) cells were cultivated to be polarized epithelial cells and apical 
membrane was isolated from these cells using a peeling method established 
recently. Enrichment and purity of isolated apical membrane were confirmed by 
Western blot analysis for specific markers of apical (gp135) and basolateral 
(Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase) membranes. Proteins derived from the isolated apical 
membrane were then resuspended in artificial urine and incubated with COM 
crystals. The bound proteins were eluted, resolved by SDS-PAGE, and analyzed by 
Q-TOF MS and MS/MS, which identified 96 proteins. Among these, expression and 
localization of annexin II on apical surface of MDCK cells were confirmed by 
Western blot analysis, immunofluorescence staining, and laser-scanning confocal 
microscopic examination. Finally, the function of annexin II as the COM 
crystal-binding protein was successfully validated by COM crystal-binding assay. 
This large data set offers many opportunities for further investigations of 
kidney stone disease and may lead to the development of new therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.1021/pr2006878
PMID: 21859077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]