---
reference_id: "PMID:32293788"
title: "Neck masses due to internal jugular vein phlebectasia: Frequency in Menkes disease and literature review of 85 pediatric subjects."
authors:
- Stevens KE
- Price JE
- Marko J
- Kaler SG
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61572
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Copper-Transporting ATPases/genetics
- "Failure to Thrive/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Infant
- "Jugular Veins/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Male
- Menkes Kinky Hair Syndrome
- Mutation/genetics
- "Neurodevelopmental Disorders/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Ultrasonography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neck masses due to internal jugular vein phlebectasia: Frequency in Menkes disease and literature review of 85 pediatric subjects.
**Authors:** Stevens KE, Price JE, Marko J, Kaler SG
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.61572](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.61572)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2020 Jun;182(6):1364-1377. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61572. Epub 
2020 Apr 15.

Neck masses due to internal jugular vein phlebectasia: Frequency in Menkes 
disease and literature review of 85 pediatric subjects.

Stevens KE(1)(2), Price JE(1), Marko J(3), Kaler SG(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Section on Translational Neuroscience, Molecular Medicine Branch, Eunice 
Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, 
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(2)George Washington University School of Nursing, Washington, District of 
Columbia, USA.
(3)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, NIH Clinical Center, Bethesda, Maryland, 
USA.
(4)Center for Gene Therapy, Abigail Wexner Research Institute, Nationwide 
Children's Hospital, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

Classic Menkes disease is a rare X-linked recessive disorder of copper 
metabolism caused by pathogenic variants in the copper transporter gene, ATP7A. 
Untreated affected individuals suffer failure to thrive and neurodevelopmental 
delays that begin at 6-8 weeks of age and progress inexorably to death, often 
within 3 years. Subcutaneous injections of Copper Histidinate (US Food and Drug 
Administration IND #34,166, Orphan product designation #12-3663) are associated 
with improved survival and neurological outcomes, especially when commenced 
within a month of birth. We previously identified internal jugular vein 
phlebectasia (IJP) in four Menkes disease subjects. This feature and other 
connective tissue abnormalities appear to be consequences of deficient activity 
of lysyl oxidase, a copper-dependent enzyme. Here, we report results from a 
prospective study of IJP based on 178 neck ultrasounds in 66 Menkes subjects 
obtained between November 2007 and March 2018. Nine patients met the criterion 
for IJP (one or more cross-sectional area measurements exceeding 2.2 cm2 ) and 
five subjects had clinically apparent neck masses that enlarged over time. Our 
prospective results suggest that IJP occurs in approximately 14% (9/66) of 
Menkes disease patients and appears to be clinically benign with no specific 
medical or surgical actionability. We surveyed the medical literature for prior 
reports of IJP in pediatric subjects and identified 85 individuals and reviewed 
the distribution of this abnormality by gender, sidedness, and underlying 
etiology. Taken together, Menkes disease accounts for 16% (15/94) of all 
reported IJP individuals. Neck masses from IJP represent underappreciated 
abnormalities in Menkes disease.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61572
PMID: 32293788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]