---
reference_id: "PMID:19692347"
title: ALX4 dysfunction disrupts craniofacial and epidermal development.
authors:
- Kayserili H
- Uz E
- Niessen C
- Vargel I
- Alanay Y
- Tuncbilek G
- Yigit G
- Uyguner O
- Candan S
- Okur H
- Kaygin S
- Balci S
- Mavili E
- Alikasifoglu M
- Haase I
- Wollnik B
- Akarsu NA
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp391
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Craniofacial Dysostosis/genetics, metabolism"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Epidermis/growth & development, metabolism"
- "Facial Bones/growth & development, metabolism"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mutation
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ALX4 dysfunction disrupts craniofacial and epidermal development.
**Authors:** Kayserili H, Uz E, Niessen C, Vargel I, Alanay Y, Tuncbilek G, Yigit G, Uyguner O, Candan S, Okur H, Kaygin S, Balci S, Mavili E, Alikasifoglu M, Haase I, Wollnik B, Akarsu NA
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddp391](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddp391)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Nov 15;18(22):4357-66. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp391. Epub 2009 
Aug 19.

ALX4 dysfunction disrupts craniofacial and epidermal development.

Kayserili H(1), Uz E, Niessen C, Vargel I, Alanay Y, Tuncbilek G, Yigit G, 
Uyguner O, Candan S, Okur H, Kaygin S, Balci S, Mavili E, Alikasifoglu M, Haase 
I, Wollnik B, Akarsu NA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul 
University, Istanbul, Turkey.

Genetic control of craniofacial morphogenesis requires a complex interaction of 
numerous genes encoding factors essential for patterning and differentiation. We 
present two Turkish families with a new autosomal recessive frontofacial 
dysostosis syndrome characterized by total alopecia, a large skull defect, 
coronal craniosynostosis, hypertelorism, severely depressed nasal bridge and 
ridge, bifid nasal tip, hypogonadism, callosal body agenesis and mental 
retardation. Using homozygosity mapping, we mapped the entity to chromosome 
11p11.2-q12.3 and subsequently identified a homozygous c.793C-->T nonsense 
mutation in the human ortholog of the mouse aristaless-like homeobox 4 (ALX4) 
gene. This mutation is predicted to result in a premature stop codon (p.R265X) 
of ALX4 truncating 146 amino acids of the protein including a part of the highly 
conserved homeodomain and the C-terminal paired tail domain. Although the RNA is 
stable and not degraded by nonsense-mediated RNA decay, the mutant protein is 
likely to be non-functional. In a skin biopsy of an affected individual, we 
observed a hypomorphic interfollicular epidermis with reduced suprabasal layers 
associated with impaired interfollicular epidermal differentiation. Hair 
follicle-like structures were present but showed altered differentiation. Our 
data indicate that ALX4 plays a critical role both in craniofacial development 
as in skin and hair follicle development in human.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddp391
PMID: 19692347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]