---
reference_id: "PMID:21122514"
title: The joint-gut axis in inflammatory bowel diseases.
authors:
- Brakenhoff LK
- van der Heijde DM
- Hommes DW
- Huizinga TW
- Fidder HH
journal: J Crohns Colitis
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.crohns.2009.11.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The joint-gut axis in inflammatory bowel diseases.
**Authors:** Brakenhoff LK, van der Heijde DM, Hommes DW, Huizinga TW, Fidder HH
**Journal:** J Crohns Colitis (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.crohns.2009.11.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crohns.2009.11.005)

## Content

1. J Crohns Colitis. 2010 Sep;4(3):257-68. doi: 10.1016/j.crohns.2009.11.005.
Epub  2009 Nov 30.

The joint-gut axis in inflammatory bowel diseases.

Brakenhoff LK(1), van der Heijde DM, Hommes DW, Huizinga TW, Fidder HH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Leiden University Medical 
Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands. K.P.M.Brakenhoff@lumc.nl

Inflammatory bowel diseases, Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis, are 
associated with a variety of extraintestinal manifestations. The most common 
extraintestinal manifestation, articular involvement, occurs in 16% to 33% of 
inflammatory bowel disease patients. These arthropathies may increase morbidity, 
resulting in a worse quality of life compared with inflammatory bowel disease 
patients without arthropathies. Thus, arthropathies in inflammatory bowel 
diseases represent a major medical problem in these patients. Arthritis 
associated with inflammatory bowel diseases is one of the diseases captured 
under the umbrella of spondyloarthritis. Spondyloarthritis is a group of 
inflammatory diseases with overlapping features and is linked to Human Leukocyte 
Antigen-B27. Arthropathy in inflammatory bowel diseases is clinically divided 
into peripheral and axial involvement. Peripheral arthritis often flares with 
relapses of bowel disease resulting in a different treatment approach than axial 
arthritis in which the course is independent of inflammatory bowel disease 
activity. Definitions, prevalence, pathophysiology and treatment of the 
arthropathies commonly seen in inflammatory bowel diseases such as peripheral 
arthritis, dactylitis, enthesitis, arthralgia, sacroiliitis, inflammatory back 
pain and ankylosing spondylitis are summarized.

Copyright © 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.crohns.2009.11.005
PMID: 21122514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]