---
reference_id: "PMID:31930617"
title: "Anosognosia in patients with Alzheimer's disease: current perspectives."
authors:
- Tagai K
- Nagata T
- Shinagawa S
- Shigeta M
journal: Psychogeriatrics
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/psyg.12507
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anosognosia in patients with Alzheimer's disease: current perspectives.
**Authors:** Tagai K, Nagata T, Shinagawa S, Shigeta M
**Journal:** Psychogeriatrics (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/psyg.12507](https://doi.org/10.1111/psyg.12507)

## Content

1. Psychogeriatrics. 2020 May;20(3):345-352. doi: 10.1111/psyg.12507. Epub 2020
Jan  12.

Anosognosia in patients with Alzheimer's disease: current perspectives.

Tagai K(1), Nagata T(1)(2), Shinagawa S(1), Shigeta M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, The Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Airanomori Hospital, Kagoshima, Japan.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease characterised by 
neurocognitive impairments, especially memory impairment, as core symptoms 
linked to reductions in activities of daily life. As marginal symptoms, 
neuropsychiatric symptoms (NPSs) appear during the progressive course of the 
disease. A lack of self-awareness (anosognosia) of cognitive and functional 
impairments is often seen in patients with AD, and associations between 
anosognosia and other NPSs have been previously reported. To account for 
anosognosia pathogenesis neurocognitively, the cognitive awareness model (CAM) 
has been helpful for explaining the stream of events from sensory input to 
behavioural/affective and metacognitive outputs. According to CAM, there are 
three types of anosognosia: (i) primary anosognosia, (ii) executive anosognosia, 
and (iii) mnemonic anosognosia. These types of anosognosia are generated from 
different neurocognitive modulations leading to metacognitive outputs or 
behavioural/affective regulations. Primary anosognosia is considered to be 
caused by deficits in the metacognitive awareness system (MAS). While preserved 
MAS function is associated with milder depression and anxiety in AD, a severer 
depressive mood in patients with mild AD can inversely cause 
self-underestimation. The modulation of executive anosognosia is thought to be 
associated with dangerous/disinhibition behaviours and apathy among NPS 
sub-symptoms, via impairments of comparator mechanism (Cm) within the central 
executive system. Other neurobehavioral reactions linked to self-awareness 
include 'denying' and 'confabulation', and each of these reactions is thought to 
be affected by the MAS and a Cm. Denial of one's own memory impairments appears 
as a defensive reaction to protect against dysphoric feelings, and the 
confabulatory comment is instantly reaction constructed by fabrications 
according to misinterpretations of memory information about oneself. Similarly, 
the innovative development of a theoretical model (CAM) has contributed to 
explaining the mechanism of anosognosia and some neurobehavioral outputs from a 
neurocognitive perspective.

© 2020 Japanese Psychogeriatric Society.

DOI: 10.1111/psyg.12507
PMID: 31930617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]