---
reference_id: "PMID:17875969"
title: "Expanding spectrum of human RYR2-related disease: new electrocardiographic, structural, and genetic features."
authors:
- Bhuiyan ZA
- van den Berg MP
- van Tintelen JP
- Bink-Boelkens MT
- Wiesfeld AC
- Alders M
- Postma AV
- van Langen I
- Mannens MM
- Wilde AA
journal: Circulation
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.711606
keywords:
- Actinin/genetics
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Atrial Fibrillation/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Atrioventricular Node/physiopathology
- "Cardiomyopathy, Dilated/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Chromosome Mapping
- Electrocardiography
- Family Health
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Genotype
- Humans
- Male
- Phenotype
- Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/genetics
- Sinoatrial Node/physiopathology
- "Tachycardia, Ventricular/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanding spectrum of human RYR2-related disease: new electrocardiographic, structural, and genetic features.
**Authors:** Bhuiyan ZA, van den Berg MP, van Tintelen JP, Bink-Boelkens MT, Wiesfeld AC, Alders M, Postma AV, van Langen I, Mannens MM, Wilde AA
**Journal:** Circulation (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.711606](https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.711606)

## Content

1. Circulation. 2007 Oct 2;116(14):1569-76. doi:
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.711606.  Epub 2007 Sep 17.

Expanding spectrum of human RYR2-related disease: new electrocardiographic,
structural, and genetic features.

Bhuiyan ZA(1), van den Berg MP, van Tintelen JP, Bink-Boelkens MT, Wiesfeld AC,
Alders M, Postma AV, van Langen I, Mannens MM, Wilde AA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Centre, University of
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. z.a.bhuiyan@amc.uva.nl

BACKGROUND: Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia is a disease
characterized by ventricular arrhythmias elicited exclusively under adrenergic
stress. Additional features include baseline bradycardia and, in some patients,
right ventricular fatty displacement. The clinical spectrum is expanded by the 2
families described here.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Sixteen members from 2 separate families have been
clinically evaluated and followed over the last 15 years. In addition to
exercise-related ventricular arrhythmias, they showed abnormalities in
sinoatrial node function, as well as atrioventricular nodal function, atrial
fibrillation, and atrial standstill. Left ventricular dysfunction and dilatation
was present in several affected individuals. Linkage analysis mapped the disease
phenotype to a 4-cM region on chromosome 1q42-q43. Conventional polymerase chain
reaction-based screening did not reveal a mutation in either the Ryanodine
receptor 2 gene (RYR2) or ACTN2, the most plausible candidate genes in the
region of interest. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification and
long-range polymerase chain reaction identified a genomic deletion that involved
RYR2 exon-3, segregated in all the affected family members (n=16) in these 2
unlinked families. Further investigation revealed that the genomic deletion
occurred in both families as a result of Alu repeat-mediated polymerase
slippage.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report on a large genomic deletion in RYR2, which
leads to extended clinical phenotypes (eg, sinoatrial node and atrioventricular
node dysfunction, atrial fibrillation, atrial standstill, and dilated
cardiomyopathy). These features have not previously been linked to RYR2.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.107.711606
PMID: 17875969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
