---
reference_id: "PMID:27486739"
title: "Adenovirus: Epidemiology, Global Spread of Novel Serotypes, and Advances in Treatment and Prevention."
authors:
- Lynch JP 3rd
- Kajon AE
journal: Semin Respir Crit Care Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1055/s-0036-1584923
keywords:
- Adenoviridae/classification
- "Adenoviridae Infections/drug therapy, epidemiology, virology"
- "Adenovirus Infections, Human"
- Adult
- Antiviral Agents/therapeutic use
- Child
- Cidofovir
- "Cytosine/analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use"
- Humans
- Military Personnel
- Organophosphonates/therapeutic use
- Prospective Studies
- "Respiratory Tract Infections/drug therapy, epidemiology, virology"
- Serogroup
- "Viral Vaccines/supply & distribution"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adenovirus: Epidemiology, Global Spread of Novel Serotypes, and Advances in Treatment and Prevention.
**Authors:** Lynch JP 3rd, Kajon AE
**Journal:** Semin Respir Crit Care Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0036-1584923](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0036-1584923)

## Content

1. Semin Respir Crit Care Med. 2016 Aug;37(4):586-602. doi:
10.1055/s-0036-1584923.  Epub 2016 Aug 3.

Adenovirus: Epidemiology, Global Spread of Novel Serotypes, and Advances in 
Treatment and Prevention.

Lynch JP 3rd(1), Kajon AE(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care Medicine, Allergy, and Clinical 
Immunology, Department of Internal Medicine, The David Geffen School of Medicine 
at University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California.
(2)Department of Infectious Disease, Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute, 
Albuquerque, New Mexico.

Adenoviruses (AdVs) are DNA viruses that typically cause mild infections 
involving the upper or lower respiratory tract, gastrointestinal tract, or 
conjunctiva. Rare manifestations of AdV infections include hemorrhagic cystitis, 
hepatitis, hemorrhagic colitis, pancreatitis, nephritis, or meningoencephalitis. 
AdV infections are more common in young children, due to lack of humoral 
immunity. Epidemics of AdV infection may occur in healthy children or adults in 
closed or crowded settings (particularly military recruits). The disease is more 
severe and dissemination is more likely in patients with impaired immunity 
(e.g., organ transplant recipients, human immunodeficiency virus infection). 
Fatality rates for untreated severe AdV pneumonia or disseminated disease may 
exceed 50%. More than 50 serotypes of AdV have been identified. Different 
serotypes display different tissue tropisms that correlate with clinical 
manifestations of infection. The predominant serotypes circulating at a given 
time differ among countries or regions, and change over time. Transmission of 
novel strains between countries or across continents and replacement of dominant 
viruses by new strains may occur. Treatment of AdV infections is controversial, 
as prospective, randomized therapeutic trials have not been conducted. Cidofovir 
is the drug of choice for severe AdV infections, but not all patients require 
treatment. Live oral vaccines are highly efficacious in reducing the risk of 
respiratory AdV infection and are in routine use in the military in the United 
States, but currently are not available to civilians.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0036-1584923
PMCID: PMC7171713
PMID: 27486739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]