---
reference_id: "PMID:12687499"
title: "Mutations of MYO6 are associated with recessive deafness, DFNB37."
authors:
- Ahmed ZM
- Morell RJ
- Riazuddin S
- Gropman A
- Shaukat S
- Ahmad MM
- Mohiddin SA
- Fananapazir L
- Caruso RC
- Husnain T
- Khan SN
- Riazuddin S
- Griffith AJ
- Friedman TB
- Wilcox ER
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1086/375122
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Amino Acid Substitution
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 6/genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Deafness/congenital, genetics"
- Family
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genetic Linkage
- Haplotypes
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Myosin Heavy Chains/genetics
- Pakistan
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations of MYO6 are associated with recessive deafness, DFNB37.
**Authors:** Ahmed ZM, Morell RJ, Riazuddin S, Gropman A, Shaukat S, Ahmad MM, Mohiddin SA, Fananapazir L, Caruso RC, Husnain T, Khan SN, Riazuddin S, Griffith AJ, Friedman TB, Wilcox ER
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1086/375122](https://doi.org/10.1086/375122)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2003 May;72(5):1315-22. doi: 10.1086/375122. Epub 2003 Apr 8.

Mutations of MYO6 are associated with recessive deafness, DFNB37.

Ahmed ZM(1), Morell RJ, Riazuddin S, Gropman A, Shaukat S, Ahmad MM, Mohiddin
SA, Fananapazir L, Caruso RC, Husnain T, Khan SN, Riazuddin S, Griffith AJ,
Friedman TB, Wilcox ER.

Author information:
(1)Section on Human Genetics, National Institute on Deafness and Other
Communication Disorders, National Institutes of Health, Rockville, MD 20850,
USA.

Cosegregation of profound, congenital deafness with markers on chromosome 6q13
in three Pakistani families defines a new recessive deafness locus, DFNB37.
Haplotype analyses reveal a 6-cM linkage region, flanked by markers D6S1282 and
D6S1031, that includes the gene encoding unconventional myosin VI. In families
with recessively inherited deafness, DFNB37, our sequence analyses of MYO6
reveal a frameshift mutation (36-37insT), a nonsense mutation (R1166X), and a
missense mutation (E216V). These mutations, along with a previously published
missense allele linked to autosomal dominant progressive hearing loss (DFNA22),
provide an allelic spectrum that probes the relationship between myosin VI
dysfunction and the resulting phenotype.

DOI: 10.1086/375122
PMCID: PMC1180285
PMID: 12687499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
