---
reference_id: "PMID:34980466"
title: Neonatal congenital pulmonary airway malformation associated with mucinous adenocarcinoma and KRAS mutations.
authors:
- Muntean A
- Banias LE
- Ade-Ajayi N
- Patel SB
- McKinney O
- Davenport M
journal: J Pediatr Surg
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2021.12.018
keywords:
- "Adenocarcinoma, Mucinous/genetics, surgery"
- "Cystic Adenomatoid Malformation of Lung, Congenital/diagnosis, genetics, surgery"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Pregnancy
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)/genetics
- Ultrasonography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neonatal congenital pulmonary airway malformation associated with mucinous adenocarcinoma and KRAS mutations.
**Authors:** Muntean A, Banias LE, Ade-Ajayi N, Patel SB, McKinney O, Davenport M
**Journal:** J Pediatr Surg (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2021.12.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2021.12.018)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Surg. 2022 Nov;57(11):520-526. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2021.12.018. 
Epub 2021 Dec 25.

Neonatal congenital pulmonary airway malformation associated with mucinous 
adenocarcinoma and KRAS mutations.

Muntean A(1), Banias LE(1), Ade-Ajayi N(1), Patel SB(1), McKinney O(2), 
Davenport M(3).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Paediatric Surgery, Kings College Hospital, London, UK SE5 
9RS.
(2)Departments of Histopathology, Kings College Hospital, London, UK SE5 9RS.
(3)Departments of Paediatric Surgery, Kings College Hospital, London, UK SE5 
9RS. Electronic address: Markdav2@ntlworld.com.

AIM OF THE STUDY: Congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM) has an 
estimated prevalence in Europe of 1.06/10,000 live births with most being 
detected using maternal ultrasound screening. Malignant transformation is a 
possible complication though its prevalence is unknown and previous reports have 
usually been in older children. We reviewed our experience to identify those 
CPAM cases associated with malignancy.
METHODS: Single centre retrospective review of all surgically treated children 
with antenatally-detected CPAM, with detailed review of cases associated with 
malignancy.
MAIN RESULTS: 210 infants and children underwent resectional surgery for CPAM 
during the period 1994-2020, with 43(20.5%) undergoing surgery during the 
neonatal period. Of these, 3 infants, all males, had undergone surgical 
resection for respiratory distress (at 3, 4 and 8 days of life) with subsequent 
histological confirmation as Stocker type 1 CPAM with clear foci of mucinous 
adenocarcinoma. Subsequent genetic analysis showed somatic KRAS (Kirsten Rat 
Sarcoma Viral Oncogene) mutations in all three cases. No adjuvant treatment was 
required, and all are asymptomatic and disease-free at most recent follow-up (8 
months, 2 and 6 years) CONCLUSIONS: This series highlights a clear association 
between type 1 CPAM and mucinous adenocarcinoma with KRAS point mutations, 
suggesting that the process of carcinogenesis has the potential to start in 
utero. This underlines the importance of discussing the risk of malignancy in 
prenatal and postnatal counselling.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2021.12.018
PMID: 34980466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.