---
reference_id: "PMID:36201194"
title: Outcomes After Treatment With Cobimetinib in Patients With Rosai-Dorfman Disease Based on KRAS and MEK Alteration Status.
authors:
- Abeykoon JP
- Rech KL
- Young JR
- Ravindran A
- Ruan GJ
- Dasari S
- Morlote DM
- King RL
- Rummage C
- Zanwar S
- Acosta-Medina AM
- Tobin WO
- Shah MV
- Bennani NN
- Vassallo R
- Ryu JH
- Koster MJ
- Davidge-Pitts CJ
- Witzig TE
- Goyal G
- Go RS
- Mayo Clinic–University of Alabama at Birmingham Histiocytosis Working Group
journal: JAMA Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2022.4432
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- Male
- "Histiocytosis, Sinus/drug therapy, pathology"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins p21(ras)/genetics
- Retrospective Studies
- Cohort Studies
- Neoplasms
- Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase Kinases
- Azetidines
- Piperidines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcomes After Treatment With Cobimetinib in Patients With Rosai-Dorfman Disease Based on KRAS and MEK Alteration Status.
**Authors:** Abeykoon JP, Rech KL, Young JR, Ravindran A, Ruan GJ, Dasari S, Morlote DM, King RL, Rummage C, Zanwar S, Acosta-Medina AM, Tobin WO, Shah MV, Bennani NN, Vassallo R, Ryu JH, Koster MJ, Davidge-Pitts CJ, Witzig TE, Goyal G, Go RS, Mayo Clinic–University of Alabama at Birmingham Histiocytosis Working Group
**Journal:** JAMA Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaoncol.2022.4432](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaoncol.2022.4432)

## Content

1. JAMA Oncol. 2022 Dec 1;8(12):1816-1820. doi: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2022.4432.

Outcomes After Treatment With Cobimetinib in Patients With Rosai-Dorfman Disease 
Based on KRAS and MEK Alteration Status.

Abeykoon JP(1), Rech KL(2), Young JR(3), Ravindran A(2), Ruan GJ(1), Dasari 
S(4), Morlote DM(5), King RL(2), Rummage C(6), Zanwar S(1), Acosta-Medina AM(1), 
Tobin WO(7), Shah MV(1), Bennani NN(1), Vassallo R(8), Ryu JH(8), Koster MJ(9), 
Davidge-Pitts CJ(10), Witzig TE(1), Goyal G(11)(12), Go RS(1); Mayo 
Clinic–University of Alabama at Birmingham Histiocytosis Working Group.

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, Minnesota.
(2)Division of Hematopathology, Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(3)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(4)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(5)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham.
(6)Hematology/Oncology Clinical Pharmacist, University of Alabama at Birmingham.
(7)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(8)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota.
(9)Division of Rheumatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(10)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, Metabolism, and Nutrition, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, Minnesota.
(11)Division of Hematology-Oncology, University of Alabama at Birmingham.
(12)Research Collaborator (limited tenure), Division of Hematology, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, Minnesota.

IMPORTANCE: Rosai-Dorfman disease (RDD) is a rare histiocytic neoplasm with 
recent studies showing alterations in the MAPK pathway, most commonly in the 
KRAS and MEK genes in about 40% of patients. Reports on the use of MEK-inhibitor 
therapy in RDD have been limited to small case studies. There are no approved 
treatments for this neoplasm, and therefore patients with RDD need efficacious 
treatments.
OBJECTIVE: To study the outcomes after treatment with cobimetinib based on MAPK 
pathway alterations in patients with RDD.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This retrospective cohort study conducted at 
2 tertiary care centers included patients with RDD who underwent treatment with 
cobimetinib between January 1, 2013, and December 1, 2021. Cobimetinib was 
administered at a dosage of 20 to 60 mg orally once daily as a single agent for 
21 days in a 28-day cycle. Pathology was centrally reviewed. Response assessment 
was centrally conducted and was based on the established positron emission 
radiography response criteria used for clinical trials of targeted therapies in 
histiocytosis.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Main outcomes were overall response rate (ORR), 
progression-free survival (PFS), adverse events (AEs) of cobimetinib in the 
entire cohort, and ORRs and PFS based on MAPK pathway alterations in patients 
with RDD.
RESULTS: A total of 16 patients (median [range] age at cobimetinib initiation, 
57 [31-74] years; 11 [69%] women) were included in the study. The median 
follow-up duration was 19.0 months (95% CI, 8.4-27.8 months). The ORR was 63% 
(n = 10), including 5 complete responses and 5 partial responses. Somatic 
alterations in the KRAS or MEK genes were detected in 8 (50%) patients. Patients 
with KRAS or MEK alterations had significantly higher ORR (88% vs 38%; P = .03), 
deeper responses (complete responses among responders: 71% vs 0%; P = .002), and 
better PFS (at 1 year, 100% vs 29% were free from progression or death, 
respectively; P < .001) compared with those without such alterations. Grade 2 or 
higher AEs occurred in 12 (75%) patients, and 9 (56%) required dose reduction or 
temporary/permanent treatment discontinuation due to AEs.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this cohort study, treatment with cobimetinib was 
associated with positive outcomes in KRAS- or MEK-variant RDD. However, AEs 
requiring dose modifications were common.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaoncol.2022.4432
PMCID: PMC9539729
PMID: 36201194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Morlote 
reported receiving personal fees from Thermo Fisher outside the submitted work. 
Dr King reported receiving grants from Celgene/BMS (research funding unrelated 
to current study) outside the submitted work. Dr Tobin reported receiving grants 
from Mallinckrodt Inc outside the submitted work. Dr Bennani reported serving on 
an advisory board with no personal compensation for Daiichi Sankyo Inc, Kyowa 
Kirin, Vividion Therapeutics, Kymera, Secura Bio, and Affimed GmbH outside the 
submitted work. Dr Vassallo reported receiving grants from Pfizer, Bristol Myers 
Squibb, and Sun Pharma outside the submitted work. No other disclosures were 
reported.