---
reference_id: "PMID:22473935"
title: Clinical and genetic findings in a large cohort of patients with ryanodine receptor 1 gene-associated myopathies.
authors:
- Klein A
- Lillis S
- Munteanu I
- Scoto M
- Zhou H
- Quinlivan R
- Straub V
- Manzur AY
- Roper H
- Jeannet PY
- Rakowicz W
- Jones DH
- Jensen UB
- Wraige E
- Trump N
- Schara U
- Lochmuller H
- Sarkozy A
- Kingston H
- Norwood F
- Damian M
- Kirschner J
- Longman C
- Roberts M
- Auer-Grumbach M
- Hughes I
- Bushby K
- Sewry C
- Robb S
- Abbs S
- Jungbluth H
- Muntoni F
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/humu.22056
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and genetic findings in a large cohort of patients with ryanodine receptor 1 gene-associated myopathies.
**Authors:** Klein A, Lillis S, Munteanu I, Scoto M, Zhou H, Quinlivan R, Straub V, Manzur AY, Roper H, Jeannet PY, Rakowicz W, Jones DH, Jensen UB, Wraige E, Trump N, Schara U, Lochmuller H, Sarkozy A, Kingston H, Norwood F, Damian M, Kirschner J, Longman C, Roberts M, Auer-Grumbach M, Hughes I, Bushby K, Sewry C, Robb S, Abbs S, Jungbluth H, Muntoni F
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.22056](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.22056)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2012 Jun;33(6):981-8. doi: 10.1002/humu.22056. Epub 2012 Apr 4.

Clinical and genetic findings in a large cohort of patients with ryanodine 
receptor 1 gene-associated myopathies.

Klein A(1), Lillis S, Munteanu I, Scoto M, Zhou H, Quinlivan R, Straub V, Manzur 
AY, Roper H, Jeannet PY, Rakowicz W, Jones DH, Jensen UB, Wraige E, Trump N, 
Schara U, Lochmuller H, Sarkozy A, Kingston H, Norwood F, Damian M, Kirschner J, 
Longman C, Roberts M, Auer-Grumbach M, Hughes I, Bushby K, Sewry C, Robb S, Abbs 
S, Jungbluth H, Muntoni F.

Author information:
(1)Paediatric Neurology, University Children's Hospital Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland.

Erratum in
    Hum Mutat. 2012 Aug;33(8):1310.

Ryanodine receptor 1 (RYR1) mutations are a common cause of congenital 
myopathies associated with both dominant and recessive inheritance. 
Histopathological findings frequently feature central cores or multi-minicores, 
more rarely, type 1 predominance/uniformity, fiber-type disproportion, increased 
internal nucleation, and fatty and connective tissue. We describe 71 families, 
35 associated with dominant RYR1 mutations and 36 with recessive inheritance. 
Five of the dominant mutations and 35 of the 55 recessive mutations have not 
been previously reported. Dominant mutations, typically missense, were 
frequently located in recognized mutational hotspot regions, while recessive 
mutations were distributed throughout the entire coding sequence. Recessive 
mutations included nonsense and splice mutations expected to result in reduced 
RyR1 protein. There was wide clinical variability. As a group, dominant 
mutations were associated with milder phenotypes; patients with recessive 
inheritance had earlier onset, more weakness, and functional limitations. 
Extraocular and bulbar muscle involvement was almost exclusively observed in the 
recessive group. In conclusion, our study reports a large number of novel RYR1 
mutations and indicates that recessive variants are at least as frequent as the 
dominant ones. Assigning pathogenicity to novel mutations is often difficult, 
and interpretation of genetic results in the context of clinical, histological, 
and muscle magnetic resonance imaging findings is essential.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22056
PMID: 22473935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]