---
reference_id: "PMID:41784795"
title: "Evaluating the diagnostic accuracy of a screening questionnaire for detecting hidradenitis suppurativa: a pooled analysis of accuracy measures from the Global Hidradenitis Suppurativa Atlas (GHiSA) study."
authors:
- Bouazzi D
- Lophaven S
- Hagan PG
- Botvid S
- Hove LS
- Prens EP
- Knecht-Gurwin K
- Szepietowski JC
- Anaba EL
- Chehad AS
- Zobiri S
- Serradj A
- Bhuiyan MSI
- Noor T
- Guillem P
- Parvizi MM
- Saki N
- Alpsoy E
- Vardar C
- Kanni T
- Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ
- Frew JW
- Maharbi WHAA
- van Huijstee JC
- Aarts P
- Dewi ST
- Febriana SA
- Indrastuti N
- Suryawati N
- Pangastuti M
- Adji A
- Akhyar G
- Nopriyati
- Hazlianda CP
- Reyes-Baraona F
- Matas C
- Saeed H
- Moodley A
- Binamer Y
- Kamil MAA
- Jocic I
- Mijuskovic Z
- Mallawaarachchi K
- Gangani C
- Tusheva I
- Boshkovski VB
- Hu D
- Geng S
- Medianfar CE
- Saunte DML
- Chandran NS
- Van Der Zee HH
- Zouboulis CC
- Benhadou F
- Villumsen B
- Alavi A
- Ibekwe PU
- Hamzavi IH
- Ingram JR
- Naik HB
- Garg A
- Boer J
- Christensen R
- Jemec GBE
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljag005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluating the diagnostic accuracy of a screening questionnaire for detecting hidradenitis suppurativa: a pooled analysis of accuracy measures from the Global Hidradenitis Suppurativa Atlas (GHiSA) study.
**Authors:** Bouazzi D, Lophaven S, Hagan PG, Botvid S, Hove LS, Prens EP, Knecht-Gurwin K, Szepietowski JC, Anaba EL, Chehad AS, Zobiri S, Serradj A, Bhuiyan MSI, Noor T, Guillem P, Parvizi MM, Saki N, Alpsoy E, Vardar C, Kanni T, Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ, Frew JW, Maharbi WHAA, van Huijstee JC, Aarts P, Dewi ST, Febriana SA, Indrastuti N, Suryawati N, Pangastuti M, Adji A, Akhyar G, Nopriyati, Hazlianda CP, Reyes-Baraona F, Matas C, Saeed H, Moodley A, Binamer Y, Kamil MAA, Jocic I, Mijuskovic Z, Mallawaarachchi K, Gangani C, Tusheva I, Boshkovski VB, Hu D, Geng S, Medianfar CE, Saunte DML, Chandran NS, Van Der Zee HH, Zouboulis CC, Benhadou F, Villumsen B, Alavi A, Ibekwe PU, Hamzavi IH, Ingram JR, Naik HB, Garg A, Boer J, Christensen R, Jemec GBE
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bjd/ljag005](https://doi.org/10.1093/bjd/ljag005)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2026 Jan 9:ljag005. doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljag005. Online ahead of 
print.

Evaluating the diagnostic accuracy of a screening questionnaire for detecting 
hidradenitis suppurativa: a pooled analysis of accuracy measures from the Global 
Hidradenitis Suppurativa Atlas (GHiSA) study.

Bouazzi D(1)(2)(3), Lophaven S, Hagan PG, Botvid S(2), Hove LS, Prens EP, 
Knecht-Gurwin K, Szepietowski JC, Anaba EL, Chehad AS, Zobiri S, Serradj A, 
Bhuiyan MSI, Noor T, Guillem P, Parvizi MM, Saki N, Alpsoy E, Vardar C, Kanni T, 
Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ, Frew JW, Maharbi WHAA, van Huijstee JC, Aarts P, Dewi 
ST, Febriana SA, Indrastuti N, Suryawati N, Pangastuti M, Adji A, Akhyar G, 
Nopriyati, Hazlianda CP, Reyes-Baraona F, Matas C, Saeed H, Moodley A, Binamer 
Y, Kamil MAA, Jocic I, Mijuskovic Z, Mallawaarachchi K, Gangani C, Tusheva I, 
Boshkovski VB, Hu D, Geng S, Medianfar CE(1)(2), Saunte DML(1)(2), Chandran NS, 
Van Der Zee HH, Zouboulis CC, Benhadou F, Villumsen B, Alavi A, Ibekwe PU, 
Hamzavi IH, Ingram JR, Naik HB, Garg A, Boer J, Christensen R(3), Jemec 
GBE(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Zealand University Hospital, Roskilde, Denmark.
(2)Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Section for Biostatistics and Evidence-Based Research, The Parker Institute, 
Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is an inflammatory skin condition that 
is associated with a prolonged diagnostic delay of approximately 7-10 years. The 
diagnostic delay can be attributed to various factors, including low awareness 
of diagnostic criteria among nondermatological healthcare professionals often 
leading to misdiagnosis. Screening questionnaires have been proposed for the 
diagnosis of HS. One such questionnaire has been validated and used in the 
Global Hidradenitis Suppurativa Atlas (GHiSA) Global Prevalence Study (GPS).
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate and provide a summary of the diagnostic accuracy 
measures (pooled sensitivity and specificity) of the screening questionnaire 
employed in the GHiSA GPS.
METHODS: All studies that adhered to the methodology specified by the GHiSA and 
provided diagnostic accuracy data were eligible for inclusion. Data on 
geographical location and diagnostic accuracy parameters (true positive, false 
positive, true negative and false negative) were extracted from the included 
studies and entered in duplicate into Microsoft Excel independently by two 
authors. The quality of the studies was assessed using the quality assessment of 
diagnostic accuracy studies (QUADAS-2) tool.
RESULTS: Data from 25 studies carried out in 23 countries were included in the 
pooled analysis. The QUADAS-2 assessment revealed a high risk of bias in the 
domains 'reference standard' and 'patient flow'. For the applicability of the 
studies, there were concerns about 'patient selection'. Substantial variations 
in sensitivity (0.43-1.00) and specificity (0.15-1.00) values were observed 
globally. A bivariate random effects model showed a pooled sensitivity of 0.88 
[95% confidence interval (CI) 0.80-0.94] and a pooled specificity of 0.86 (95% 
CI 0.78-0.91). The summary receiver operating curve revealed a clustering of 
studies in the upper left corner, indicating a sensitivity and specificity close 
to 1. The area under the curve was 0.93, suggesting excellent accuracy.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite substantial variations in diagnostic estimates around the 
world, the pooled analysis indicated that the accuracy of the GHiSA screening 
questionnaire was excellent. The screening questionnaire may prove useful for 
triage, ensuring that only individuals fitting the criteria for HS see 
specialized dermatological care.

Plain Language Summary: Hidradenitis suppurativa is a long-lasting and painful 
skin condition. It is often called ‘HS’ for short. HS can have negative effects 
on a person’s quality of life. It often takes between 7 and 10 years to diagnose 
the condition. This may be because some doctors are not aware of the symptoms, 
or because an incorrect diagnosis is made before the right one. To try to solve 
this problem, a questionnaire has been created to help doctors diagnose HS. This 
questionnaire has been used in studies carried out by an organization called the 
Global Hidradenitis Suppurativa Atlas (or ‘GHiSA’ for short). This international 
study examined how accurate the questionnaire was in helping to diagnose HS. The 
researchers looked at data from 25 studies that followed methods recommended by 
GHiSA. The studies came from 23 different countries and data from the studies 
was combined. The data was also analysed by country. The researchers found that 
the questionnaire was very effective. Using the questionnaire helped doctors 
correctly identify 88% of people who did have HS. They also correctly identified 
86% of people who did not have the condition. The researchers found that the 
accuracy of diagnosis was different in different countries. Using the 
questionnaire could help doctors diagnose and assess people with HS. This could 
reduce delays in diagnosing the condition and lead to better outcomes for 
people.

© The Author(s) 2026. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of British 
Association of Dermatologists. All rights reserved. For commercial re-use, 
please contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for 
reprints. All other permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service 
via the Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information 
please contact journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bjd/ljag005
PMID: 41784795