---
reference_id: "PMID:26906964"
title: A clinical approach to diagnosis of autoimmune encephalitis.
authors:
- Graus F
- Titulaer MJ
- Balu R
- Benseler S
- Bien CG
- Cellucci T
- Cortese I
- Dale RC
- Gelfand JM
- Geschwind M
- Glaser CA
- Honnorat J
- Höftberger R
- Iizuka T
- Irani SR
- Lancaster E
- Leypoldt F
- Prüss H
- Rae-Grant A
- Reindl M
- Rosenfeld MR
- Rostásy K
- Saiz A
- Venkatesan A
- Vincent A
- Wandinger KP
- Waters P
- Dalmau J
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(15)00401-9
keywords:
- Autoimmune Diseases of the Nervous System/diagnosis
- Encephalitis/diagnosis
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A clinical approach to diagnosis of autoimmune encephalitis.
**Authors:** Graus F, Titulaer MJ, Balu R, Benseler S, Bien CG, Cellucci T, Cortese I, Dale RC, Gelfand JM, Geschwind M, Glaser CA, Honnorat J, Höftberger R, Iizuka T, Irani SR, Lancaster E, Leypoldt F, Prüss H, Rae-Grant A, Reindl M, Rosenfeld MR, Rostásy K, Saiz A, Venkatesan A, Vincent A, Wandinger KP, Waters P, Dalmau J
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(15)00401-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(15)00401-9)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2016 Apr;15(4):391-404. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(15)00401-9.
Epub  2016 Feb 20.

A clinical approach to diagnosis of autoimmune encephalitis.

Graus F(1), Titulaer MJ(2), Balu R(3), Benseler S(4), Bien CG(5), Cellucci T(6), 
Cortese I(7), Dale RC(8), Gelfand JM(9), Geschwind M(9), Glaser CA(10), Honnorat 
J(11), Höftberger R(12), Iizuka T(13), Irani SR(14), Lancaster E(3), Leypoldt 
F(15), Prüss H(16), Rae-Grant A(17), Reindl M(18), Rosenfeld MR(19), Rostásy 
K(20), Saiz A(21), Venkatesan A(22), Vincent A(14), Wandinger KP(23), Waters 
P(14), Dalmau J(24).

Author information:
(1)Neuroimmunology Program, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i 
Sunyer, Barcelona, Spain; Service of Neurology, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, 
Spain. Electronic address: fgraus@clinic.ub.es.
(2)Department of Neurology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Alberta Children Hospital, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(5)Epilepsy Centre Bethel, Krankenhaus Mara, Bielefeld, Germany.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, McMaster Children's Hospital, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, ON, Canada.
(7)Neuroimmunology Clinic, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(8)Neuroimmunology Group, Children's Hospital at Westmead, University of Sydney, 
Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(9)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(10)Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Kaiser Permanente, Oakland 
Medical Center and University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(11)French Reference Center on Paraneoplastic Neurological Syndrome, Hospices 
Civils De Lyon, Hôpital Neurologique, Inserm U1028, CNRS UMR 5292, Lyon's 
Neurosciences Research Center, Université Claude-Bernard Lyon-1, Lyon, France.
(12)Institute of Neurology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(13)Department of Neurology, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Kanagawa, 
Japan.
(14)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, John Radcliffe Hospital, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(15)Neuroimmunology, Institute of Clinical Chemistry, and Department of 
Neurology, University Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany.
(16)Department of Neurology, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, 
Germany; German Center for Neurodegenerative Disorders Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(17)Department of Neurology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH, USA.
(18)Clinical Department of Neurology, Medical University of Innsbruck, 
Innsbruck, Austria.
(19)Neuroimmunology Program, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i 
Sunyer, Barcelona, Spain.
(20)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Children's Hospital Datteln, 
Witten/Herdecke University, Datteln, Germany.
(21)Neuroimmunology Program, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i 
Sunyer, Barcelona, Spain; Service of Neurology, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(22)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(23)Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Department of Neurology, University 
Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Lübeck, Germany.
(24)Neuroimmunology Program, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i 
Sunyer, Barcelona, Spain; Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA; Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats 
(ICREA), Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address: jdalmau@clinic.ub.es.

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2016 Apr;15(4):349-50. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(16)00025-9.
    Lancet Neurol. 2016 Sep;15(10):1009-10. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(16)30140-5.
    Lancet Neurol. 2016 Sep;15(10):1010. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(16)30130-2.
    J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2021 Jul;92(7):686. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2021-326096.
    Neurologia (Engl Ed). 2023 Oct;38(8):601-602. doi: 
10.1016/j.nrleng.2022.09.005.

Encephalitis is a severe inflammatory disorder of the brain with many possible 
causes and a complex differential diagnosis. Advances in autoimmune encephalitis 
research in the past 10 years have led to the identification of new syndromes 
and biomarkers that have transformed the diagnostic approach to these disorders. 
However, existing criteria for autoimmune encephalitis are too reliant on 
antibody testing and response to immunotherapy, which might delay the diagnosis. 
We reviewed the literature and gathered the experience of a team of experts with 
the aims of developing a practical, syndrome-based diagnostic approach to 
autoimmune encephalitis and providing guidelines to navigate through the 
differential diagnosis. Because autoantibody test results and response to 
therapy are not available at disease onset, we based the initial diagnostic 
approach on neurological assessment and conventional tests that are accessible 
to most clinicians. Through logical differential diagnosis, levels of evidence 
for autoimmune encephalitis (possible, probable, or definite) are achieved, 
which can lead to prompt immunotherapy.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(15)00401-9
PMCID: PMC5066574
PMID: 26906964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests FG receives royalties 
from licensing fees to Euroimmun for the use of IgLON5 as a diagnostic test. MJT 
has received research funding for consultancy work for MedImmune, and a travel 
grant for Sun Pharma. CGB has given scientific advice to Eisai and UCB; 
undertaken industry-funded travel with support from Eisai, UCB, Desitin, and 
Grifols; obtained honoraria for speaking engagements from Eisai, UCB, Desitin, 
Diamed, Fresenius Medical Care; and received research support from Astellas 
Pharma, Octapharma, Diamed, and Fresenius Medical Care. CGB is an employee of 
Krankenhaus Mara, Bielefeld, Germany, which runs a laboratory for the detection 
of autoantibodies including those described in this paper; external senders are 
charged for antibody diagnostics. RCD has received research funding from the 
Star Scientific Foundation and Pfizer Neuroscience and speaker’s honoraria from 
Biogen Idec and Bristol-Myers Squibb. JMG has received compensation for medical 
legal consulting and for consulting on a scientific advisory board for Medimmune 
and Roche; he has received research funding through the University of 
California, San Francisco, USA, from Quest Diagnostic for work on a dementia 
care pathway. MG receives grants from Quest Diagnostics and has received 
personal fees for consultancy work from MedaCorp, Gerson-Lehman Group, Best 
Doctors, Advance Medical, Inc, and Optio LLC. JH receives royalties from 
licensing fees to Athena Diagnostics, Euroimmun, and ravo Diagnostika for a 
patent for the use of CV2/CRMP5 as diagnostic tests. SRI receives royalties from 
licensing fees to Euroimmun for patents for the use of LGI1, CASPR2, and 
contactin-2 as autoantibody tests. EL has received speaker’s honoraria and 
consultancy fees from Grifols, and consultancy fees from Medimmune. FL has 
received speaker’s honoraria from Grifols, Teva, and Biogen Idec and is employed 
by University Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany, which offers 
commercial antibody testing without any personal reimbursements. MR reports that 
his employers, the University Hospital and Medical University of Innsbruck, 
Austria, receive payments for antibody assays (NMDA receptor, AQP4, and other 
autoantibodies) and for AQP4 antibody validation experiments organised by 
Euroimmun. MRR receives royalties from licensing fees to Euroimmun for a patent 
for the use of NMDA receptor as an autoantibody test, and from licensing fees to 
Athena Diagnostics for a patent for the use of Ma2. AS has received compensation 
for consulting services and speaker honoraria from Bayer-Schering, Merck-Serono, 
Biogen Idec, Sanofi-Aventis, Teva, and Novartis. AVe reports personal fees from 
Medimmune. AVi receives royalties from licensing fees to Euroimmun for the use 
of LGI1 and CASPR2 as diagnostic tests. PW receives royalties for the use of 
LGI1 and CASPR2 as autoantibody diagnostic tests; is a named inventor on a 
patent for the use of GABAA receptor as an autoantibody test; and has received 
speaker honoraria from Biogen Idec and Euroimmun. JD receives royalties from 
licensing fees to Athena Diagnostics for a patent for the use of Ma2 as an 
autoantibody test; licensing fees to Euroimmun for patents for the use of NMDA 
receptor and GABAB receptor as autoantibody tests; licensing fees for the use of 
DPPX, GABAA receptor, and IgLON5 antibodies as diagnostic tests; and has 
received a research grant from Euroimmun. RB, SB, TC, IC, CAG, RH, TI, HP, AR-G, 
KR, and K-PW declare no competing interests. None of the funding sources had any 
influence in the preparation of this Position Paper.