---
reference_id: "PMID:9158663"
title: Effect of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency on neutrophil function.
authors:
- Ardati KO
- Bajakian KM
- Tabbara KS
journal: Acta Haematol
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1159/000203685
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency on neutrophil function.
**Authors:** Ardati KO, Bajakian KM, Tabbara KS
**Journal:** Acta Haematol (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000203685](https://doi.org/10.1159/000203685)

## Content

1. Acta Haematol. 1997;97(4):211-5. doi: 10.1159/000203685.

Effect of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency on neutrophil function.

Ardati KO(1), Bajakian KM, Tabbara KS.

Author information:
(1)Arabian Gulf University College of Medicine and Medical Sciences, Manama, 
Bahrain.

The bactericidal activity of neutrophils depends primarily on free oxygen 
radicals released by the activation of NADPH oxidase when neutrophils are 
stimulated by microorganisms. Severe glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) 
deficiency is associated with decreased NADPH production. Increased 
susceptibility to recurrent bacterial infections in children with severe 
neutrophil G6PD deficiency as a consequence of decreased NADPH production has 
been reported earlier. In this study, the in vitro activity of neutrophils from 
normal and G6PD-deficient individuals was assessed by measuring the [14C]CO2 
released via the hexose monophosphate shunt from radiolabeled [1-14C]-glucose 
and the nitroblue tetrazolium (NBT) dye reduction test. Our results show that 
the G6PD activity of neutrophils from 48 individuals, identified as severely 
erythrocyte (RBC) G6PD deficient (< 2 U/10(12) RBC) was 23% of the enzyme 
activity of neutrophils from 53 individuals with normal RBC G6PD levels (98.8 
U/10(12) RBC). However, the results of functional assays of neutrophils as 
measured by hexose monophosphate shunt and the NBT test were comparable in 
G6PD-deficient and normal individuals, suggesting that a reduced activity of 
G6PD to as low as 23% of normal does not affect neutrophil function.

DOI: 10.1159/000203685
PMID: 9158663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]