---
reference_id: "PMID:26204423"
title: "The Cockayne Syndrome Natural History (CoSyNH) study: clinical findings in 102 individuals and recommendations for care."
authors:
- Wilson BT
- Stark Z
- Sutton RE
- Danda S
- Ekbote AV
- Elsayed SM
- Gibson L
- Goodship JA
- Jackson AP
- Keng WT
- King MD
- McCann E
- Motojima T
- Murray JE
- Omata T
- Pilz D
- Pope K
- Sugita K
- White SM
- Wilson IJ
journal: Genet Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/gim.2015.110
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Cockayne Syndrome/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, physiopathology"
- DNA Helicases/genetics
- DNA Repair/genetics
- DNA Repair Enzymes/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Poly-ADP-Ribose Binding Proteins
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Cockayne Syndrome Natural History (CoSyNH) study: clinical findings in 102 individuals and recommendations for care.
**Authors:** Wilson BT, Stark Z, Sutton RE, Danda S, Ekbote AV, Elsayed SM, Gibson L, Goodship JA, Jackson AP, Keng WT, King MD, McCann E, Motojima T, Murray JE, Omata T, Pilz D, Pope K, Sugita K, White SM, Wilson IJ
**Journal:** Genet Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/gim.2015.110](https://doi.org/10.1038/gim.2015.110)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2016 May;18(5):483-93. doi: 10.1038/gim.2015.110. Epub 2015 Jul 23.

The Cockayne Syndrome Natural History (CoSyNH) study: clinical findings in 102 
individuals and recommendations for care.

Wilson BT(1)(2), Stark Z(3), Sutton RE(1), Danda S(4), Ekbote AV(4), Elsayed 
SM(5)(6), Gibson L(7), Goodship JA(1)(2), Jackson AP(8), Keng WT(9), King 
MD(10)(11), McCann E(12), Motojima T(13), Murray JE(8), Omata T(13), Pilz D(14), 
Pope K(3), Sugita K(15), White SM(3)(16), Wilson IJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Northern Genetics Service, Newcastle Upon Tyne NHS Foundation Trust, 
International Centre for Life, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(2)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, International Centre for 
Life, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(3)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.
(4)Clinical Genetics Unit, Christian Medical College, Vellore, India.
(5)Medical Genetics Center, Korba, Cairo, Egypt.
(6)Children's Hospital, Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt.
(7)Paediatrics & Child Health, University College Cork, Cork, Republic of 
Ireland.
(8)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, 
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(9)Clinical Genetics, Hospital Kuala Lumpur, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(10)Paediatric Neurology, Temple Street Children's University Hospital, Dublin, 
Republic of Ireland.
(11)School of Medicine and Medical Science, University College Dublin, Dublin, 
Republic of Ireland.
(12)Department of Clinical Genetics, Glan Clwyd Hospital, Rhyl, Denbighshire, 
UK.
(13)Division of Child Neurology, Chiba Children's Hospital, Chiba, Japan.
(14)Institute of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, UK.
(15)Division of Child Health, Faculty of Education, Chiba University, Chiba, 
Japan.
(16)Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.

PURPOSE: Cockayne syndrome (CS) is a rare, autosomal-recessive disorder 
characterized by microcephaly, impaired postnatal growth, and premature 
pathological aging. It has historically been considered a DNA repair disorder; 
fibroblasts from classic patients often exhibit impaired transcription-coupled 
nucleotide excision repair. Previous studies have largely been restricted to 
case reports and small series, and no guidelines for care have been established.
METHODS: One hundred two study participants were identified through a network of 
collaborating clinicians and the Amy and Friends CS support groups. Families 
with a diagnosis of CS could also self-recruit. Comprehensive clinical 
information for analysis was obtained directly from families and their 
clinicians.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: We present the most complete evaluation of Cockayne 
syndrome to date, including detailed information on the prevalence and onset of 
clinical features, achievement of neurodevelopmental milestones, and patient 
management. We confirm that the most valuable prognostic factor in CS is the 
presence of early cataracts. Using this evidence, we have created simple 
guidelines for the care of individuals with CS. We aim to assist clinicians in 
the recognition, diagnosis, and management of this condition and to enable 
families to understand what problems they may encounter as CS progresses.Genet 
Med 18 5, 483-493.

DOI: 10.1038/gim.2015.110
PMCID: PMC4857186
PMID: 26204423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]