---
reference_id: "PMID:9671744"
title: Variable and tissue-specific hormone resistance in heterotrimeric Gs protein alpha-subunit (Gsalpha) knockout mice is due to tissue-specific imprinting of the gsalpha gene.
authors:
- Yu S
- Yu D
- Lee E
- Eckhaus M
- Lee R
- Corria Z
- Accili D
- Westphal H
- Weinstein LS
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.95.15.8715
keywords:
- Alleles
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- DNA Primers
- Female
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits, Gs/genetics"
- "Genes, Lethal"
- Genetic Vectors
- Genomic Imprinting
- Homozygote
- Kidney Cortex/metabolism
- Kidney Medulla/metabolism
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Parathyroid Hormone/pharmacology
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variable and tissue-specific hormone resistance in heterotrimeric Gs protein alpha-subunit (Gsalpha) knockout mice is due to tissue-specific imprinting of the gsalpha gene.
**Authors:** Yu S, Yu D, Lee E, Eckhaus M, Lee R, Corria Z, Accili D, Westphal H, Weinstein LS
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.95.15.8715](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.95.15.8715)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Jul 21;95(15):8715-20. doi:
10.1073/pnas.95.15.8715.

Variable and tissue-specific hormone resistance in heterotrimeric Gs protein
alpha-subunit (Gsalpha) knockout mice is due to tissue-specific imprinting of
the gsalpha gene.

Yu S(1), Yu D, Lee E, Eckhaus M, Lee R, Corria Z, Accili D, Westphal H,
Weinstein LS.

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Diseases Branch, National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive and
Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO), an autosomal dominant disorder
characterized by short stature, obesity, and skeletal defects, is associated
with heterozygous inactivating mutations of GNAS1, the gene encoding the
heterotrimeric G protein alpha-subunit (Gsalpha) that couples multiple receptors
to the stimulation of adenylyl cyclase. It has remained unclear why only some
AHO patients present with multihormone resistance and why AHO patients
demonstrate resistance to some hormones [e.g., parathyroid hormone (PTH)] but
not to others (e.g., vasopressin), even though all activate adenylyl cyclase. We
generated mice with a null allele of the mouse homolog Gnas. Homozygous Gs
deficiency is embryonically lethal. Heterozygotes with maternal (m-/+) and
paternal (+/p-) inheritance of the Gnas null allele have distinct phenotypes,
suggesting that Gnas is an imprinted gene. PTH resistance is present in m-/+,
but not +/p-, mice. Gsalpha expression in the renal cortex (the site of PTH
action) is markedly reduced in m-/+ but not in +/p- mice, demonstrating that the
Gnas paternal allele is imprinted in this tissue. Gnas is also imprinted in
brown and white adipose tissue. The maximal physiological response to
vasopressin (urinary concentrating ability) is normal in both m-/+ and +/p- mice
and Gnas is not imprinted in the renal inner medulla (the site of vasopressin
action). Tissue-specific imprinting of Gnas is likely the mechanism for variable
and tissue-specific hormone resistance in these mice and a similar mechanism
might explain the variable phenotype in AHO.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.15.8715
PMCID: PMC21142
PMID: 9671744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
