---
reference_id: "PMID:39081340"
title: Genotype-relevant neuroimaging features in low-grade epilepsy-associated tumors.
authors:
- Iijima K
- Fujii H
- Suzuki F
- Murayama K
- Goto YI
- Saito Y
- Sano T
- Suzuki H
- Miyata H
- Kimura Y
- Nakashima T
- Suzuki H
- Iwasaki M
- Sato N
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2024.1419104
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotype-relevant neuroimaging features in low-grade epilepsy-associated tumors.
**Authors:** Iijima K, Fujii H, Suzuki F, Murayama K, Goto YI, Saito Y, Sano T, Suzuki H, Miyata H, Kimura Y, Nakashima T, Suzuki H, Iwasaki M, Sato N
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2024.1419104](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2024.1419104)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2024 Jul 16;15:1419104. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2024.1419104. 
eCollection 2024.

Genotype-relevant neuroimaging features in low-grade epilepsy-associated tumors.

Iijima K(1), Fujii H(2), Suzuki F(2), Murayama K(3), Goto YI(3), Saito Y(4)(5), 
Sano T(4), Suzuki H(6), Miyata H(7), Kimura Y(2), Nakashima T(8), Suzuki H(8), 
Iwasaki M(1), Sato N(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, National Center Hospital, National Center of 
Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Radiology, National Center Hospital, National Center of 
Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Medical Genome Center, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, 
Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, National Center Hospital, 
National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Neurology, Tokyo Metropolitan Geriatric Hospital and Institute 
of Gerontology, Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, National Hospital 
Organization Sendai Medical Center, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.
(7)Department of Neuropathology, Research Institute for Brain and Blood Vessels, 
Akita Cerebrospinal and Cardiovascular Center, Akita, Japan.
(8)Division of Brain Tumor Translational Research, National Cancer Center 
Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Low-grade epilepsy-associated tumors are the second most common 
histopathological diagnoses in cases of drug-resistant focal epilepsy. However, 
the connection between neuroimaging features and genetic alterations in these 
tumors is unclear, prompting an investigation into genotype-relevant 
neuroimaging characteristics.
METHODS: This study retrospectively analyzed neuroimaging and surgical specimens 
from 46 epilepsy patients with low-grade epilepsy-associated neuroepithelial 
tumors that had genetic mutations identified through panel sequencing to 
investigate their relationship to genotypes.
RESULTS: Three distinct neuroimaging groups were established: Group 1 had 
indistinct borders and iso T1-weighted and slightly high or high T2-weighted 
signal intensities without a diffuse mass effect, associated with 93.8% 
sensitivity and 100% specificity to BRAF V600E mutations; Group 2 exhibited 
sharp borders and very or slightly low T1-weighted and very high T2-weighted 
signal intensities with a diffuse mass effect and 100% sensitivity and 
specificity for FGFR1 mutations; and Group 3 displayed various characteristics. 
Histopathological diagnoses including diffuse low-grade glioma and ganglioglioma 
showed no clear association with genotypes. Notably, postoperative seizure-free 
rates were higher in Group 1 tumors (BRAF V600E) than in Group 2 tumors (FGFR1).
DISCUSSION: These findings suggest that tumor genotype may be predicted by 
neuroimaging before surgery, providing insights for personalized treatment 
approaches.

Copyright © 2024 Iijima, Fujii, Suzuki, Murayama, Goto, Saito, Sano, Suzuki, 
Miyata, Kimura, Nakashima, Suzuki, Iwasaki and Sato.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2024.1419104
PMCID: PMC11286587
PMID: 39081340

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.