---
reference_id: "PMID:36650407"
title: Clinical spectrum and currently available treatment of type I interferonopathy Aicardi-Goutières syndrome.
authors:
- "Dell'Isola GB"
- Dini G
- Culpepper KL
- Portwood KE
- Ferrara P
- Di Cara G
- Verrotti A
- Lodolo M
journal: World J Pediatr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s12519-022-00679-2
keywords:
- Humans
- Quality of Life
- "Autoimmune Diseases of the Nervous System/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Nervous System Malformations/genetics
- Interferons/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical spectrum and currently available treatment of type I interferonopathy Aicardi-Goutières syndrome.
**Authors:** Dell'Isola GB, Dini G, Culpepper KL, Portwood KE, Ferrara P, Di Cara G, Verrotti A, Lodolo M
**Journal:** World J Pediatr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12519-022-00679-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12519-022-00679-2)

## Content

1. World J Pediatr. 2023 Jul;19(7):635-643. doi: 10.1007/s12519-022-00679-2. Epub
 2023 Jan 17.

Clinical spectrum and currently available treatment of type I
interferonopathy Aicardi-Goutières syndrome.

Dell'Isola GB(1), Dini G(2), Culpepper KL(3), Portwood KE(4), Ferrara P(5), Di
Cara G(2), Verrotti A(2), Lodolo M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Perugia, Giorgio Menghini Square,
06129, Perugia, Italy. giovanni.dellisola@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, University of Perugia, Giorgio Menghini Square,
06129, Perugia, Italy.
(3)Department of Neurology Jacksonville, University of Florida, Florida, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Child Neurology, University of Florida,
UF Health Shands Children's Hospital, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(5)Unit of Pediatrics, Campus Bio-Medico University, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (AGS) is a genetically determined
disorder with a variable phenotype. Since the original description of AGS,
advances in gene sequencing techniques have resulted in a significant broadening
of the phenotypic spectrum associated with AGS genes, and new clinical pictures
have emerged beyond the classic presentation. The aim of this review is to
provide a comprehensive analysis of the clinical spectrum of AGS and report
currently available treatments and new immunosuppressive strategies.
DATA SOURCES: Literature reviews and original research articles were collected
from databases, including PubMed and ClinicalTrials.gov. Relevant articles about
AGS were included.
RESULTS: The involvement of the nervous system certainly represents the major
cause of mortality and morbidity in AGS patients. However, other clinical
manifestations, such as chilblains, hepatosplenomegaly, and hematological
disturbances, may lead to the diagnosis and considerably impact the prognosis
and overall quality of life of these patients. Therapeutic approaches of AGS are
limited to interventions aimed at specific symptoms and the management of
multiple comorbidities. However, advances in understanding the pathogenesis of
AGS could open new and more effective therapies.
CONCLUSIONS: The over-activation of innate immunity due to upregulated
interferon production plays a critical role in AGS, leading to multi-organ
damage with the main involvement of the central nervous system. To date, there
is no specific and effective treatment for AGS. New drugs specifically targeting
the interferon pathway may bring new hope to AGS patients.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12519-022-00679-2
PMCID: PMC10258176
PMID: 36650407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No financial benefits have been received or will
be received from any party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this
article. The authors have no conflict of interest to declare.
