---
reference_id: "PMID:27401840"
title: Prognostic significance of an early decline in serum alpha-fetoprotein during chemotherapy for ovarian yolk sac tumors.
authors:
- de la Motte Rouge T
- Pautier P
- Genestie C
- Rey A
- Gouy S
- Leary A
- Haie-Meder C
- Kerbrat P
- Culine S
- Fizazi K
- Lhommé C
journal: Gynecol Oncol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2016.07.005
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Endodermal Sinus Tumor/blood, drug therapy, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Staging
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/blood, drug therapy, pathology"
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- Young Adult
- alpha-Fetoproteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prognostic significance of an early decline in serum alpha-fetoprotein during chemotherapy for ovarian yolk sac tumors.
**Authors:** de la Motte Rouge T, Pautier P, Genestie C, Rey A, Gouy S, Leary A, Haie-Meder C, Kerbrat P, Culine S, Fizazi K, Lhommé C
**Journal:** Gynecol Oncol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ygyno.2016.07.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ygyno.2016.07.005)

## Content

1. Gynecol Oncol. 2016 Sep;142(3):452-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2016.07.005. Epub 
2016 Jul 8.

Prognostic significance of an early decline in serum alpha-fetoprotein during 
chemotherapy for ovarian yolk sac tumors.

de la Motte Rouge T(1), Pautier P(2), Genestie C(3), Rey A(4), Gouy S(5), Leary 
A(2), Haie-Meder C(6), Kerbrat P(1), Culine S(7), Fizazi K(2), Lhommé C(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Centre Eugène Marquis, Av de la bataille 
Flandres-Dunkerque, CS 44229, F-35042 Rennes, France.
(2)Department of Cancer Medicine, Institut Gustave-Roussy, 114 rue Edouard 
Vaillant, F-94805 Villejuif, France.
(3)Department of Biopathology, Institut Gustave-Roussy, 114 rue Edouard 
Vaillant, F-94805 Villejuif, France.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, Institut Gustave-Roussy, 114 rue Edouard 
Vaillant, F-94805 Villejuif, France.
(5)Department of Surgery, Institut Gustave-Roussy, 114 rue Edouard Vaillant, 
F-94805 Villejuif, France.
(6)Department of Radiotherapy, Institut Gustave-Roussy, 114 rue Edouard 
Vaillant, F-94805 Villejuif, France.
(7)Department of Medical Oncology, CHU Hôpital Saint Louis, 1 avenue 
Claude-Vellefaux, F-75010 Paris, France.
(8)Department of Cancer Medicine, Institut Gustave-Roussy, 114 rue Edouard 
Vaillant, F-94805 Villejuif, France. Electronic address: 
catherine.lhomme@gustaveroussy.fr.

BACKGROUND: The ovarian yolk sac tumor (OYST) is a very rare malignancy arising 
in young women. Our objective was to determine whether an early decline in serum 
alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) during chemotherapy has a prognostic impact.
METHODS: This retrospective study is based on prospectively recorded OYST cases 
at Gustave Roussy (Cancer Treatment Center). Survival curves were estimated 
using the Kaplan-Meier method. The serum AFP decline was calculated with the 
formula previously developed and validated in male patients with poor prognosis 
non-seminomatous germ cell tumors. Univariate and multivariate analyses were 
performed using the log-rank test and logistic regression, respectively.
RESULTS: Data on AFP were available to calculate an early AFP decline in 57 
patients. All patients had undergone surgery followed by chemotherapy. The 
5-year overall survival (OS) and event-free survival (EFS) rates were 86% (95% 
CI: 74%-93%) and 84% (95% CI: 73%-91%), respectively. The disease stage, 
presence of ascites at presentation, use of the BEP regimen, serum AFP half-life 
and an early AFP decline were significantly predictive factors for OS and EFS in 
the univariate analysis. The OS rate was 100% and 49% (95% CI: 26%-72%) in 
patients with a favorable AFP decline and in those with an unfavorable decline, 
respectively (p<0.001). In the multivariate analysis, only the presence of 
ascites at diagnosis (RR=7.3, p=0.03) and an unfavorable early AFP decline 
(RR=16.9, p<0.01) were significant negative predictive factors for OS.
CONCLUSIONS: An early AFP decline during chemotherapy is an independent 
prognostic factor in patients with OYSTs.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT: No conflict of interest.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2016.07.005
PMID: 27401840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]