---
reference_id: "PMID:32814031"
title: "Surgical Advances in the Management of the Silent Sinus Syndrome: Our Experience and Review of the Literature."
authors:
- Baig MZ
- Weber JF
- Bhora F
- Al Shetawi AH
journal: J Oral Maxillofac Surg
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.joms.2020.07.026
keywords:
- "Enophthalmos/etiology, surgery"
- Humans
- "Maxillary Sinus/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- "Maxillary Sinusitis/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- "Orbit/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- Paranasal Sinus Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surgical Advances in the Management of the Silent Sinus Syndrome: Our Experience and Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Baig MZ, Weber JF, Bhora F, Al Shetawi AH
**Journal:** J Oral Maxillofac Surg (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.joms.2020.07.026](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.joms.2020.07.026)

## Content

1. J Oral Maxillofac Surg. 2020 Dec;78(12):2289-2295. doi: 
10.1016/j.joms.2020.07.026. Epub 2020 Jul 25.

Surgical Advances in the Management of the Silent Sinus Syndrome: Our Experience 
and Review of the Literature.

Baig MZ(1), Weber JF(1), Bhora F(2), Al Shetawi AH(3).

Author information:
(1)Postdoctoral fellow, Division of Thoracic Surgery, Rudy L Ruggles Biomedical 
Research Institute, Nuvance Health Systems, Danbury, CT.
(2)Chief of Thoracic Surgery, Division of Thoracic Surgery, Rudy L Ruggles 
Biomedical Research Institute, Nuvance Health Systems, Danbury, CT.
(3)Attending Surgeon, Division of Surgical Oncology, Nuvance Health Systems, 
Poughkeepsie, NY. Electronic address: shetawi@nuvancehealth.org.

Silent sinus syndrome is a rare disorder characterized by ipsilateral 
enophthalmos and hypoglobus caused by collapse of the orbital floor in the 
presence of asymptomatic long-term maxillary sinusitis. The basic principles in 
the management are to address the diseased sinus and reconstruct the orbit 
concurrently or separately. Failure to accurately restore the orbit volume can 
have significant consequences on the patient. In this article, we provide an 
update on current practices and highlight our experience of using 
computer-assisted planning and patient-specific implant in managing this 
syndrome.

Copyright © 2020 American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons. 
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.joms.2020.07.026
PMID: 32814031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]