---
reference_id: "PMID:31036551"
title: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mutant TDP-43 may cause synaptic dysfunction through altered dendritic spine function.
authors:
- Jiang T
- Handley E
- Brizuela M
- Dawkins E
- Lewis KEA
- Clark RM
- Dickson TC
- Blizzard CA
journal: Dis Model Mech
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1242/dmm.038109
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mutant TDP-43 may cause synaptic dysfunction through altered dendritic spine function.
**Authors:** Jiang T, Handley E, Brizuela M, Dawkins E, Lewis KEA, Clark RM, Dickson TC, Blizzard CA
**Journal:** Dis Model Mech (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dmm.038109](https://doi.org/10.1242/dmm.038109)

## Content

1. Dis Model Mech. 2019 May 17;12(5):dmm038109. doi: 10.1242/dmm.038109.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mutant TDP-43 may cause synaptic dysfunction 
through altered dendritic spine function.

Jiang T(1), Handley E(1), Brizuela M(1), Dawkins E(1), Lewis KEA(1), Clark 
RM(1), Dickson TC(1), Blizzard CA(2).

Author information:
(1)Menzies Institute for Medical Research, University of Tasmania, Medical 
Sciences Precinct, 17 Liverpool Street, Hobart, TAS 7000, Australia.
(2)Menzies Institute for Medical Research, University of Tasmania, Medical 
Sciences Precinct, 17 Liverpool Street, Hobart, TAS 7000, Australia 
Catherine.Blizzard@utas.edu.au.

Altered cortical excitability and synapse dysfunction are early pathogenic 
events in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) patients and animal models. Recent 
studies propose an important role for TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43), the 
mislocalization and aggregation of which are key pathological features of ALS. 
However, the relationship between ALS-linked TDP-43 mutations, excitability and 
synaptic function is not fully understood. Here, we investigate the role of 
ALS-linked mutant TDP-43 in synapse formation by examining the morphological, 
immunocytochemical and excitability profile of transgenic mouse primary cortical 
pyramidal neurons that over-express human TDP-43A315T In TDP-43A315T cortical 
neurons, dendritic spine density was significantly reduced compared to wild-type 
controls. TDP-43A315T over-expression increased the total levels of the 
α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropinionic acid (AMPA) glutamate receptor 
subunit GluR1, yet the localization of GluR1 to the dendritic spine was reduced. 
These postsynaptic changes were coupled with a decrease in the amount of the 
presynaptic marker synaptophysin that colocalized with dendritic spines. 
Interestingly, action potential generation was reduced in TDP-43A315T pyramidal 
neurons. This work reveals a crucial effect of the over-expression mutation 
TDP-43A315T on the formation of synaptic structures and the recruitment of GluR1 
to the synaptic membrane. This pathogenic effect may be mediated by cytoplasmic 
mislocalization of TDP-43A315T Loss of synaptic GluR1, and reduced excitability 
within pyramidal neurons, implicates hypoexcitability and attenuated synaptic 
function in the pathogenic decline of neuronal function in TDP-43-associated 
ALS. Further studies into the mechanisms underlying AMPA receptor-mediated 
excitability changes within the ALS cortical circuitry may yield novel 
therapeutic targets for treatment of this devastating disease.

© 2019. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.038109
PMCID: PMC6550035
PMID: 31036551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.