---
reference_id: "PMID:2659680"
title: Biologic factors in the sexual transmission of human immunodeficiency virus.
authors:
- Holmberg SD
- Horsburgh CR Jr
- Ward JW
- Jaffe HW
journal: J Infect Dis
year: '1989'
doi: 10.1093/infdis/160.1.116
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biologic factors in the sexual transmission of human immunodeficiency virus.
**Authors:** Holmberg SD, Horsburgh CR Jr, Ward JW, Jaffe HW
**Journal:** J Infect Dis (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1093/infdis/160.1.116](https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/160.1.116)

## Content

1. J Infect Dis. 1989 Jul;160(1):116-25. doi: 10.1093/infdis/160.1.116.

Biologic factors in the sexual transmission of human immunodeficiency virus.

Holmberg SD(1), Horsburgh CR Jr, Ward JW, Jaffe HW.

Author information:
(1)AIDS Program, Centers for Disease Control, Atlanta, Georgia 30333.

Comment in
    J Infect Dis. 1990 Jul;162(1):274. doi: 10.1093/infdis/162.1.274.

The probability that any single episode of genital-genital or anogenital sexual 
intercourse will result in transmission of HIV may be determined by multiple 
biologic factors of the infectious person, the virus itself, and the exposed 
susceptible person. Some of these factors are known or suspected (figure 1), and 
they may explain observed differences in the sexual transmission of HIV in 
different parts of the world, notably in Africa, where genital ulcerative 
disease is probably influencing the epidemiology of HIV. Several studies have 
shown that infection in partners of HIV-infected persons is not determined 
solely by numbers of sexual encounters; on the contrary, HIV-infected partners 
have usually had fewer sexual encounters with infectious mates than have 
noninfected partners. Thus, sexually active persons should be cautioned that, to 
our knowledge, there are no nonsusceptible persons and that any single 
unprotected sexual encounter may lead to HIV transmission. Research into 
biologic factors that modulate HIV transmission continues to be hampered by 
difficulties in identifying HIV transmitters and nontransmitters, infective and 
noninfective variants of HIV (if the latter exist in vivo), and persons 
relatively more or less susceptible to HIV infection. However, as the number of 
partner studies and the number of those enrolled in them increase, a 
progressively clearer idea of the biologic determinants of sexual transmission 
of HIV should emerge.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/160.1.116
PMID: 2659680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]