---
reference_id: "PMID:25824144"
title: Two Novel Homozygous Desmoplakin Mutations in Carvajal Syndrome.
authors:
- Molho-Pessach V
- Sheffer S
- Siam R
- Tams S
- Siam I
- Awwad R
- Babay S
- Golender J
- Simanovsky N
- Ramot Y
- Zlotogorski A
journal: Pediatr Dermatol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/pde.12541
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Cardiomyopathies/genetics
- "Cardiomyopathy, Dilated"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Consanguinity
- Desmoplakins/genetics
- Genetic Testing
- Hair Diseases/genetics
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Keratoderma, Palmoplantar/genetics"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two Novel Homozygous Desmoplakin Mutations in Carvajal Syndrome.
**Authors:** Molho-Pessach V, Sheffer S, Siam R, Tams S, Siam I, Awwad R, Babay S, Golender J, Simanovsky N, Ramot Y, Zlotogorski A
**Journal:** Pediatr Dermatol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pde.12541](https://doi.org/10.1111/pde.12541)

## Content

1. Pediatr Dermatol. 2015 Sep-Oct;32(5):641-6. doi: 10.1111/pde.12541. Epub 2015
Mar 30.

Two Novel Homozygous Desmoplakin Mutations in Carvajal Syndrome.

Molho-Pessach V(1)(2), Sheffer S(1), Siam R(1), Tams S(3), Siam I(1), Awwad
R(4), Babay S(2), Golender J(5), Simanovsky N(6), Ramot Y(1)(2), Zlotogorski
A(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center,
Jerusalem, Israel.
(2)Center for Genetic Diseases of the Skin and Hair, Hadassah-Hebrew University
Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, Palestinian Al Quds University, Abu Dis, Palestinian
Authority.
(4)Caritas Baby Hospital, Bethlehem, Palestinian Authority.
(5)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical
Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
(6)Department of Medical Imaging, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center,
Jerusalem, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in various desmosomal proteins were shown to cause
inherited forms of cardiomyopathy. Carvajal syndrome (Online Mendelian
Inheritance in Man [OMIM] 605676) is characterized by the association of dilated
cardiomyopathy, striate palmoplantar keratoderma, and woolly hair. It is caused
by homozygous as well as heterozygous mutations in DSP, which encodes the
desmosomal plaque protein desmoplakin. An overlapping cardiocutaneous phenotype
was also described with homozygous mutations in genes encoding two other
desmosomal proteins; plakoglobin (Naxos disease; OMIM 601214) and desmocollin-2
(OMIM 610476).
METHODS: We performed clinical and molecular workups in two consanguineous Arab
Palestinian families manifesting an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance
of the above mentioned clinical findings. Whole exome sequencing was employed in
the search for the causing mutation.
RESULTS: Affected family members suffered from biventricular involvement and
arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia based on echocardiography and
magnetic resonance imaging. One patient who underwent implantation of an
implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) is still alive at the age of 59
years. Whole exome sequencing revealed two novel homozygous mutations in DSP,
each affecting one family.
CONCLUSIONS: The association of woolly hair with palmoplantar keratoderma in a
child should lead to a cardiac workup in the search for those at increased risk
for sudden cardiac death. Early diagnosis and ICD implantation may be
lifesaving. Whole exome sequencing should be utilized for rapid genetic analysis
since the cardiocutaneous phenotype may result from mutations in one of several
genes.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/pde.12541
PMID: 25824144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
