---
reference_id: "PMID:23798694"
title: "Dracunculiasis (guinea worm disease): eradication without a drug or a vaccine."
authors:
- Biswas G
- Sankara DP
- Agua-Agum J
- Maiga A
journal: Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1098/rstb.2012.0146
keywords:
- Animals
- Copepoda/physiology
- "Disease Eradication/economics, history, methods"
- "Dracunculiasis/epidemiology, prevention & control"
- "Dracunculus Nematode/pathogenicity, physiology"
- "History, 20th Century"
- "History, 21st Century"
- Humans
- Life Cycle Stages/physiology
- Public Health/methods
- Water Supply/standards
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dracunculiasis (guinea worm disease): eradication without a drug or a vaccine.
**Authors:** Biswas G, Sankara DP, Agua-Agum J, Maiga A
**Journal:** Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1098/rstb.2012.0146](https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2012.0146)

## Content

1. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2013 Jun 24;368(1623):20120146. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2012.0146. Print 2013 Aug 5.

Dracunculiasis (guinea worm disease): eradication without a drug or a vaccine.

Biswas G(1), Sankara DP, Agua-Agum J, Maiga A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Control of Neglected Tropical Diseases, World Health
Organization, Avenue Appia 20, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland. biswasg@who.int

Dracunculiasis, commonly known as guinea worm disease, is a nematode infection
transmitted to humans exclusively via contaminated drinking water. The disease
prevails in the most deprived areas of the world. No vaccine or medicine is
available against the disease: eradication is being achieved by implementing
preventive measures. These include behavioural change in patients and
communities--such as self-reporting suspected cases to health workers or
volunteers, filtering drinking water and accessing water from improved sources
and preventing infected individuals from wading or swimming in drinking-water
sources--supplemented by active surveillance and case containment, vector
control and provision of improved water sources. Efforts to eradicate
dracunculiasis began in the early 1980s. By the end of 2012, the disease had
reached its lowest levels ever. This paper reviews the progress made in
eradicating dracunculiasis since the eradication campaign began, the factors
influencing progress and the difficulties in controlling the pathogen that
requires behavioural change, especially when the threat becomes rare. The
challenges of intensifying surveillance are discussed, particularly in insecure
areas containing the last foci of the disease. It also summarizes the broader
benefits uniquely linked to interventions against dracunculiasis.

DOI: 10.1098/rstb.2012.0146
PMCID: PMC3720044
PMID: 23798694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
