---
reference_id: "PMID:41595732"
title: The Natural History of Prediabetes and Cardiovascular Disease in the Pediatric Population.
authors:
- Accacha S
- Barillas-Cerritos J
- Gabriel L
- Srivastava A
- Gulkarov S
- Apsan JA
- De Leon J
- Reiss AB
journal: Biomedicines
year: '2026'
doi: 10.3390/biomedicines14010198
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Natural History of Prediabetes and Cardiovascular Disease in the Pediatric Population.
**Authors:** Accacha S, Barillas-Cerritos J, Gabriel L, Srivastava A, Gulkarov S, Apsan JA, De Leon J, Reiss AB
**Journal:** Biomedicines (2026)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biomedicines14010198](https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines14010198)

## Content

1. Biomedicines. 2026 Jan 16;14(1):198. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines14010198.

The Natural History of Prediabetes and Cardiovascular Disease in the Pediatric 
Population.

Accacha S(1)(2), Barillas-Cerritos J(1), Gabriel L(1), Srivastava A(3), Gulkarov 
S(3), Apsan JA(2), De Leon J(4), Reiss AB(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, NYU Grossman Long Island School of Medicine, 
Mineola, NY 11501, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Donald and Barbara Zucker School of Medicine at 
Hofstra/Northwell, Hempstead, NY 11549, USA.
(3)Department of Foundations of Medicine, NYU Grossman Long Island School of 
Medicine, Mineola, NY 11501, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, NYU Grossman Long Island School of Medicine, Mineola, 
NY 11501, USA.

The prevalence and incidence of prediabetes in children and youth continue to 
increase in parallel with the obesity epidemic. While prediabetes is defined by 
elevated HbA1c and/or impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) and/or impaired fasting 
glucose (IFG), the risk of clinical disease is a continuum. Individuals with 
prediabetes are at a higher risk of developing youth-onset type 2 diabetes, 
which is considered a more aggressive form of the disease. This condition is 
associated with increased cardiovascular and metabolic risks and leads to an 
earlier onset of complications compared to adults with type 2 diabetes. 
Additionally, significant damage to beta cells may occur even before dysglycemia 
develops. Recent data indicate that mortality rates are higher in youths with 
type 2 diabetes compared to those with type 1 diabetes. Childhood prediabetes 
and cardiovascular complications associated with it are a significant health 
concern. This review provides the latest insights into this complex issue. We 
will present an overview of pathophysiology, screening methods, and therapeutic 
options to prevent the progression from prediabetes to type 2 diabetes in 
children. In summary, it is crucial to identify prediabetes in children, as this 
underscores the importance of appropriate screening and timely intervention.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines14010198
PMCID: PMC12839148
PMID: 41595732

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.