---
reference_id: "PMID:37340830"
title: Vitelline vascular remnant causing intestinal obstruction in a patient with TARP syndrome.
authors:
- Omorodion J
- Tannenbaum L
- "O'Neill JP"
- Cummings C
- Wojcik MH
journal: Birth Defects Res
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/bdr2.2212
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vitelline vascular remnant causing intestinal obstruction in a patient with TARP syndrome.
**Authors:** Omorodion J, Tannenbaum L, O'Neill JP, Cummings C, Wojcik MH
**Journal:** Birth Defects Res (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/bdr2.2212](https://doi.org/10.1002/bdr2.2212)

## Content

1. Birth Defects Res. 2023 Aug 1;115(13):1216-1221. doi: 10.1002/bdr2.2212. Epub 
2023 Jun 21.

Vitelline vascular remnant causing intestinal obstruction in a patient with TARP 
syndrome.

Omorodion J(1), Tannenbaum L(2), O'Neill JP(3), Cummings C(2), Wojcik MH(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Department of Pediatrics, Boston 
Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Division of Newborn Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Boston Children's 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: TARP syndrome, characterized by talipes equinovarus, atrial septal 
defect, Robin sequence, and persistent left superior vena cava, is an X-linked 
recessive condition caused by deleterious variants in RBM10. Vitelline vascular 
remnants (VVR) are a rare vitelline duct anomaly with approximately 26 cases 
previously reported. There are no previously reported cases of VVRs in patients 
with TARP syndrome.
CASE: We present a male neonate diagnosed with TARP syndrome via trio whole 
exome sequencing who had classic features of this syndrome, although his course 
was additionally complicated by feeding intolerance with multiple episodes of 
abdominal distension. Serial imaging and contrast studies of the upper GI tract 
and small bowel demonstrated small bowel obstruction of unclear etiology. Given 
the poor prognosis associated with this condition, life-sustaining measures were 
withdrawn, and he passed away at 38 days of age. On autopsy, a VVR was 
unexpectedly identified with proximal bowel dilation, explaining his feeding 
intolerance.
CONCLUSIONS: We highlight the importance of full post-mortem examination in 
understanding the complete spectrum of manifestations of genetic syndromes and 
provide a review of the literature.

© 2023 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/bdr2.2212
PMID: 37340830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]