---
reference_id: "PMID:30724107"
title: Endothelial cell-specific collagen type IV-α(3) expression does not rescue Alport syndrome in Col4a3(-)(/-) mice.
authors:
- Funk SD
- Bayer RH
- Miner JH
journal: Am J Physiol Renal Physiol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1152/ajprenal.00556.2018
keywords:
- Animals
- "Autoantigens/genetics, metabolism"
- "Collagen Type IV/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Endothelial Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genetic Therapy
- Kidney Glomerulus/blood supply
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Inbred CBA"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Nephritis, Hereditary/genetics, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- Phenotype
- Protein Subunits
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endothelial cell-specific collagen type IV-α(3) expression does not rescue Alport syndrome in Col4a3(-)(/-) mice.
**Authors:** Funk SD, Bayer RH, Miner JH
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Renal Physiol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajprenal.00556.2018](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajprenal.00556.2018)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2019 May 1;316(5):F830-F837. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00556.2018. Epub 2019 Feb 6.

Endothelial cell-specific collagen type IV-α(3) expression does not rescue
Alport syndrome in Col4a3(-)(/-) mice.

Funk SD(1), Bayer RH(1), Miner JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Washington University School
of Medicine , St. Louis, Missouri.

The glomerular basement membrane (GBM) is a critical component of the kidney's
blood filtration barrier. Alport syndrome, a hereditary disease leading to
kidney failure, is caused by the loss or dysfunction of the GBM's major collagen
type IV (COL4) isoform α3α4α5. The constituent COL4 α-chains assemble into
heterotrimers in the endoplasmic reticulum before secretion into the
extracellular space. If any one of the α3-, α4-, or α5-chains is lost due to
mutation of one of the genes, then the entire heterotrimer is lost. Patients
with Alport syndrome typically have mutations in the X-linked COL4A5 gene or
uncommonly have the autosomal recessive form of the disease due to COL4A3 or
COL4A4 mutations. Treatment for Alport syndrome is currently limited to
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition or angiotensin receptor blockers.
Experimental approaches in Alport mice have demonstrated that induced expression
of COL4A3, either widely or specifically in podocytes of Col4a3-/- mice, can
abrogate disease progression even after establishment of the abnormal GBM. While
targeting podocytes in vivo for gene therapy is a significant challenge, the
more accessible glomerular endothelium could be amenable for mutant gene repair.
In the present study, we expressed COL4A3 in Col4a3-/- Alport mice using an
endothelial cell-specific inducible transgenic system, but collagen-α3α4α5(IV)
was not detected in the GBM or elsewhere, and the Alport phenotype was not
rescued. Our results suggest that endothelial cells do not express the
Col4a3/a4/a5 genes and should not be viewed as a target for gene therapy.

DOI: 10.1152/ajprenal.00556.2018
PMCID: PMC6580247
PMID: 30724107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No conflicts of interest, financial or
otherwise, are declared by the authors.
