---
reference_id: "PMID:34939452"
title: "Ocular manifestations of multiple sclerosis in patients from three countries: A Web-based survey."
authors:
- Zhao RZ
- Zhang GX
- Zhang WT
- Yu WJ
- Du L
- Toledo MC
- Olivera Leal IR
- O'Farrill ZL
- Izquierdo G
journal: Eur J Ophthalmol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1177/11206721211069457
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ocular manifestations of multiple sclerosis in patients from three countries: A Web-based survey.
**Authors:** Zhao RZ, Zhang GX, Zhang WT, Yu WJ, Du L, Toledo MC, Olivera Leal IR, O'Farrill ZL, Izquierdo G
**Journal:** Eur J Ophthalmol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1177/11206721211069457](https://doi.org/10.1177/11206721211069457)

## Content

1. Eur J Ophthalmol. 2022 Sep;32(5):2975-2981. doi: 10.1177/11206721211069457.
Epub  2021 Dec 23.

Ocular manifestations of multiple sclerosis in patients from three countries: A 
Web-based survey.

Zhao RZ(1)(2), Zhang GX(3)(4), Zhang WT(5), Yu WJ(6), Du L(1), Toledo MC(2), 
Olivera Leal IR(7), O'Farrill ZL(8), Izquierdo G(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Eye Institute of PLA, 66352Xijing Hospital, 
Fourth Military Medical University, Shaanxi, The People of Republic of China.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, 113046Hermanos Ameijeiras Hospital, Havana, 
Cuba.
(3)Department of Neurology, 105849Yan'an University, Shaanxi, The People of 
Republic of China.
(4)Multiple Sclerosis Unit, Neurology Service, 222071Vithas Nisa Hospital, 
Seville, Spain.
(5)Institute of Biomedicine of Seville, IBIS (University of Seville, HUVR, 
Government of Andalusia, CSIC), Spain; Department of Medical Biochemistry and 
Molecular Biology and Immunology, 16778University of Seville, 41009, Spain.
(6)Department of Neurology, Xijing Hospital,Fourth Military Medicine University, 
Shaanxi, The People of Republic of China.
(7)Department of Neurology, Hermanos Ameijeiras Hospital, Havana, Cuba.
(8)Department of Neurology, 306462Institute of Neurology, Havana, Cuba.

OBJECTIVE: This study evaluates the epidemiological characteristics, 
ophthalmological manifestations, and different therapeutic options available for 
patients with multiple sclerosis (MS) in China, Spain, and Cuba.
METHODS: A self-designed questionnaire was used to conduct a comparable 
descriptive cross-sectional study on patients with MS. The survey included 
patients' demographic data, ocular manifestations related to MS, and treatment 
methodology followed in the three countries. The online survey was designed 
using the Wenjuanxing survey platform, and a survey link was circulated through 
WhatsApp, WeChat, and emails. Quantitative data were expressed as mean and 
standard deviation, the Kruskal-Wallis test was used for non-parametric 
variables. Qualitative data were expressed as numerical and percentage. The 
chi-square test (χ2) was used to compare the group's response categories. The 
statistical difference was considered significant when p < 0.05.
RESULTS: The female-to-male ratio in all the three countries was 2-3:1, and 
relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS) was the most frequent in all three countries. 
Vision loss was slow and progressive in half of the patients from the three 
countries, with no significant differences (p = 0.524). A higher percentage of 
steroid treatment was observed in Chinese patients in comparison with the 
patients from other two countries (p < 0.001), and a similar trend was seen in 
the use of traditional medicines. Almost one-third of patients who did not 
receive any treatment recovered spontaneously in all the three countries 
(p = 0.097).
CONCLUSIONS: MS occurs more frequently in the relapsing-remitting clinical form 
and there is a clear female predominance. The first ocular crisis or clinical 
debut of MS is characterized by slow and progressive visual impairment, 
increasing and adding to other ocular manifestations during its evolutionary 
course. Spontaneous recovery of vision after an attack of optic neuritis in the 
course of MS is possible.

DOI: 10.1177/11206721211069457
PMID: 34939452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]