---
reference_id: "PMID:40675737"
title: Neuromuscular junction and the complement system.
authors:
- Jacob S
- Howard JF Jr
journal: Int Rev Neurobiol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/bs.irn.2025.04.031
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuromuscular junction and the complement system.
**Authors:** Jacob S, Howard JF Jr
**Journal:** Int Rev Neurobiol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/bs.irn.2025.04.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.irn.2025.04.031)

## Content

1. Int Rev Neurobiol. 2025;182:21-42. doi: 10.1016/bs.irn.2025.04.031. Epub 2025 
Jun 27.

Neuromuscular junction and the complement system.

Jacob S(1), Howard JF Jr(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Immunology and Immunotherapy, University of Birmingham, United 
Kingdom; University Hospitals Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom.
(2)Myasthenia Gravis Clinical Trials and Translational Research Programme. The 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, United States. 
Electronic address: howardj@neurology.unc.edu.

Nearly 90 % of generalized myasthenia gravis (MG) patients have IgG1 or IgG3 
antibodies against the acetylcholine receptor (AChR). Acetylcholine receptor 
antibodies induce neuromuscular transmission defect by various potential 
mechanisms including internalisation of AChR, receptor blockade and by 
activation of the classical complement pathway. Membrane attack complex (MAC) 
which is the final end product of complement activation leads to architectural 
destruction of the neuromuscular junction (NMJ). Several experimental models 
(EAMG) have shown evidence for complement in the pathogenesis of MG, with 
demonstration of prevention or reversal of the disease using complement 
inhibitory therapies. Various molecules that target the complement system have 
been developed to treat myasthenia gravis. Most of the currently studied 
molecules inhibit complement protein 5 (C5), which prevents the formation of MAC 
and subsequent NMJ destruction. The currently studied anti-complement therapies 
for MG include eculizumab, zilucoplan, ravulizumab, pozelimab, cemdisiran, 
gefurilimab, danicopan and few others in the pipeline. Many of these have also 
been shown to have long term benefit in different sub-groups of patients with 
MG. Given the risk of Gram-negative septicaemia (especially by meningococcus), 
patients would need vaccination prior to initiation of treatment and in some 
countries prophylactic antibiotics during treatment is recommended, although no 
major safety signatures have been noted in the studies so far. Future studies 
identifying specific biomarkers might help clinicians select the most 
appropriate patients who are more likely to respond to complement inhibitory 
therapies.

Copyright © 2025. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.irn.2025.04.031
PMID: 40675737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]