---
reference_id: "PMID:23284067"
title: "Pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 1: clinical spectrum and relevance of EXOSC3 mutations."
authors:
- Rudnik-Schöneborn S
- Senderek J
- Jen JC
- Houge G
- Seeman P
- Puchmajerová A
- Graul-Neumann L
- Seidel U
- Korinthenberg R
- Kirschner J
- Seeger J
- Ryan MM
- Muntoni F
- Steinlin M
- Sztriha L
- Colomer J
- Hübner C
- Brockmann K
- Van Maldergem L
- Schiff M
- Holzinger A
- Barth P
- Reardon W
- Yourshaw M
- Nelson SF
- Eggermann T
- Zerres K
journal: Neurology
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31827f0f66
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Brain/pathology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Electromyography
- Exosome Multienzyme Ribonuclease Complex/genetics
- Family Health
- Female
- Gene Frequency
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genotype
- Humans
- Infant
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- "Olivopontocerebellar Atrophies/complications, genetics, pathology"
- RNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 1: clinical spectrum and relevance of EXOSC3 mutations.
**Authors:** Rudnik-Schöneborn S, Senderek J, Jen JC, Houge G, Seeman P, Puchmajerová A, Graul-Neumann L, Seidel U, Korinthenberg R, Kirschner J, Seeger J, Ryan MM, Muntoni F, Steinlin M, Sztriha L, Colomer J, Hübner C, Brockmann K, Van Maldergem L, Schiff M, Holzinger A, Barth P, Reardon W, Yourshaw M, Nelson SF, Eggermann T, Zerres K
**Journal:** Neurology (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1212/WNL.0b013e31827f0f66](https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0b013e31827f0f66)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2013 Jan 29;80(5):438-46. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31827f0f66. Epub
2013 Jan 2.

Pontocerebellar hypoplasia type 1: clinical spectrum and relevance of EXOSC3
mutations.

Rudnik-Schöneborn S(1), Senderek J, Jen JC, Houge G, Seeman P, Puchmajerová A,
Graul-Neumann L, Seidel U, Korinthenberg R, Kirschner J, Seeger J, Ryan MM,
Muntoni F, Steinlin M, Sztriha L, Colomer J, Hübner C, Brockmann K, Van
Maldergem L, Schiff M, Holzinger A, Barth P, Reardon W, Yourshaw M, Nelson SF,
Eggermann T, Zerres K.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Medical Faculty, University Hospital Aachen,
Germany. srudnik-schoeneborn@ukaachen.de

Comment in
    Neurology. 2013 Jan 29;80(5):426-7. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31827f101c.

OBJECTIVES: Pontocerebellar hypoplasia with spinal muscular atrophy, also known
as PCH1, is a group of autosomal recessive disorders characterized by
generalized muscle weakness and global developmental delay commonly resulting in
early death. Gene defects had been discovered only in single patients until the
recent identification of EXOSC3 mutations in several families with relatively
mild course of PCH1. We aim to genetically stratify subjects in a large and
well-defined cohort to define the clinical spectrum and genotype-phenotype
correlation.
METHODS: We documented clinical, neuroimaging, and morphologic data of 37
subjects from 27 families with PCH1. EXOSC3 gene sequencing was performed in 27
unrelated index patients of mixed ethnicity.
RESULTS: Biallelic mutations in EXOSC3 were detected in 10 of 27 families (37%).
The most common mutation among all ethnic groups was c.395A>C, p.D132A,
responsible for 11 (55%) of the 20 mutated alleles and ancestral in origin. The
mutation-positive subjects typically presented with normal pregnancy, normal
birth measurements, and relative preservation of brainstem and cortical
structures. Psychomotor retardation was profound in all patients but lifespan
was variable, with 3 subjects surviving beyond the late teens. Abnormal
oculomotor function was commonly observed in patients surviving beyond the first
year. Major clinical features previously reported in PCH1, including
intrauterine abnormalities, postnatal hypoventilation and feeding difficulties,
joint contractures, and neonatal death, were rarely observed in
mutation-positive infants but were typical among the mutation-negative subjects.
CONCLUSION: EXOSC3 mutations account for 30%-40% of patients with PCH1 with
variability in survival and clinical severity that is correlated with the
genotype.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31827f0f66
PMCID: PMC3590055
PMID: 23284067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
