---
reference_id: "PMID:29237806"
title: Afatinib Is a New Therapeutic Approach in Chordoma with a Unique Ability to Target EGFR and Brachyury.
authors:
- Magnaghi P
- Salom B
- Cozzi L
- Amboldi N
- Ballinari D
- Tamborini E
- Gasparri F
- Montagnoli A
- Raddrizzani L
- Somaschini A
- Bosotti R
- Orrenius C
- Bozzi F
- Pilotti S
- Galvani A
- Sommer J
- Stacchiotti S
- Isacchi A
journal: Mol Cancer Ther
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-17-0324
keywords:
- Afatinib/therapeutic use
- Animals
- "Bone Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- "Chordoma/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- "ErbB Receptors/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- "Fetal Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic/drug effects"
- Humans
- "Mice, Nude"
- Phosphorylation/drug effects
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/therapeutic use
- "T-Box Domain Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- "Tumor Burden/drug effects, genetics"
- Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays
- Brachyury Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Afatinib Is a New Therapeutic Approach in Chordoma with a Unique Ability to Target EGFR and Brachyury.
**Authors:** Magnaghi P, Salom B, Cozzi L, Amboldi N, Ballinari D, Tamborini E, Gasparri F, Montagnoli A, Raddrizzani L, Somaschini A, Bosotti R, Orrenius C, Bozzi F, Pilotti S, Galvani A, Sommer J, Stacchiotti S, Isacchi A
**Journal:** Mol Cancer Ther (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-17-0324](https://doi.org/10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-17-0324)

## Content

1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2018 Mar;17(3):603-613. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-17-0324. 
Epub 2017 Dec 13.

Afatinib Is a New Therapeutic Approach in Chordoma with a Unique Ability to 
Target EGFR and Brachyury.

Magnaghi P(1), Salom B(2), Cozzi L(2), Amboldi N(2), Ballinari D(2), Tamborini 
E(3), Gasparri F(2), Montagnoli A(2), Raddrizzani L(2), Somaschini A(2), Bosotti 
R(2), Orrenius C(2), Bozzi F(3), Pilotti S(3), Galvani A(2), Sommer J(4), 
Stacchiotti S(3), Isacchi A(2).

Author information:
(1)Oncology, Nerviano Medical Sciences, Nerviano, Milan, Italy. 
paola.magnaghi@nervianoms.com.
(2)Oncology, Nerviano Medical Sciences, Nerviano, Milan, Italy.
(3)Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy.
(4)Chordoma Foundation, Durham, North Carolina.

Chordomas are rare bone tumors with no approved therapy. These tumors express 
several activated tyrosine kinase receptors, which prompted attempts to treat 
patients with tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Although clinical benefit was observed 
in phase II clinical trials with imatinib and sorafenib, and sporadically also 
with EGFR inhibitors, therapies evaluated to date have shown modest activity. 
With the goal of identifying new drugs with immediate therapeutic potential for 
chordoma patients, we collected clinically approved drugs and other advanced 
inhibitors of MET, PDGFRβ, and EGFR tyrosine kinases, and assessed their 
antiproliferative activity against a panel of chordoma cell lines. Chordoma cell 
lines were not responsive to MET and PDGFRβ inhibitors. U-CH1 and UM-Chor1 were 
sensitive to all EGFR inhibitors, whereas the remaining cell lines were 
generally insensitive to these drugs. Afatinib was the only EGFR inhibitor with 
activity across the chordoma panel. We then investigated the molecular 
mechanisms behind the responses observed and found that the antiproliferative 
IC50s correlate with the unique ability of afatinib to promote degradation of 
EGFR and brachyury, an embryonic transcription factor considered a key driver of 
chordoma. Afatinib displayed potent antitumor efficacy in U-CH1, SF8894, CF322, 
and CF365 chordoma tumor models in vivo In the panel analyzed, high EGFR 
phosphorylation and low AXL and STK33 expression correlated with higher 
sensitivity to afatinib and deserve further investigation as potential 
biomarkers of response. These data support the use of afatinib in clinical 
trials and provide the rationale for the upcoming European phase II study on 
afatinib in advanced chordoma. Mol Cancer Ther; 17(3); 603-13. ©2017 AACR.

©2017 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-17-0324
PMID: 29237806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]