---
reference_id: "PMID:36142926"
title: "Efficacy and Safety of Tacrolimus as Treatment for Bleeding Caused by Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia: An Open-Label, Pilot Study."
authors:
- Hessels J
- Kroon S
- Boerman S
- Nelissen RC
- Grutters JC
- Snijder RJ
- Lebrin F
- Post MC
- Mummery CL
- Mager JJ
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/jcm11185280
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and Safety of Tacrolimus as Treatment for Bleeding Caused by Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia: An Open-Label, Pilot Study.
**Authors:** Hessels J, Kroon S, Boerman S, Nelissen RC, Grutters JC, Snijder RJ, Lebrin F, Post MC, Mummery CL, Mager JJ
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm11185280](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm11185280)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2022 Sep 7;11(18):5280. doi: 10.3390/jcm11185280.

Efficacy and Safety of Tacrolimus as Treatment for Bleeding Caused by Hereditary 
Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia: An Open-Label, Pilot Study.

Hessels J(1), Kroon S(1), Boerman S(1), Nelissen RC(2), Grutters JC(1)(3), 
Snijder RJ(1), Lebrin F(4), Post MC(5)(6), Mummery CL(7), Mager JJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonology, St. Antonius Hospital, Koekoekslaan 1, 3435 CM 
Nieuwegein, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, St. Antonius Hospital, Koekoekslaan 1, 
3435 CM Nieuwegein, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pulmonology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 
100, 3484 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Cardiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 
100, 3484 CX Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Cardiology, St. Antonius Hospital, Koekoekslaan 1, 3435 CM 
Nieuwegein, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA Leiden, The Netherlands.

Haploinsufficiency for Endoglin (ENG) and activin A receptor type II-like I 
(ACVRL1/ALK1) lead to the formation of weak and abnormal vessels in hereditary 
hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT). These cause epistaxis (nosebleeds) and/or 
gastrointestinal blood loss. In vitro in cultured endothelial cells, tacrolimus 
has been shown to increase ENG and ALK1 expression. It is, therefore, a 
potential treatment option. We report here a proof-of-concept study in patients 
with HHT and severe epistaxis and/or gastrointestinal bleeding who were treated 
daily with orally-administered tacrolimus for twenty weeks. Twenty-five patients 
with HHT (11 females (44%)) and median age of 59 years were enrolled. Five 
patients (20%) stopped the trial prematurely-four due to (serious) adverse 
events ((S)AE). Twenty patients were included in further analyses. Hemoglobin 
levels increased during tacrolimus treatment from 6.1 (IQR 5.2-6.9) mmol/L at 
baseline (9.8 g/dL) to 6.7 (6.5-7.1) mmol/L (10.8 g/dL), p = 0.003. The number 
of blood transfusions over the twenty weeks decreased from a mean of 5.0 (±9.2) 
to 1.9 (±3.5), p = 0.04. In 64% of the patients, at least one AE occurred. Oral 
tacrolimus, thus, significantly increased hemoglobin levels and decreased blood 
transfusion needs, epistaxis and/or gastrointestinal bleeding in patients with 
HHT. However, side-effects were common. Further investigation of the potential 
therapeutic benefit is justified by the outcome of the study.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm11185280
PMCID: PMC9503120
PMID: 36142926

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.