---
reference_id: "PMID:20301480"
title: Dysferlinopathy.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Aoki M
- Takahashi T
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dysferlinopathy.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Aoki M, Takahashi T

## Content

1. Dysferlinopathy.

Aoki M(1), Takahashi T(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2004 Feb 5 [updated 2025 Dec 4].

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan
(2)Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization – Sendai-Nishitaga 
Hospital, Sendai, Japan

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Dysferlinopathy includes a spectrum of muscle disease 
characterized by two major phenotypes: Miyoshi muscular dystrophy (MMD) and 
limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2B (LGMD2B); and two minor phenotypes: 
asymptomatic hyperCKemia and distal myopathy with anterior tibial onset (DMAT). 
MMD (median age of onset 19 years) is characterized by muscle weakness and 
atrophy, most marked in the distal parts of the legs, especially the 
gastrocnemius and soleus muscles. Over a period of years, the weakness and 
atrophy spread to the thighs and gluteal muscles. The forearms may become mildly 
atrophic with decrease in grip strength; the small muscles of the hands are 
spared. LGMD2B is characterized by early weakness and atrophy of the pelvic and 
shoulder girdle muscles in adolescence or young adulthood, with slow 
progression. Other phenotypes in this spectrum are scapuloperoneal syndrome and 
congenital muscular dystrophy. Asymptomatic hyperCKemia is characterized by 
marked elevation of serum CK concentration only. DMAT is characterized by early 
and predominant distal muscle weakness, particularly of the muscles of the 
anterior compartment of the legs.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of dysferlinopathy is established in a proband 
with suggestive findings and biallelic pathogenic variants in DYSF identified by 
molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: There is no approved therapy for 
dysferlinopathy. Treatment is symptomatic only. Management should be tailored to 
the individual and the specific subtype. Individualized management may include 
physical therapy, use of mechanical aids, surgical intervention for orthopedic 
complications, respiratory aids, and social and emotional support. Surveillance: 
Annual monitoring of muscle strength, physical function, activities of daily 
living, joint range of motion, balance, and respiratory function, and for 
evidence of cardiomyopathy for individuals with cardiac involvement. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Weight control to avoid obesity.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Dysferlinopathy is inherited in an autosomal recessive 
manner. If both parents are known to be heterozygous for a DYSF pathogenic 
variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of 
being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance 
of being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the DYSF pathogenic variants have 
been identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for at-risk 
relatives, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk, and 
preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301480