---
reference_id: "PMID:29293211"
title: "Microglia-derived ASC specks cross-seed amyloid-β in Alzheimer's disease."
authors:
- Venegas C
- Kumar S
- Franklin BS
- Dierkes T
- Brinkschulte R
- Tejera D
- Vieira-Saecker A
- Schwartz S
- Santarelli F
- Kummer MP
- Griep A
- Gelpi E
- Beilharz M
- Riedel D
- Golenbock DT
- Geyer M
- Walter J
- Latz E
- Heneka MT
journal: Nature
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/nature25158
keywords:
- "Alzheimer Disease/metabolism, pathology"
- Amyloid beta-Peptides/metabolism
- "Amyloid beta-Protein Precursor/deficiency, genetics"
- Animals
- "Antibodies/administration & dosage, immunology, pharmacology"
- "CARD Signaling Adaptor Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, chemistry, immunology, metabolism"
- Female
- "Hippocampus/cytology, metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- "Inflammasomes/immunology, metabolism"
- "Inflammation/metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Microglia/metabolism
- "Presenilin-1/deficiency, genetics"
- "Protein Aggregation, Pathological"
- Protein Domains
- Spatial Memory/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Microglia-derived ASC specks cross-seed amyloid-β in Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Venegas C, Kumar S, Franklin BS, Dierkes T, Brinkschulte R, Tejera D, Vieira-Saecker A, Schwartz S, Santarelli F, Kummer MP, Griep A, Gelpi E, Beilharz M, Riedel D, Golenbock DT, Geyer M, Walter J, Latz E, Heneka MT
**Journal:** Nature (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature25158](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature25158)

## Content

1. Nature. 2017 Dec 20;552(7685):355-361. doi: 10.1038/nature25158.

Microglia-derived ASC specks cross-seed amyloid-β in Alzheimer's disease.

Venegas C(1), Kumar S(2), Franklin BS(3), Dierkes T(1)(3), Brinkschulte R(3),
Tejera D(1), Vieira-Saecker A(1), Schwartz S(1), Santarelli F(1), Kummer MP(1),
Griep A(1), Gelpi E(4), Beilharz M(3), Riedel D(5), Golenbock DT(6), Geyer M(3),
Walter J(2), Latz E(3)(6)(7), Heneka MT(1)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurodegenerative Diseases and Gerontopsychiatry, University of
Bonn, Sigmund-Freud-Strasse 25, 53127 Bonn, Germany.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany.
(3)Institute of Innate Immunity, University of Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany.
(4)Neurological Tissue Bank, University of Barcelona-Hospital Clinic, IDIBAPS,
08036 Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Electron Microscopy Group, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry,
37077 Göttingen, Germany.
(6)Department of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA.
(7)Deutsches Zentrum für Neurodegenerative Erkrankungen (DZNE), 53127 Bonn,
Germany.

Comment in
    Nature. 2017 Dec 21;552(7685):342-343. doi: 10.1038/d41586-017-08668-6.

The spreading of pathology within and between brain areas is a hallmark of
neurodegenerative disorders. In patients with Alzheimer's disease, deposition of
amyloid-β is accompanied by activation of the innate immune system and involves
inflammasome-dependent formation of ASC specks in microglia. ASC specks released
by microglia bind rapidly to amyloid-β and increase the formation of amyloid-β
oligomers and aggregates, acting as an inflammation-driven cross-seed for
amyloid-β pathology. Here we show that intrahippocampal injection of ASC specks
resulted in spreading of amyloid-β pathology in transgenic double-mutant
APPSwePSEN1dE9 mice. By contrast, homogenates from brains of APPSwePSEN1dE9 mice
failed to induce seeding and spreading of amyloid-β pathology in ASC-deficient
APPSwePSEN1dE9 mice. Moreover, co-application of an anti-ASC antibody blocked
the increase in amyloid-β pathology in APPSwePSEN1dE9 mice. These findings
support the concept that inflammasome activation is connected to seeding and
spreading of amyloid-β pathology in patients with Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1038/nature25158
PMID: 29293211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
