---
reference_id: "PMID:26606077"
title: Diagnostic challenges of adult asthma.
authors:
- Virchow JC
journal: Curr Opin Pulm Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000232
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic challenges of adult asthma.
**Authors:** Virchow JC
**Journal:** Curr Opin Pulm Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MCP.0000000000000232](https://doi.org/10.1097/MCP.0000000000000232)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2016 Jan;22(1):38-45. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000232.

Diagnostic challenges of adult asthma.

Virchow JC(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pneumology and Intensive Care Medicine, Medizinische Klinik 1, 
Zentrum für Innere Medizin, Universitätsmedizin Rostock, e.-Heydemannstrasse 6, 
18057 Rostock, Germany.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Bronchial asthma is a common disorder that affects about 300 
million people worldwide. Its signs and symptoms however, can be present in 
other pulmonary and/or airway diseases and therefore a careful workup of 
patients with respiratory symptoms that might be due to asthma is required to a) 
keep a broad differential diagnosis, especially in cases that do not respond 
well to standard antiasthmatic therapy and b) attempt to subphenotype patients 
within the syndrome of asthma to diagnose e.g. precipitating factors, 
inflammatory subtypes and comorbidities.
RECENT FINDINGS: The syndrome of asthma contains a number of different 
phenotypes that offer the possibility of personalized medicine based on the 
respective asthma phenotype. There are attempts to combine asthma and COPD in 
newly postulated overlap syndromes which this review discourages to do but 
instead, based on new and old information concerning asthma phenotyping, 
suggests to rule in comorbidities and rule out a number of other diseases that 
can mimick asthma clinically.
SUMMARY: Bronchial asthma, although one of the most common respiratory diseases, 
can be mimicked by a number of other pulmonary and airway diseases, and 
especially patients with so called severe or treatment refractory asthma should 
receive a detailed diagnostic workup with a rather broad differential diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000000232
PMID: 26606077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]