---
reference_id: "PMID:2923250"
title: Effect of blood glucose concentration on osmoregulation in diabetes mellitus.
authors:
- Thompson CJ
- Davis SN
- Baylis PH
journal: Am J Physiol
year: '1989'
doi: 10.1152/ajpregu.1989.256.3.R597
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of blood glucose concentration on osmoregulation in diabetes mellitus.
**Authors:** Thompson CJ, Davis SN, Baylis PH
**Journal:** Am J Physiol (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpregu.1989.256.3.R597](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpregu.1989.256.3.R597)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol. 1989 Mar;256(3 Pt 2):R597-604. doi: 
10.1152/ajpregu.1989.256.3.R597.

Effect of blood glucose concentration on osmoregulation in diabetes mellitus.

Thompson CJ(1), Davis SN, Baylis PH.

Author information:
(1)Endocrine Unit, Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle upon Tyne, United 
Kingdom.

Poorly controlled insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus is associated with 
considerable elevations of plasma vasopressin concentrations, although 
well-controlled diabetics have normal osmoregulated thirst and vasopressin 
release. We studied the effect of blood glucose concentration on osmoregulated 
thirst and vasopressin secretion in insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Blood 
glucose was maintained overnight, and for the duration of the study, in either 
the euglycemic (4-5 mmol/l) or hyperglycemic (10-12 mmol/l) range, and patients 
underwent infusion of hypertonic (855 mmol/l) sodium chloride solution. Plasma 
sodium was lower during the hyperglycemic study, but elevation in plasma sodium 
concentration by infusion of saline caused progressive linear increases in both 
thirst and plasma vasopressin concentrations in both studies. Linear regression 
analysis defined lowered plasma sodium thresholds for both thirst appreciation 
and vasopressin release during the hyperglycemic study, although the sensitivity 
of the osmoreceptors remained unchanged. Analysis of the data in terms of plasma 
osmolality, corrected for the increase in blood glucose in the hyperglycemic 
study, revealed no differences in the osmotic thresholds for thirst or 
vasopressin release; sensitivity of the osmoreceptors also remained the same. 
Drinking abolished thirst and lowered plasma vasopressin concentrations before 
major changes in plasma sodium were observed. These results show that 
insulin-dependent diabetic patients osmoregulate appropriately when moderately 
hyperglycemic but that the threshold plasma sodium for vasopressin secretion and 
thirst appreciation is lowered by an unknown mechanism.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpregu.1989.256.3.R597
PMID: 2923250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]