---
reference_id: "PMID:32201007"
title: The Society for Vascular Surgery clinical practice guidelines on the management of visceral aneurysms.
authors:
- Chaer RA
- Abularrage CJ
- Coleman DM
- Eslami MH
- Kashyap VS
- Rockman C
- Murad MH
journal: J Vasc Surg
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2020.01.039
keywords:
- "Aneurysm/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- "Arteries/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- Consensus
- "Endovascular Procedures/adverse effects, standards"
- Evidence-Based Medicine/standards
- Humans
- Risk Factors
- Treatment Outcome
- "Vascular Surgical Procedures/adverse effects, standards"
- Viscera/blood supply
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Society for Vascular Surgery clinical practice guidelines on the management of visceral aneurysms.
**Authors:** Chaer RA, Abularrage CJ, Coleman DM, Eslami MH, Kashyap VS, Rockman C, Murad MH
**Journal:** J Vasc Surg (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jvs.2020.01.039](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvs.2020.01.039)

## Content

1. J Vasc Surg. 2020 Jul;72(1S):3S-39S. doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2020.01.039. Epub 2020
 Mar 20.

The Society for Vascular Surgery clinical practice guidelines on the management 
of visceral aneurysms.

Chaer RA(1), Abularrage CJ(2), Coleman DM(3), Eslami MH(4), Kashyap VS(5), 
Rockman C(6), Murad MH(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Vascular Surgery, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, 
Pittsburgh, Pa. Electronic address: chaerra@upmc.edu.
(2)Division of Vascular Surgery, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Md.
(3)Division of Vascular Surgery, University of Michigan Hospitals, Ann Arbor, 
Mich.
(4)Division of Vascular Surgery, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, 
Pittsburgh, Pa.
(5)Division of Vascular Surgery, University Hospitals Case Medical Center, 
Cleveland, Ohio.
(6)Division of Vascular Surgery, New York University Langone Medicine Center, 
New York, NY.
(7)Mayo Clinic Evidence-Based Practice Center, Rochester, Minn.

Comment in
    J Vasc Surg. 2020 Jul;72(1S):1S-2S. doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2020.04.485.

These Society for Vascular Surgery Clinical Practice Guidelines describe the 
care of patients with aneurysms of the visceral arteries. They include 
evidence-based size thresholds for repair of aneurysms of the renal arteries, 
splenic artery, celiac artery, and hepatic artery, among others. Specific open 
surgical and endovascular repair strategies are also discussed. They also 
describe specific circumstances in which aneurysms may be repaired at smaller 
sizes than these size thresholds, including in women of childbearing age and 
false aneurysms. These Guidelines offer important recommendations for the care 
of patients with aneurysms of the visceral arteries and long-awaited guidance 
for clinicians who treat these patients.

Copyright © 2020 Society for Vascular Surgery. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jvs.2020.01.039
PMID: 32201007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]