---
reference_id: "PMID:26769607"
title: A novel mutation of PDE8B Gene in a Japanese family with autosomal-dominant striatal degeneration.
authors:
- Azuma R
- Ishikawa K
- Hirata K
- Hashimoto Y
- Takahashi M
- Ishii K
- Inaba A
- Yokota T
- Orimo S
journal: Mov Disord
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/mds.26345
keywords:
- "3',5'-Cyclic-AMP Phosphodiesterases/genetics"
- Adult
- Aged
- Brain/pathology
- Corpus Striatum/pathology
- Female
- Humans
- Japan
- Male
- Mutation
- "Nerve Degeneration/congenital, genetics, pathology"
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel mutation of PDE8B Gene in a Japanese family with autosomal-dominant striatal degeneration.
**Authors:** Azuma R, Ishikawa K, Hirata K, Hashimoto Y, Takahashi M, Ishii K, Inaba A, Yokota T, Orimo S
**Journal:** Mov Disord (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.26345](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.26345)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 2015 Dec;30(14):1964-7. doi: 10.1002/mds.26345. Epub 2015 Oct 13.

A novel mutation of PDE8B Gene in a Japanese family with autosomal-dominant
striatal degeneration.

Azuma R(1), Ishikawa K(2), Hirata K(1), Hashimoto Y(2), Takahashi M(1), Ishii
K(3), Inaba A(1), Yokota T(2), Orimo S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Kanto Central Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Neurology and Neurological Science, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Research Team for Neuroimaging, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Gerontology,
Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Autosomal-dominant striatal degeneration is a rare
autosomal-dominant neurodegenerative movement disorder characterized by slowly
progressive parkinsonism. Recently, a mutation of the cyclic nucleotide
phosphodiesterase 8B gene was reported to be a causal gene mutation of this
disease.
METHODS: We report on the clinical characteristics of 2 patients of a Japanese
family with autosomal-dominant striatal degeneration and the result of gene
mutation analysis of this family.
RESULTS: Clinical features of the patients are slowly progressive parkinsonism
and brain MRI showing high signal intensity in T2-weighted images in the
striatum. We found a heterozygous nonsense mutation in the first exon of cyclic
nucleotide phosphodiesterase 8B gene, which is predicted to disrupt all
important functional domains of the cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase 8B
protein.
CONCLUSIONS: This family is the second family with autosomal-dominant striatal
degeneration after the first German family, confirming that cyclic nucleotide
phosphodiesterase 8B gene is the causative gene for this disease.

© 2015 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.26345
PMID: 26769607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
