---
reference_id: "PMID:32107533"
title: Erdheim-Chester disease.
authors:
- Haroche J
- Cohen-Aubart F
- Amoura Z
journal: Blood
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1182/blood.2019002766
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Erdheim-Chester disease.
**Authors:** Haroche J, Cohen-Aubart F, Amoura Z
**Journal:** Blood (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood.2019002766](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.2019002766)

## Content

1. Blood. 2020 Apr 16;135(16):1311-1318. doi: 10.1182/blood.2019002766.

Erdheim-Chester disease.

Haroche J(1), Cohen-Aubart F(1), Amoura Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Sorbonne Université, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Service de 
Médecine Interne 2, Maladies Auto-Imunes et Systémiques, Centre National de 
Référence des Histiocytoses, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.

Erdheim-Chester disease (ECD) is characterized by the infiltration of tissues by 
foamy CD68+CD1a- histiocytes, with 1500 known cases since 1930. Mutations 
activating the MAPK pathway are found in more than 80% of patients with ECD, 
mainly the BRAFV600E activating mutation in 57% to 70% of cases, followed by 
MAP2K1 in close to 20%. The discovery of BRAF mutations and of other MAP kinase 
pathway alterations, as well as the co-occurrence of ECD with LCH in 15% of 
patients with ECD, led to the 2016 revision of the classification of 
histiocytoses in which LCH and ECD belong to the "L" group. Both conditions are 
considered inflammatory myeloid neoplasms. Ten percent of ECD cases are 
associated with myeloproliferative neoplasms and/or myelodysplastic syndromes. 
Some of the most striking signs of ECD are the long bone involvement (80%-95%), 
as well as the hairy kidney appearance on computed tomography scan (63%), the 
coated aorta (40%), and the right atrium pseudo-tumoral infiltration (36%). 
Central nervous system involvement is a strong prognostic factor and independent 
predictor of death. Interferon-α seems to be the best initial treatment of ECD. 
Since 2012, more than 200 patients worldwide with multisystem or refractory ECD 
have benefitted from highly effective therapy with BRAF and MEK inhibitors. 
Targeted therapies have an overall, robust, and reproducible efficacy in ECD, 
with no acquired resistance to date, but their use may be best reserved for the 
most severe manifestations of the disease, as they may be associated with 
serious adverse effects and as-yet-unknown long-term consequences.

© 2020 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.2019002766
PMID: 32107533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]