---
reference_id: "PMID:31966039"
title: Biology and pathogenesis of human osteosarcoma.
authors:
- de Azevedo JWV
- de Medeiros Fernandes TAA
- Fernandes JV Jr
- de Azevedo JCV
- Lanza DCF
- Bezerra CM
- Andrade VS
- de Araújo JMG
- Fernandes JV
journal: Oncol Lett
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3892/ol.2019.11229
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biology and pathogenesis of human osteosarcoma.
**Authors:** de Azevedo JWV, de Medeiros Fernandes TAA, Fernandes JV Jr, de Azevedo JCV, Lanza DCF, Bezerra CM, Andrade VS, de Araújo JMG, Fernandes JV
**Journal:** Oncol Lett (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3892/ol.2019.11229](https://doi.org/10.3892/ol.2019.11229)

## Content

1. Oncol Lett. 2020 Feb;19(2):1099-1116. doi: 10.3892/ol.2019.11229. Epub 2019
Dec  18.

Biology and pathogenesis of human osteosarcoma.

de Azevedo JWV(1), de Medeiros Fernandes TAA(2), Fernandes JV Jr(3), de Azevedo
JCV(4), Lanza DCF(5), Bezerra CM(6), Andrade VS(6), de Araújo JMG(6), Fernandes
JV(6).

Author information:
(1)Orthopedic Trauma Clinic Service, Deoclécio Marques Hospital, 59141-085
Parnamirim, RN, Brazil.
(2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Rio Grande do Norte State,
59607-360 Mossoró, RN, Brazil.
(3)Orthopedic Trauma Clinic Service, Getulio Vargas Hospital, 50630-060 Recife,
PE, Brazil.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Onofre Lopes, Federal
University of Rio Grande do Norte, 59012-300 Natal, RN, Brazil.
(5)Department of Biochemisty, Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte,
59072-970 Natal, RN, Brazil.
(6)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Federal University of Rio Grande
do Norte, 59072-970 Natal, RN, Brazil.

Osteosarcoma (OS) is a bone tumor of mesenchymal origin, most frequently
occurring during the rapid growth phase of long bones, and usually located in
the epiphyseal growth plates of the femur or the tibia. Its most common feature
is genome disorganization, aneuploidy with chromosomal alterations, deregulation
of tumor suppressor genes and of the cell cycle, and an absence of DNA repair.
This suggests the involvement of surveillance failures, DNA repair or apoptosis
control during osteogenesis, allowing the survival of cells which have undergone
alterations during differentiation. Epigenetic events, including DNA
methylation, histone modifications, nucleosome remodeling and expression of
non-coding RNAs have been identified as possible risk factors for the tumor. It
has been reported that p53 target genes or those genes that have their activity
modulated by p53, in addition to other tumor suppressor genes, are silenced in
OS-derived cell lines by hypermethylation of their promoters. In osteogenesis,
osteoblasts are formed from pluripotent mesenchymal cells, with potential for
self-renewal, proliferation and differentiation into various cell types. This
involves complex signaling pathways and multiple factors. Any disturbance in
this process can cause deregulation of the differentiation and proliferation of
these cells, leading to the malignant phenotype. Therefore, the origin of OS
seems to be multifactorial, involving the deregulation of differentiation of
mesenchymal cells and tumor suppressor genes, activation of oncogenes,
epigenetic events and the production of cytokines.

Copyright: © de Azevedo et al.

DOI: 10.3892/ol.2019.11229
PMCID: PMC6955653
PMID: 31966039
