---
reference_id: "PMID:28533336"
title: A Coding Variant in the Gene Bardet-Biedl Syndrome 4 (BBS4) Is Associated with a Novel Form of Canine Progressive Retinal Atrophy.
authors:
- Chew T
- Haase B
- Bathgate R
- Willet CE
- Kaukonen MK
- Mascord LJ
- Lohi HT
- Wade CM
journal: G3 (Bethesda)
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1534/g3.117.043109
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Coding Variant in the Gene Bardet-Biedl Syndrome 4 (BBS4) Is Associated with a Novel Form of Canine Progressive Retinal Atrophy.
**Authors:** Chew T, Haase B, Bathgate R, Willet CE, Kaukonen MK, Mascord LJ, Lohi HT, Wade CM
**Journal:** G3 (Bethesda) (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1534/g3.117.043109](https://doi.org/10.1534/g3.117.043109)

## Content

1. G3 (Bethesda). 2017 Jul 5;7(7):2327-2335. doi: 10.1534/g3.117.043109.

A Coding Variant in the Gene Bardet-Biedl Syndrome 4 (BBS4) Is Associated with a 
Novel Form of Canine Progressive Retinal Atrophy.

Chew T(1), Haase B(2), Bathgate R(2), Willet CE(3), Kaukonen MK(4)(5)(6), 
Mascord LJ(7), Lohi HT(4)(5)(6), Wade CM(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of 
Sydney, 2006, Australia tracy.chew@sydney.edu.au claire.wade@sydney.edu.au.
(2)Sydney School of Veterinary Science, Faculty of Science, University of 
Sydney, 2006, Australia.
(3)Sydney Informatics Hub, Core Research Facilities, University of Sydney, 2006, 
Australia.
(4)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, University of Helsinki, 00014, Finland.
(5)Research Programs Unit, Molecular Neurology, University of Helsinki, 00014, 
Finland.
(6)Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, University of Helsinki, 00014, Finland.
(7)School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of 
Sydney, 2006, Australia.

Progressive retinal atrophy is a common cause of blindness in the dog and 
affects >100 breeds. It is characterized by gradual vision loss that occurs due 
to the degeneration of photoreceptor cells in the retina. Similar to the human 
counterpart retinitis pigmentosa, the canine disorder is clinically and 
genetically heterogeneous and the underlying cause remains unknown for many 
cases. We use a positional candidate gene approach to identify putative variants 
in the Hungarian Puli breed using genotyping data of 14 family-based samples 
(CanineHD BeadChip array, Illumina) and whole-genome sequencing data of two 
proband and two parental samples (Illumina HiSeq 2000). A single nonsense SNP in 
exon 2 of BBS4 (c.58A > T, p.Lys20*) was identified following filtering of high 
quality variants. This allele is highly associated (PCHISQ = 3.425e-14, n = 103) 
and segregates perfectly with progressive retinal atrophy in the Hungarian Puli. 
In humans, BBS4 is known to cause Bardet-Biedl syndrome which includes a 
retinitis pigmentosa phenotype. From the observed coding change we expect that 
no functional BBS4 can be produced in the affected dogs. We identified canine 
phenotypes comparable with Bbs4-null mice including obesity and spermatozoa 
flagella defects. Knockout mice fail to form spermatozoa flagella. In the 
affected Hungarian Puli spermatozoa flagella are present, however a large 
proportion of sperm are morphologically abnormal and <5% are motile. This 
suggests that BBS4 contributes to flagella motility but not formation in the 
dog. Our results suggest a promising opportunity for studying Bardet-Biedl 
syndrome in a large animal model.

Copyright © 2017 Chew et al.

DOI: 10.1534/g3.117.043109
PMCID: PMC5499139
PMID: 28533336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]