---
reference_id: "PMID:23954411"
title: "Cutis laxa: intersection of elastic fiber biogenesis, TGFβ signaling, the secretory pathway and metabolism."
authors:
- Urban Z
- Davis EC
journal: Matrix Biol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2013.07.006
keywords:
- Cutis Laxa/metabolism
- Elastic Tissue/metabolism
- Humans
- Protein Transport
- Protein-Lysine 6-Oxidase
- Reactive Oxygen Species/metabolism
- Secretory Pathway
- Signal Transduction
- Transforming Growth Factor beta/physiology
- Transport Vesicles/metabolism
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Cutis laxa: intersection of elastic fiber biogenesis, TGFβ signaling, the secretory pathway and metabolism.
**Authors:** Urban Z, Davis EC
**Journal:** Matrix Biol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.matbio.2013.07.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matbio.2013.07.006)

## Content

1. Matrix Biol. 2014 Jan;33:16-22. doi: 10.1016/j.matbio.2013.07.006. Epub 2013
Aug  16.

Cutis laxa: intersection of elastic fiber biogenesis, TGFβ signaling, the
secretory pathway and metabolism.

Urban Z(1), Davis EC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Public Health, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, United States. Electronic address:
urbanz@pitt.edu.
(2)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec,
H3A 0C7 Canada.

Cutis laxa (CL), a disease characterized by redundant and inelastic skin,
displays extensive locus heterogeneity. Together with geroderma
osteodysplasticum and arterial tortuosity syndrome, which show phenotypic
overlap with CL, eleven CL-related genes have been identified to date, which
encode proteins within 3 groups. Elastin, fibulin-4, fibulin-5 and latent
transforming growth factor-β-binding protein 4 are secreted proteins which form
elastic fibers and are involved in the sequestration and subsequent activation
of transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ). Proteins within the second group,
localized to the secretory pathway, perform transport and membrane trafficking
functions necessary for the modification and secretion of elastic fiber
components. Key proteins include a subunit of the vacuolar-type proton pump,
which ensures the efficient secretion of tropoelastin, the precursor or elastin.
A copper transporter is required for the activity of lysyl oxidases, which
crosslink collagen and elastin. A Rab6-interacting goglin recruits kinesin
motors to Golgi-vesicles facilitating the transport from the Golgi to the plasma
membrane. The Rab and Ras interactor 2 regulates the activity of Rab5, a small
guanosine triphosphatase essential for the endocytosis of various cell surface
receptors, including integrins. Proteins of the third group related to CL
perform metabolic functions within the mitochondria, inhibiting the accumulation
of reactive oxygen species. Two of these proteins catalyze subsequent steps in
the conversion of glutamate to proline. The third transports dehydroascorbate
into mitochondria. Recent studies on CL-related proteins highlight the intricate
connections among membrane trafficking, metabolism, extracellular matrix
assembly, and TGFβ signaling.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.matbio.2013.07.006
PMCID: PMC4109627
PMID: 23954411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Cutis laxa (CL) is a group of disorders characterized by redundant,
pendulous, prematurely wrinkled and inelastic skin. CL can either be inherited or
acquired secondary to a range of inflammatory conditions. Considerable progress has
been made in identifying the genes responsible for inherited forms of CL (Table 1). A detailed review of the clinical
manifestations of the different types of inherited CL and related syndromes has
recently been published (Berk et al., 2012).
Recent reviews also discussed the genetic heterogeneity of CL and its implications
for the complexity of elastic fiber biogenesis (Uitto et al., 2013; Urban, 2012).
Complementary human genetic, biochemical, cell biological and animal model studies
now suggest that many forms of inherited CL display abnormalities both of elastic
fibers biogenesis and of transforming growth factor-β (TGFβ)
signaling, membrane trafficking and mitochondrial metabolism, highlighting the
integration of these processes at multiple levels. The goal of this review is to
discuss these latest insights.

The skin manifestations in inherited CL are usually congenital and
generalized, and are commonly associated with involvement of elastic tissues within
the respiratory and cardiovascular systems (Berk et
al., 2012). The phenotype is consistent with a generalized elastinopathy.
However, some forms of CL are also associated with growth and developmental delay,
craniofacial anomalies, reduced bone density, joint and ligament laxity, hernias and
gastrointestinal and urinary tract lesions suggesting broader connective tissue
involvement (Table 1). Histological and
electron microscopic studies have shown a range of elastic fiber abnormalities in
CL, consistent with defective assembly of these extracellular matrix (ECM)
structures (Figure 1). Consistently, several
genes that encode proteins associated with elastic fibers, including elastin,
fibulin-4, fibulin-5 and latent TGFβ-binding protein 4 (LTBP4), have been
identified to harbor mutations causing CL (Table
1). The mechanisms by which mutations in these genes lead to abnormal
elastic fiber assembly and altered TGFβ signaling is beginning to emerge.

Autosomal dominant CL (ADCL) is most commonly caused by frameshift mutations
within the last 5 exons of the elastin gene (ELN)
(Callewaert et al., 2011; Hadj-Rabia et al., 2013). These mutations lead
to the replacement of the C-terminus of the elastin precursor, tropoelastin, with a
missense peptide sequence as a consequence of a stable mutant mRNA and protein
(Callewaert et al., 2011; Szabo et al., 2006). ADCL-causing mutations
have multiple cellular and biochemical effects. The most upstream (exon 30)
mutations result in the longest missense peptide sequence, which activates the
unfolded protein response (UPR) and leads to increased rates of apoptosis both in
patient-derived skin fibroblasts (Callewaert et al.,
2011) and in a transgenic mouse model (Hu
et al., 2010). Despite activation of the UPR, the mutant tropoelastin is
partially secreted by ADCL cells and alters the assembly of the elastic fibers by
interfering with the binding of tropoelastin to fibulin-5 and fibrillin-1 (Sato et al., 2006). In addition, ADCL mutations
increase the coacervation of tropoelastin in a dominant manner (Callewaert et al., 2011). The effects of these
biochemical changes include ultrastructural disorganization and altered mechanical
properties of the elastic fibers (Callewaert et al.,
2011; Hu et al., 2010). In
transgenic mouse models, the mutant tropoelastin was observed to contribute to lung
elastic fibers, but was largely excluded from fibers in the skin and blood vessels
(Hu et al., 2010; Sugitani et al., 2012). Although these findings point to
tissue-specific mechanisms of elastic fiber assembly, the precise molecular
determinants of such tissue specificity remain to be determined. Nevertheless, it is
clear that ADCL-related ELN mutations are characterized by a
complex molecular disease mechanism with a gain of function in polymerization and a
loss of function in elastin-microfibril interaction coupled with some non-specific
toxic effects associated with protein misfolding.

The profound functional consequences of alterations at the C-terminus of
tropoelastin in ADCL strengthen an existing body of evidence for the essential
nature of this region for a variety of activities. For example, the last 17 amino
acids of tropoelastin are key for cell attachment both via heparan sulfate
proteoglycans (HSPGs) (Broekelmann et al.,
2005) and through non-RGD-mediated
αvβ3 integrin binding (Bax et al., 2009). Consistent with the dynamic, cell-mediated
nature of elastic fiber assembly (Czirok et al.,
2006; Kozel et al., 2006),
antibodies against this C-terminal cell interaction domain interfere with elastin
deposition (Brown-Augsburger et al., 1996).
Additionally, the hydrophobic domain encoded by exon 30 is essential for
tropoelastin polymerization, and hence, fiber formation (Kozel et al., 2003).

Whereas the molecular mechanisms of ADCL are quite complex, autosomal
recessive CL (ARCL) involves a simpler, loss of function mechanism. Type 1 ARCL
(ARCL1), characterized by severe cardiovascular or pulmonary manifestations (Table 1), can be caused by mutations in
fibulin-5 (FBLN5, ARCL1A) (Loeys et al., 2002), fibulin-4
(FBLN4/EFEMP2, ARCL1B) (Hucthagowder et al., 2006), and LTBP4 (ARCL1C) (Urban et al., 2009).

Loss of function mutations in FBLN5 result in ARCL1A
associated with severe, often fatal, infantile respiratory distress related to
developmental emphysema. Other common manifestations include supravalvular aortic
stenosis, pulmonary artery stenosis and inguinal hernias (Callewaert et al., 2013; Claus
et al., 2008; Elahi et al., 2006;
Loeys et al., 2002).
Fibulin-5 knockout mice show a similar phenotype with skin
laxity, developmental emphysema, elongation, tortuosity and altered branching of the
large arteries (Nakamura et al., 2002; Yanagisawa et al., 2002), an increased
angiogenic phenotype (Sullivan et al., 2007),
and pelvic prolapse (Drewes et al., 2007).
ARCL1A-causing mutations affect the folding and secretion of fibulin-5 resulting in
a failure of elastin to be properly integrated with microfibrils (Choi et al., 2009; Hu et al., 2006; Lotery et al.,
2006). Biochemical studies have highlighted a number of activities of
fibulin-5, including its ability to bind lysyl oxidase-like-1 (LOXL1) (Hirai et al., 2007b; Liu et al., 2004), LOXL2, and LOXL4 (Hirai et al., 2007b), fibrillin-1 (El-Hallous et al., 2007; Freeman et al., 2005; Ono et al.,
2009), tropoelastin (Hirai et al.,
2007b; Yanagisawa et al., 2002),
LTBP2 (Hirai et al., 2007a) and LTBP4 (Noda et al., 2013). The binding of fibulin-5
increases the coacervation and crosslinking of tropoelastin, facilitating elastic
fiber formation (Hirai et al., 2007b; Wachi et al., 2008). Furthermore, an RGD motif
in fibulin-5 binds αvβ3,
αvβ5,
α4β1,
α5β1 and
α9β1 integrins (Lomas et al., 2007; Nakamura et
al., 2002). In vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC), the main integrins
responsible for attachment to fibulin-5 are α4β1
and α5β1, however, binding to fibulin-5 does not
result in integrin activation (Lomas et al.,
2007). Additionally, in vivo evidence suggests that
fibulin-5-integrin interactions are not necessary for elastic fiber formation, as
mice carrying homozygous RGD>RGE mutations in fibulin-5 are
normal (Budatha et al., 2011).

Fibulin-5-deficient tissues show increased angiogenesis and vascular
invasion, with elevated VEGF and angiopoietin expression playing a role (Sullivan et al., 2007). Conversely,
transplanted tumors show decreased growth in fibulin-5 knockout mice associated with
increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) production dependent on
β1-integrin and fibronectin (Schluterman et al., 2010). Fibulin-5 also binds the extracellular
superoxide dismutase, Sod3. In the absence of fibulin-5, the localization of Sod3 to
the ECM is lost, leading to an elevated extracellular superoxide levels in vessels
(Nguyen et al., 2004). However, it
remains unclear if any of these physiological changes contribute to disease in human
patients with fibulin-5 mutations.

Mutations in FBLN4cause ARCL1B, a disease associated with
widespread systemic involvement, including arterial tortuosity, aortic aneurysm,
pulmonary hypertension, developmental emphysema, bone fragility, aranchnodactyly,
joint laxity and diaphragmatic and inguinal hernias (Dasouki et al., 2007; Hoyer et al.,
2009; Hucthagowder et al., 2006;
Renard et al., 2010). Knockout and
hypomorphic mice replicate many of these phenotypes (Hanada et al., 2007; Horiguchi et al.,
2009; Huang et al., 2010; McLaughlin et al., 2006). Fibulin-4 binds
tropoelastin (McLaughlin et al., 2006),
fibrillin-1 (Choudhury et al., 2009; El-Hallous et al., 2007; Ono et al., 2009) and LTBP1 (Massam-Wu et al., 2010). A somewhat different set of ligands, distinct
binding affinities for shared ligands and cell type- and developmental
stage-specific expression of fibulin-5 and fibulin-4 ensure that these proteins
perform non-overlapping functions in elastic fiber assembly. For example, fibulin-5
has higher affinity for tropoelastin than fibrillin-1, whereas fibulin-4
preferentially binds fibrillin-1 over tropoelastin. Fibulin-4 can form a ternary
complex with tropoelastin and LOX, facilitating the crosslinking of elastin (Choudhury et al., 2009; Horiguchi et al., 2009). In addition, fibulin-5 enhances
tropoelastin coacervation (Hirai et al.,
2007b; Wachi et al., 2008). Both
fibulin-4 and fibulin-5 limit tropoelastin droplet size during the maturation of
coacervates (Cirulis et al., 2008). In both
human mutations and animal models, the absence of fibulin-5 leads to elastin
deposits that are large and not integrated with the microfibril scaffold (Hu et al., 2006; Nakamura et al., 2002; Yanagisawa et al., 2002). In contrast, fibulin-4 mutant
patients and mice show greatly reduced amounts of elastic fibers, a decrease in
elastin-specific desmosine crosslinks and disorganization of the elastic fiber
ultrastructure (Horiguchi et al., 2009; Hucthagowder et al., 2006; McLaughlin et al., 2006).

In a VSMC conditional knockout of fibulin-4, the VSMC were shown to be
undifferentiated, together with enhanced angiotensin production, increased ERK
signaling and cell proliferation (Huang et al.,
2010; Huang et al., 2013). Aortic
aneurysms caused by fibulin-4 deficiency can be prevented by treatment with an
angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor (captopril) or an angiotensin II type 1
receptor inhibitor (losartan) (Huang et al.,
2013; Moller et al., 2005),
indicating a role for fibulin-4 in the regulation of angiotensin signaling and VSMC
homeostasis and identifying a potential approach for the treatment of patients with
fibulin-4 mutations.

Mutations in LTBP4 cause ARCL1C, also known as
Urban-Rifkin-Davis syndrome, characterized by severe developmental emphysema, severe
diverticulosis, tortuosity, enlargement and stenosis of the gastrointestinal tract,
diverticulosis of the bladder and diaphragmatic and inguinal hernias (Callewaert et al., 2013; Urban et al., 2009). Respiratory failure and, less frequently,
intestinal perforation are causes of premature death. LTBP4
utilizes 3 alternative promoters producing one small (LTBP4S) and 2 large (LTBP4L)
isoforms. Human mutations identified to date affect all isoforms. A knockout mouse
has only been reported for Ltbp4S (Sterner-Kock et
al., 2002), which nevertheless replicates the elastic fiber phenotypes
seen in humans, such as developmental emphysema and the abnormal morphology of
elastic fibers with large elastin deposits with a smooth surface devoid of
microfibrils (Dabovic et al., 2009; Urban et al., 2009). However, the structural
anomalies of the gastrointestinal and urinary systems observed in humans with
LTBP4 mutations are not present in Ltbp4S−/−
mice, suggesting that normal development of the digestive system and bladder
primarily requires LTBP4L.

An increasing body of evidence shows that LTBP4 has at least two functions,
one related to TGFβ sequestration, and the other for facilitating elastic
fiber assembly. Indeed, the developmental emphysema observed in
Ltbp4S−/− mice could be partially reversed by reducing the
TGFβ2 dose, but the elastic fiber abnormality was not corrected (Dabovic et al., 2009). LTBP4 isoforms are
functionally specialized, with LTBP4L preferentially binding TGFβ, and LTBP4S
associated with the ECM (Kantola et al.,
2010). Consistent with phenotypic similarities between ARCL1A and ARCL1C and
between Fbln5−/− and
Ltbp4S−/− mice, LTBP4 binds fibulin-5 (Noda et al., 2013) and fibrillin-1 (Isogai et al., 2003), facilitating the
incorporation of fibulin-5/elastin complexes onto microfibrils. LTBP4 is also known
to interact with fibronectin and HSPGs and is capable of supporting cell adhesion
(Kantola et al., 2008). Although the
importance of these functions for elastic fiber formation or TGFβ signaling
remains unclear, a human mutation eliminating the C-terminal cell-attachment region
results in microfibrillar bundles of abnormally thick and wavy morphology (Callewaert et al., 2013) suggesting that a
balanced binding of cells and ECM molecules is necessary for LTBP4 to contribute to
normal deposition of elastic fibers.

TGFβs are a family of cytokines involved in reciprocal interactions
with the ECM. They are secreted in a latent form strongly but non-covalently bound
to their propeptides, also known as latency-associated peptides, which in turn
interact with latent TGFβ-binding proteins (LTBPs). LTBPs target latent
TGFβs to the ECM by binding to fibrillin-1, fibronectin and HSPGs. Activation
of latent TGFβs can occur by integrin-mediated force generation, proteolytic
degradation, exposure to ROS or interaction with matricellular proteins, such as
thrombospondin-1 (Horiguchi et al.,
2012).

TGFβs, in turn, up-regulate the expression of many genes necessary
for the production of elastic fibers including fibronectin (Ignotz et al., 1987), LTBPs
(Ahmed et al., 1998; Weikkolainen et al., 2003), ELN (Kahari et al., 1992; Kucich et al., 1997), LOXs (Boak et al., 1994; Kim et al., 2008) and FBLN5 (Kuang et al., 2006). This regulation occurs at
the transcriptional (Ahmed et al., 1998; Ignotz et al., 1987; Kim et al., 2008; Kuang et al.,
2006) or posttranscriptional level depending on the gene (Kahari et al., 1992; Kucich et al., 1997). Posttranscriptional regulation of
ELN and fibrillin-1 (FBN1) is
likely achieved in part by TGFβ-mediated suppression of the miR29 family of
micro-RNAs (van Rooij et al., 2008), which
have binding sites in several mRNAs encoding elastic fiber proteins (Table 2).

During the course of normal development or injury, sequestration of
TGFβ by elastic fibers serves as a negative feedback signal indicating that
sufficient amounts and quality of ECM has been produced. Consistently, loss of
function mutations in genes responsible for TGFβ sequestration, including
FBN1 and LTBP4, result in elevated TGFβ
signaling (Dabovic et al., 2009; Neptune et al., 2003; Urban et al., 2009). However, recent studies have shown
elevated TGFβ in several types of CL caused by mutations in genes not
directly involved in TGFβ sequestration, but rather required for the
biogenesis of elastic fibers including ELN (Callewaert et al., 2011; Hu et
al., 2010), fibulin-4 (Hanada et al., 2007; Renard et al.,
2010) and ATP6V0A2 (Fischer et al., 2012). Thus, impaired elastic fiber function sensed by
cells, in turn up-regulates TGFβ activity. Sensing of ECM dysfunction may
involve integrin-mediated activation of TGFβ itself, which is dependent on
the mechanical properties of the ECM, as well as on force generation by the cells
(Hinz, 2009). Consistently, mutations in
actin (ACTA2) and myosin (MYH11) genes, required for the contractility of VSMC, are
mutated in familial thoracic aortic aneurysms and are associated with increased
TGFβ signaling (Renard et al.,
2013).

In humans, there are three fibrillins and four LTBPs. These proteins contain
multiple TGFβ-binding (TB) domains interspersed with numerous calcium-binding
epidermal growth factor domains. The TB domain, which is found in no other proteins,
emerged over 600 million years ago in the Eumetazoa (Peterson and Butterfield, 2005) within a single fibrillin gene (Piha-Gossack et al., 2012). Diversification of
the TB domain led to the emergence of the first LTBP-like protein in sea urchins
(Robertson et al., 2011). TGFβ
also appeared at this time suggesting co-evolution of their functions (Robertson et al., 2011). Elastin appeared later
still, with the divergence of jawless fish (agnatha) and jawed vertebrates, known as
gnathostomes within the phylum Chordata (Keeley,
2013). This time period coincided with a duplication event leading to two
fibrillins (Piha-Gossack et al., 2012), and
the appearance of a closed circulatory system (Faury, 2001). The single fibrillin had also acquired a unique hybrid
domain and RGD-intergin binding sites in two of the TB domains by this time (Piha-Gossack et al., 2012). Like fibrillin,
fibulin-like proteins also existed in the Eumetazoa, much earlier than the emergence
of elastin supporting a functional role for fibulins independent of elastic fiber
assembly (Segade, 2010). Interestingly,
diversification of the fibulins also occurred at the same time as the evolution of
elastin. The appearance of specialized domains and the occurrence of duplication
events around the time of the evolution of elastin underscores the potential
functional significance of these specialized regions and duplicated proteins in
elastic fiber assembly.

Several CL-related genes are required for intracellular protein trafficking,
highlighting the importance of the secretory pathway in elastic fiber biogenesis.
Loss of function mutations in ATP7A, a copper transporter localized to the Golgi
apparatus, cause Menkes disease or a milder disease, occipital horn syndrome (OHS)
(Das et al., 1995). OHS, also known as
X-linked CL displays LOX deficiency associated with impaired crosslinking of elastin
and collagen (Byers et al., 1980). Recessive
mutations in the gene for the A2 subunit of the vacuolar proton pump,
ATP6V0A2, cause ARCL2A (Kornak
et al., 2008). ATP6V0A2-deficient cells show accumulation of tropoelastin
in the Golgi, Golgi fragmentation and an accumulation of lamellar bodies, leading to
impaired secretion of tropoelastin, but relatively preserved production of
fibrillin-1 and LOXs (Hucthagowder et al.,
2009). Macrocephaly alopecia CL scoliosis (MACS) syndrome is caused by a
recessive mutation in RIN2 (Ras and Rab interactor 2) (Basel-Vanagaite et al., 2009). Subsequently, a
recessive RIN2 mutation was also described in an Ehlers-Danlos syndrome-like
condition (Syx et al., 2010). Tissues and
cells from individuals with RIN2 mutations show abnormal endoplasmic reticulum,
Golgi apparatus, elastic and collagen fibers (Basel-Vanagaite et al., 2009; Syx et
al., 2010). Geroderma osteodysplasticum, a disease related to CL, is
caused by recessive mutations in the GORAB (goglin, Rab6 interacting) (Hennies et al., 2008). GORAB is localized to
the Golgi apparatus where it interacts with Rab6 G-proteins, which recruit kinesin
motor proteins required for the trafficking of secretory vesicles to the plasma
membrane (Grigoriev et al., 2007).

Three conditions related to CL are caused by mutations in molecules required
for cellular metabolism. ARCL2B, is caused by recessive mutations in gene for
pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase 1 (PYCR1) (Guernsey et al., 2009; Reversade et al., 2009), a mitochondrial enzyme that catalyzes the final
step of proline biosynthesis (De Ingeniis et al.,
2012). PYCR1 mutant cells do not show overt proline
deficiency, but are sensitive to oxidative stress, suggesting that PYCR1 is required
for the maintenance of mitochondrial antioxidant balance (Reversade et al., 2009). De Barsy syndrome, also known as
ARCL3, can be caused by mutations in ALDH18A1 (Bicknell et al., 2008; Skidmore et al.,
2011), the gene for another mitochondrial enzyme in the proline
biosynthetic pathway, Δ1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthase (P5CS).
In ALDH18A1 mutant cells, the assembly of collagen type I and elastin into ECM fibers
is diminished (Bicknell et al., 2008; Skidmore et al., 2011). Arterial tortuosity
syndrome (ATS), related to CL, is caused by mutations in the
SLC2A10 gene (Coucke et al.,
2006), which encodes the facilitative glucose transporter family member
10 (GLUT10). Patients show disorganized elastic fibers in the arterial wall and
elevated TGFβ signaling. Surprisingly, mice with inactivating missense
mutations in Slc2a10 do not show phenotypes characteristic of ATS
(Callewaert et al., 2008; Cheng et al., 2009). In contrast,
slc2a10 knockdown in zebrafish produces disorganization of the
vasculature, wavy notochord and cardiac edema, as well as mitochondrial dysfunction
and reduced TGFβ signaling (Willaert et al.,
2012). SLC2A10 was shown to be transport dehydroascorbate (oxidized
vitamin C) into mitochondria to limit the production of ROS (Lee et al., 2010). Thus, together with PYCR1, SLC2A10 is also
required for the maintenance of mitochondrial redox balance.

Human genetic studies on CL patients have revealed a network of genes
required for elastic fiber assembly, TGFβ sequestration and activation,
vesicular trafficking in the Golgi apparatus and metabolic function of the
mitochondria. The connections between secreted proteins (elastin, fibulin-4,
fibulin-5, LTBP4) and their interactions with other elastic fiber-related proteins
(fibronectin, lysyl oxidases, fibrillins, LTBPs) are well known and often involve
direct binding. However, the temporal and spatial hierarchy of these interactions
has not been defined yet. A combination of developmental and live imaging
investigations will be necessary to have a comprehensive mechanistic view of elastic
fiber assembly. The involvement of the posttranslational and sorting mechanisms that
occur in the secretory pathway will also need to be investigated, as they may define
the timing, order and precise biochemical milieu in which the components can
interact. Finally, the role of small molecule metabolites (ROS, proline) as well as
signaling molecules (angiotensin, TGFβ) in elastic fiber biogenesis and
dysfunction will need to be elucidated, as these molecules are more amenable to
therapeutic modification than structural elastic fiber proteins.
