---
reference_id: "PMID:20301494"
title: SCN1A Seizure Disorders.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Miller IO
- Sotero de Menezes MA
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SCN1A Seizure Disorders.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Miller IO, Sotero de Menezes MA

## Content

1. SCN1A Seizure Disorders.

Miller IO(1), Sotero de Menezes MA(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2007 Nov 29 [updated 2022 Feb 17].

Author information:
(1)Medical Director, Comprehensive Epilepsy Program, Nicklaus Children's 
Hospital, Miami, Florida
(2)Director, Genetic Epilepsy Clinic and TSC Clinic, Pediatric Neuroscience 
Center, Swedish Neuroscience Institute, Seattle, Washington

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: SCN1A seizure disorders encompass a spectrum that 
ranges from simple febrile seizures and generalized epilepsy with febrile 
seizures plus (GEFS+) at the mild end to Dravet syndrome and intractable 
childhood epilepsy with generalized tonic-clonic seizures (ICE-GTC) at the 
severe end. Phenotypes with intractable seizures including Dravet syndrome are 
often associated with cognitive decline. Less commonly observed phenotypes 
include myoclonic astatic epilepsy (MAE), Lennox-Gastaut syndrome, infantile 
spasms, epilepsy with focal seizures, and vaccine-related encephalopathy and 
seizures. The phenotype of SCN1A seizure disorders can vary even within the same 
family.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of an SCN1A seizure disorder is established in 
a proband by identification of a heterozygous pathogenic variant in SCN1A by 
molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Care is best provided by a physician 
(e.g., pediatric epileptologist) familiar with the pharmacotherapy for this 
disorder. Seizure control is critical to prevent permanent injury and death. 
Anti-seizure medication (ASM): clobazam (can be used for treatment of seizures 
in Lennox-Gastaut syndrome); stiripentol, benzodiazepines, cannabidiol, 
topiramate, levetiracetam, valproic acid, and ethosuximide. Levetiracetam is 
often effective, but may make seizures worse in some individuals. Phenobarbital 
is effective but poorly tolerated because of its effects on cognition. Use of 
the ketogenic diet to decrease seizure frequency has been beneficial in some 
affected individuals. Parents are advised to take a CPR course. Routine seizure 
and personal safety education is indicated. Prevention of secondary 
complications: Use of protective helmets by individuals with atonic seizures or 
myoclonic-astatic epilepsy. Good sleep hygiene should be encouraged. Persons 
with epilepsy should be made aware of motor vehicle driving laws. Surveillance: 
Serial neuropsychological evaluation for neurologic, cognitive, and behavioral 
deterioration; EEG monitoring for new or different seizure types; 
polysomnography should be considered if obstructive or central sleep apnea is 
suspected. Agents/circumstances to avoid: ASMs: carbamazepine, lamotrigine, and 
vigabatrin, which can induce or increase myoclonic seizures; phenytoin, which 
can induce choreoathetosis; rufinamide may exacerbate seizures as well; 
acetaminophen, which is hepatotoxic. Activities in which a sudden loss of 
consciousness could lead to injury or death (e.g., bathing, swimming, driving, 
or working/playing at heights). Sleep deprivation, which can exacerbate 
seizures, should be avoided. Pregnancy management: Pregnant women should receive 
counseling regarding the risks and benefits of the use of anti-seizure 
medication during pregnancy; the advantages and disadvantages of increasing 
maternal periconceptional folic acid supplementation to 4,000 µg daily; the 
effects of pregnancy on anticonvulsant metabolism; and the effect of pregnancy 
on maternal seizure control.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SCN1A seizure disorders are inherited in an autosomal 
dominant manner. A proband with an SCN1A seizure disorder may have an inherited 
or a de novo pathogenic variant. The proportion of cases caused by de novo 
pathogenic variants varies by phenotype: the percentage of probands with an 
SCN1A seizure disorder and an affected parent decreases as the severity of the 
phenotype in the proband increases; thus, most SCN1A-related severe myoclonic 
epilepsy in infancy (SCN1A-SMEI) and ICE-GTC are the result of a de novo 
pathogenic variant. Each child of an individual with an SCN1A seizure disorder 
has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant; however, the risk of 
developing seizures is less than 100% because of reduced penetrance. Prenatal 
diagnosis for pregnancies at increased risk is possible if the pathogenic 
variant in the family is known.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301494