---
reference_id: "PMID:39372655"
title: "Case Report: Respiratory lesions successfully treated with intravenous plasminogen, human-tvmh, replacement therapy in four patients with plasminogen deficiency type 1."
authors:
- Nakar C
- McDaniel H
- Parker JM
- Thibaudeau K
- Thukral N
- Shapiro AD
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2024.1465166
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case Report: Respiratory lesions successfully treated with intravenous plasminogen, human-tvmh, replacement therapy in four patients with plasminogen deficiency type 1.
**Authors:** Nakar C, McDaniel H, Parker JM, Thibaudeau K, Thukral N, Shapiro AD
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2024.1465166](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2024.1465166)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2024 Sep 20;12:1465166. doi: 10.3389/fped.2024.1465166. 
eCollection 2024.

Case Report: Respiratory lesions successfully treated with intravenous 
plasminogen, human-tvmh, replacement therapy in four patients with plasminogen 
deficiency type 1.

Nakar C(1), McDaniel H(2), Parker JM(3), Thibaudeau K(4), Thukral N(1), Shapiro 
AD(1).

Author information:
(1)Indiana Hemophilia & Thrombosis Center, Indianapolis, IN, United States.
(2)Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, United States.
(3)Consultant to Kedrion Biopharma Inc., Fort Lee, NJ, United States.
(4)Global Medical Affairs, Kedrion SpA, Laval, QC, Canada.

Plasminogen deficiency type 1 (PLGD-1, hypoplasminogenemia) is an ultra-rare, 
lifelong disease associated with development of fibrinous lesions in multiple 
organ systems. Depending on lesion location, clinical manifestations of PLGD-1 
can result in acute and/or chronic respiratory airway disease which can 
compromise respiratory function leading to life-threatening events. Early 
recognition and effective treatment of airway obstruction caused by fibrinous 
lesions are critical to prevent morbidity due to respiratory compromise. 
However, physicians may not be familiar with the clinical presentation and 
management of PLGD-1, causing delays in diagnosis and treatment and potentially 
contributing to morbidity. Presented here is a case series of one adult and 
three pediatric patients with severe respiratory complications of PLGD-1 
successfully managed by infusions of plasminogen, human-tvmh replacement 
therapy. Patients' respiratory symptoms were resolved or greatly improved, and 
treatment was generally well tolerated. In all patients, baseline plasminogen 
activity was substantially increased with plasminogen replacement therapy 
administered initially every one to two days followed by extended interval 
dosing as symptoms were controlled or resolved. All four described cases support 
the clinical benefit of replacement therapy with plasminogen, human-tvmh in the 
resolution of life-threatening respiratory complications associated with PLGD-1. 
Clinical manifestations in addition to respiratory lesions were also improved or 
resolved with continued treatment.

© 2024 Nakar, McDaniel, Parker, Thibaudeau, Thukral and Shapiro.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2024.1465166
PMCID: PMC11449724
PMID: 39372655

Conflict of interest statement: Authors CN and AS received research funding from 
Kedrion SpA, authors HM and JP were consultants to Kedrion SpA, and author KT 
was employed by Kedrion SpA. The authors declare that this study received 
funding from Prometic Biotherapeutics and Kedrion SpA. The funders had the 
following involvement in the study: the design and conduct of the study, 
collection, management, analysis, and interpretation of the data, preparation, 
review, approval of and decision to submit the manuscript for publication. 
Prometic Biotherapeutics was acquired by Kedrion in October 2021 and merged with 
Kedrion in 2023. CN: Research funding – Kedrion SpA (legacy Prometic 
Biotherapeutics). HM: was a consultant to Kedrion SpA and clinical trial 
investigator (legacy Prometic Biotherapeutics). JP: Consultant to Kedrion, SpA. 
KT: Current employee of Kedrion, SpA. AS: Research funding – Agios, BioMarin, 
Bioverativ, Daiichi Sankyo, Genentech/Roche, Glover Blood Therapeutics, Kedrion 
Biopharma, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Pfizer, Prometic Biotherapeutics, Takeda, 
Regeneron, Be Biopharma; Consultancy – Bioverativ, Prometic Biotherapeutics, 
Novo Nordisk Membership on entity's Board of Directors or advisory committees – 
Bioverativ, Genentech/Roche, Novo Nordisk, Takeda, Novo Nordisk Hemophilia 
Foundation Speakers Bureau – Novo Nordisk, Genentech/Roche, Bioverativ. The 
remaining author declares that the research was conducted in the absence of any 
commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential 
conflict of interest