---
reference_id: "PMID:28166682"
title: Clonally expanded cytotoxic CD4(+) T cells and the pathogenesis of IgG4-related disease.
authors:
- Mattoo H
- Stone JH
- Pillai S
journal: Autoimmunity
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1080/08916934.2017.1280029
keywords:
- Animals
- "B-Lymphocytes/immunology, metabolism"
- "CD4-Positive T-Lymphocytes/immunology, metabolism"
- Cell Communication
- Clonal Evolution/immunology
- Cytokines/metabolism
- "Cytotoxicity, Immunologic"
- Disease Susceptibility
- Fibrosis
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulin Class Switching/genetics, immunology"
- Immunoglobulin G/immunology
- Lymphocyte Activation
- "T-Lymphocyte Subsets/immunology, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clonally expanded cytotoxic CD4(+) T cells and the pathogenesis of IgG4-related disease.
**Authors:** Mattoo H, Stone JH, Pillai S
**Journal:** Autoimmunity (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1080/08916934.2017.1280029](https://doi.org/10.1080/08916934.2017.1280029)

## Content

1. Autoimmunity. 2017 Feb;50(1):19-24. doi: 10.1080/08916934.2017.1280029.

Clonally expanded cytotoxic CD4(+) T cells and the pathogenesis of IgG4-related
disease.

Mattoo H(1), Stone JH(1), Pillai S(1).

Author information:
(1)a Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA , USA.

IgG4-related disease (IgG4-RD) is a systemic condition of unknown cause
characterized by highly fibrotic lesions, with dense lymphoplasmacytic
infiltrates containing a preponderance of IgG4-expressing plasma cells. CD4+ T
cells and B cells constitute the major inflammatory cell populations in IgG4-RD
lesions. IgG4-RD patients with active, untreated disease show a marked expansion
of plasmablasts in the circulation. Although the therapeutic depletion of B
cells suggests a role for these cells in the disease, a direct role for B cells
or IgG4 in the pathogenesis of IgG4-RD is yet to be demonstrated. Among the CD4+
T-cell subsets, Th2 cells were initially thought to contribute to IgG4-RD
pathogenesis, but many previous studies were confounded by the concomitant
history of allergic diseases in the patients studied and the failure to use
multi-color staining to definitively identify T-cell subsets in tissue samples.
More recently, using an unbiased approach to characterize CD4+ T-cell subsets in
patients with IgG4-RD - based on their clonal expansion and ability to
infiltrate affected tissue sites - CD4+ CTLs have been identified as the major
CD4+ T-cell subset in disease lesions as well as in the circulation. CD4+ CTLs
in affected tissues secrete pro-fibrotic cytokines including IL-1β, TGF-β1, and
IFN-γ as well as cytolytic molecules such as perforin and granzymes A and B. In
this review, we examine possible mechanisms by which activated B cells and
plasmablasts may collaborate with the expanded CD4+ CTLs in driving the fibrotic
pathology of the disease and describe the lacunae in the field and in our
understanding of IgG4-RD pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1080/08916934.2017.1280029
PMCID: PMC5880292
PMID: 28166682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interest The authors declare that
they have no relevant conflicts of interest.
