---
reference_id: "PMID:38634098"
title: Netherton syndrome-A therapeutic challenge in childhood.
authors:
- Kostova P
- Petrova G
- Shahid M
- Papochieva V
- Miteva D
- Yordanova I
- Drenovska K
- Bradinova I
- Janniger CK
- Schwartz RA
- Vassileva S
journal: Clin Case Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/ccr3.8770
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Netherton syndrome-A therapeutic challenge in childhood.
**Authors:** Kostova P, Petrova G, Shahid M, Papochieva V, Miteva D, Yordanova I, Drenovska K, Bradinova I, Janniger CK, Schwartz RA, Vassileva S
**Journal:** Clin Case Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ccr3.8770](https://doi.org/10.1002/ccr3.8770)

## Content

1. Clin Case Rep. 2024 Apr 16;12(4):e8770. doi: 10.1002/ccr3.8770. eCollection
2024  Apr.

Netherton syndrome-A therapeutic challenge in childhood.

Kostova P(1)(2), Petrova G(1)(2), Shahid M(3)(4), Papochieva V(2), Miteva 
D(1)(2), Yordanova I(5), Drenovska K(3)(4), Bradinova I(6), Janniger CK(7), 
Schwartz RA(8), Vassileva S(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Department Medical University Sofia Bulgaria.
(2)Pediatric Clinic, UMHAT Alexandrovska Sofia Bulgaria.
(3)Department of Dermatology and Venereology Medical University Sofia Bulgaria.
(4)Dermatology Clinic UMHAT Alexandrovska Sofia Bulgaria.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, Faculty of Medicine 
Medical University Pleven Pleven Bulgaria.
(6)National Genetic Laboratory Medical University Sofia, University Hospital of 
Obstetrics and Gynecology "Maichin dom" Sofia Bulgaria.
(7)Dermatology and Pediatrics Rutgers New Jersey Medical School Newark New 
Jersey USA.
(8)Dermatology, Pediatrics and Pathology Rutgers New Jersey Medical School 
Newark New Jersey USA.

KEY CLINICAL MESSAGE: High-dose intravenous immunoglobulin exhibits great 
potential in the treatment of Netherton syndrome.
ABSTRACT: Netherton syndrome (NS) is a rare autosomal recessive genodermatosis 
(OMIM #256500) characterized by superficial scaling, atopic manifestations, and 
multisystemic complications. It is caused by loss-of-function mutations in the 
SPINK5 gene, which encode a key kallikrein protease inhibitor. There are two 
subtypes of the syndrome that differ in clinical presentation and immune 
profile: ichthyosiform erythroderma and ichthyosis linearis circumflexa. NS is a 
multisystemic disease with numerous extracutaneous manifestations. Current 
therapy for patients with NS is mainly supportive, as there is no curative or 
specific treatment, especially for children with NS, but targeted therapies are 
being developed. We describe an 8-year-old boy with genetically proven NS 
treated with intravenous immunoglobulin for recurrent skin and systemic 
infections from infancy, growth retardation, and associated erythroderma. Under 
this therapy, his skin status, infectious exacerbations, and quality of life all 
improved. Knowledge of the cytokine-mediated pathogenesis of NS and the 
development of new biologic drugs open new possibilities for NS patients. 
However, the different therapeutic options have been applied in a limited number 
of cases, and variable responses have been shown. Randomized controlled trials 
with a sufficient number of patients stratified and treated according to their 
specific immune profile and clinical phenotype are needed to evaluate the safety 
and efficacy of treatment options for patients with NS.

© 2024 The Authors. Clinical Case Reports published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/ccr3.8770
PMCID: PMC11021628
PMID: 38634098

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the article was written 
without financial or commercial motives that could represent a potential 
conflict of interest.