---
reference_id: "PMID:32795681"
title: Novel therapeutic approaches for the treatment of achondroplasia.
authors:
- Legeai-Mallet L
- Savarirayan R
journal: Bone
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2020.115579
keywords:
- "Achondroplasia/drug therapy, genetics"
- Animals
- Chondrogenesis
- Growth Plate
- Mice
- Mutation
- Osteogenesis
- "Receptors, Fibroblast Growth Factor/genetics"
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel therapeutic approaches for the treatment of achondroplasia.
**Authors:** Legeai-Mallet L, Savarirayan R
**Journal:** Bone (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bone.2020.115579](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2020.115579)

## Content

1. Bone. 2020 Dec;141:115579. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2020.115579. Epub 2020 Aug 11.

Novel therapeutic approaches for the treatment of achondroplasia.

Legeai-Mallet L(1), Savarirayan R(2).

Author information:
(1)Université de Paris, Imagine Institute, Laboratory of Molecular and 
Physiopathological Bases of Osteochondrodysplasia, INSERM UMR 1163, F-75015 
Paris, France. Electronic address: Laurence.legeai-mallet@inserm.fr.
(2)Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, 
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia. Electronic 
address: ravi.savarirayan@vcgs.org.au.

Achondroplasia is the most common form of human dwarfism. The molecular basis of 
achondroplasia was elucidated in 1994 with the identification of the fibroblast 
growth factor receptor 3 (FGFR3) as the causative gene. Missense mutations 
causing achondroplasia result in activation of FGFR3 and its downstream 
signaling pathways, disturbing chondrogenesis, osteogenesis, and long bone 
elongation. A more accurate understanding of the clinical and molecular aspects 
of achondroplasia has allowed new therapeutic approaches to be developed. These 
are based on: clear understanding of the natural history of the disease; 
proof-of-concept preclinical studies in mouse models; and the current state of 
knowledge regarding FGFR3 and related growth plate homeostatic pathways. This 
review provides a brief overview of the preclinical mouse models of 
achondroplasia that have led to new, non-surgical therapeutic strategies being 
assessed and applied to children with achondroplasia through pioneering clinical 
trials.

Copyright © 2020 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2020.115579
PMID: 32795681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]