---
reference_id: "PMID:16781290"
title: "A prospective randomized clinical trial of 0.1% tacrolimus ointment in a model of chronic allergic contact dermatitis."
authors:
- Belsito D
- Wilson DC
- Warshaw E
- Fowler J
- Ehrlich A
- Anderson B
- Strober BE
- Willetts J
- Rutledge ES
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2006.03.025
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Chronic Disease
- "Dermatitis, Allergic Contact/drug therapy, etiology"
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Humans
- "Immunosuppressive Agents/administration & dosage"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Nickel/adverse effects
- Ointments
- Prospective Studies
- "Tacrolimus/administration & dosage"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A prospective randomized clinical trial of 0.1% tacrolimus ointment in a model of chronic allergic contact dermatitis.
**Authors:** Belsito D, Wilson DC, Warshaw E, Fowler J, Ehrlich A, Anderson B, Strober BE, Willetts J, Rutledge ES
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaad.2006.03.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2006.03.025)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2006 Jul;55(1):40-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2006.03.025. Epub
 2006 May 26.

A prospective randomized clinical trial of 0.1% tacrolimus ointment in a model 
of chronic allergic contact dermatitis.

Belsito D(1), Wilson DC, Warshaw E, Fowler J, Ehrlich A, Anderson B, Strober BE, 
Willetts J, Rutledge ES.

Author information:
(1)University of Missouri, Kansas City, USA.

Comment in
    J Am Acad Dermatol. 2007 Mar;56(3):519-20; author reply 520. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaad.2006.09.035.

OBJECTIVE: Tolerability and safety of 0.1% tacrolimus ointment in treating 
nickel-induced allergic contact dermatitis (ACD) were evaluated.
METHODS: Patients allergic to nickel applied nickel patches to each upper inner 
aspect of the arm for 4 to 8 hours daily. Tacrolimus was applied to patch site 
on one arm and vehicle to patch site on the other, twice daily. Physician's 
Global Assessment, signs and symptoms of ACD, pruritus scores, and adverse 
events were evaluated.
RESULTS: After 8 weeks, dermatitis in 45% of patients was clear or almost clear 
(Physician's Global Assessment) with tacrolimus; and 1% with vehicle (P < .001). 
Significant results were achieved as early as day 8. Tacrolimus was superior in 
ACD signs and symptoms improvement and pruritus reduction (P < .001). Adverse 
events were similar between treatments.
LIMITATIONS: This model, involving one agent, may not be generalizable for other 
agents.
CONCLUSIONS: Tacrolimus ointment 0.1% is well tolerated and significantly more 
effective than vehicle in treating chronically exposed, nickel-induced ACD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2006.03.025
PMID: 16781290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]