---
reference_id: "PMID:33164705"
title: Neuroprotective effects of natural compounds on neurotoxin-induced oxidative stress and cell apoptosis.
authors:
- Chen B
- Zhao J
- Zhang R
- Zhang L
- Zhang Q
- Yang H
- An J
journal: Nutr Neurosci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/1028415X.2020.1840035
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuroprotective effects of natural compounds on neurotoxin-induced oxidative stress and cell apoptosis.
**Authors:** Chen B, Zhao J, Zhang R, Zhang L, Zhang Q, Yang H, An J
**Journal:** Nutr Neurosci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/1028415X.2020.1840035](https://doi.org/10.1080/1028415X.2020.1840035)

## Content

1. Nutr Neurosci. 2022 May;25(5):1078-1099. doi: 10.1080/1028415X.2020.1840035. 
Epub 2020 Nov 8.

Neuroprotective effects of natural compounds on neurotoxin-induced oxidative 
stress and cell apoptosis.

Chen B(1), Zhao J(1), Zhang R(1), Zhang L(1), Zhang Q(1), Yang H(1), An J(1).

Author information:
(1)Translational Medicine Centre, Honghui Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong University, 
Xi'an, Shannxi, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVES: Overproduction of reactive species, notably reactive oxygen (ROS) 
and nitrogen (RNS) species, along with the failure of balancing effects of 
endogenous antioxidant defenses result in destruction of cellular structures, 
lipids, proteins, and genetic material, which lead to oxidative stress. 
Oxidative stress-induced neuronal apoptosis plays a pivotal role in pathogenesis 
of neurodegeneration. Antioxidants represent one of the medical choice 
strategies for protecting against this unbalanced oxidation-antioxidation 
status. Recently, natural compounds with neuroprotective potential that can 
scavenge free radicals and protect cells from oxidative damage have received 
extensive attention.
METHODS: In this review, we summarized the detailed research progress on the 
medicinal plants-derived natural compounds with potential anti-oxidation effects 
and their molecular mechanisms on modulating the neurotoxin (6-OHDA, H2O2, 
glutamate, Aβ)-induced oxidative stress and cell apoptosis.
RESULTS: The natural compounds that efficacious in modulating reactive species 
production and mitochondrial function include flavonoids, glucosides, alkaloids, 
polyphenols, lignans, coumarins, terpenoids, quinones and others. They decreased 
the neurotoxin-induced oxidative damage and apoptosis by (1) decreasing ROS/RNS 
generation, lipid peroxidation, caspase-3 and caspase-9 activities, LDH release, 
the ratio of Bax/Bcl-2, Ca2+ influx and cytochrome c release, (2) elevating MMP, 
and (3) restoring endogenous antioxidant enzymatic activities (CAT, GSH-Px, GSR, 
SOD). And they exerted neuroprotective effects against cell damages and 
apoptosis by modulating the oxidative cascades of different signaling pathways 
(Nrf2/HO-1, NF-κB, MAPKs, PI3K/Akt, GSK-3β) and preventing 
mitochondria-dependent apoptosis pathways.
DISCUSSION: The present work reviews the role of oxidative stress in 
neurodegeneration, highlighting the potential anti-oxidation effects of natural 
compounds as a promising approach to develop innovative neuroprotective 
strategy.

DOI: 10.1080/1028415X.2020.1840035
PMID: 33164705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]