---
reference_id: "PMID:20462780"
title: Early-onset progressive osteoarthritis with hereditary progressive ophtalmopathy or Stickler syndrome.
authors:
- Couchouron T
- Masson C
journal: Joint Bone Spine
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.jbspin.2010.03.012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early-onset progressive osteoarthritis with hereditary progressive ophtalmopathy or Stickler syndrome.
**Authors:** Couchouron T, Masson C
**Journal:** Joint Bone Spine (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jbspin.2010.03.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbspin.2010.03.012)

## Content

1. Joint Bone Spine. 2011 Jan;78(1):45-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jbspin.2010.03.012. Epub
 2010 May 11.

Early-onset progressive osteoarthritis with hereditary progressive ophtalmopathy 
or Stickler syndrome.

Couchouron T(1), Masson C.

Author information:
(1)Service de rhumatologie, centre hospitalier de Cholet, 1, rue de Marengo, 
49300 Cholet, France. tifenn.couchouron@ch-cholet.fr

Stickler syndrome is a group of rare genetic conditions (incidence, 1/7500 
births) related to mutations in the collagen genes. Both the mutations and the 
clinical features vary widely across affected patients. The main manifestations 
are craniofacial birth defects, bone and joint symptoms, ocular abnormalities, 
and hearing loss. Stickler syndrome may be revealed at birth (25% of cases) by a 
combination of cleft palate, retrognathism, and micrognathism known as Pierre 
Robin sequence, which may cause neonatal respiratory problems. The ocular 
abnormalities include severe myopia, abnormalities of the vitreous, and a high 
risk of retinal detachment (60% of cases), which may cause blindness (4% of 
cases). Severe hearing loss with onset in early childhood may impair performance 
at school. Osteoarthritis (75% of patients) with onset before 30 years of age is 
a severe manifestation that causes chronic hip and low back pain and functional 
impairments. Joint replacement surgery is often required. The risk associated 
with multiple anesthesias is highest in patients with craniofacial defects. The 
bone status may deserve to be evaluated, as the combination of genetic 
abnormalities and physical impairments may promote bone loss. Clinicians should 
be cognizant of Stickler syndrome so that they can detect the disease in 
patients and their family members, prevent functional impairments, organize a 
multidisciplinary management strategy, and arrange for genetic counseling.

Copyright Â© 2010 Société française de rhumatologie. Published by Elsevier SAS. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbspin.2010.03.012
PMID: 20462780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]