---
reference_id: "PMID:36260828"
title: Randomized Study of Temozolomide or Temozolomide and Capecitabine in Patients With Advanced Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors (ECOG-ACRIN E2211).
authors:
- Kunz PL
- Graham NT
- Catalano PJ
- Nimeiri HS
- Fisher GA
- Longacre TA
- Suarez CJ
- Martin BA
- Yao JC
- Kulke MH
- Hendifar AE
- Shanks JC
- Shah MH
- Zalupski MM
- Schmulbach EL
- Reidy-Lagunes DL
- Strosberg JR
- "O'Dwyer PJ"
- Benson AB 3rd
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.22.01013
keywords:
- Humans
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- Capecitabine/therapeutic use
- Dacarbazine/therapeutic use
- Neuroendocrine Tumors/drug therapy
- Pancreatic Neoplasms/drug therapy
- Prospective Studies
- Retrospective Studies
- Temozolomide/therapeutic use
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Randomized Study of Temozolomide or Temozolomide and Capecitabine in Patients With Advanced Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors (ECOG-ACRIN E2211).
**Authors:** Kunz PL, Graham NT, Catalano PJ, Nimeiri HS, Fisher GA, Longacre TA, Suarez CJ, Martin BA, Yao JC, Kulke MH, Hendifar AE, Shanks JC, Shah MH, Zalupski MM, Schmulbach EL, Reidy-Lagunes DL, Strosberg JR, O'Dwyer PJ, Benson AB 3rd
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.22.01013](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.22.01013)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2023 Mar 1;41(7):1359-1369. doi: 10.1200/JCO.22.01013. Epub 2022
 Oct 19.

Randomized Study of Temozolomide or Temozolomide and Capecitabine in Patients 
With Advanced Pancreatic Neuroendocrine Tumors (ECOG-ACRIN E2211).

Kunz PL(1), Graham NT(2), Catalano PJ(2), Nimeiri HS(3), Fisher GA(4), Longacre 
TA(4), Suarez CJ(4), Martin BA(5), Yao JC(6), Kulke MH(7), Hendifar AE(8), 
Shanks JC(9), Shah MH(10), Zalupski MM(11), Schmulbach EL(12), Reidy-Lagunes 
DL(13), Strosberg JR(14), O'Dwyer PJ(15), Benson AB 3rd(3).

Author information:
(1)Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT.
(2)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA.
(3)Robert H. Lurie Cancer Center of Northwestern University, Chicago, IL.
(4)Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA.
(5)University of Louisville, Louisville, KY.
(6)University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX.
(7)Boston University/Boston Medical Center, Boston, MA.
(8)Samuel Oschin Comprehensive Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 
Los Angeles, CA.
(9)Health East Cancer Care, Lake Elmo, MN.
(10)The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH.
(11)University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
(12)The Permanente Medical Group, South San Francisco, CA.
(13)Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY.
(14)H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, FL.
(15)University of Pennsylvania Abramson Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA.

PURPOSE: Patients with advanced pancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) have few 
treatment options that yield objective responses. Retrospective and small 
prospective studies suggest that capecitabine and temozolomide are associated 
with high response rates (RRs) and long progression-free survival (PFS).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: E2211 was a multicenter, randomized, phase II trial 
comparing temozolomide versus capecitabine/temozolomide in patients with 
advanced low-grade or intermediate-grade pancreatic NETs. Key eligibility 
criteria included progression within the preceding 12 months and no prior 
temozolomide, dimethyl-triazeno-imidazole-carboxamide or dacarbazine, 
capecitabine or fluorouracil. The primary end point was PFS; secondary endpoints 
were overall survival, RR, safety, and methylguanine methyltransferase (MGMT) by 
immunohistochemistry and promoter methylation.
RESULTS: A total of 144 patients were enrolled between April 2013 and March 2016 
to temozolomide (n = 72) or capecitabine and temozolomide (n = 72); the primary 
analysis population included 133 eligible patients. At the scheduled interim 
analysis in January 2018, the median PFS was 14.4 months for temozolomide versus 
22.7 months for capecitabine/temozolomide (hazard ratio = 0.58), which was 
sufficient to reject the null hypothesis for the primary end point (stratified 
log-rank P = .022). In the final analysis (May 2021), the median overall 
survival was 53.8 months for temozolomide and 58.7 months for 
capecitabine/temozolomide (hazard ratio = 0.82, P = .42). MGMT deficiency was 
associated with response.
CONCLUSION: The combination of capecitabine/temozolomide was associated with a 
significant improvement in PFS compared with temozolomide alone in patients with 
advanced pancreatic NETs. The median PFS and RR observed with 
capecitabine/temozolomide are the highest reported in a randomized study for 
pancreatic NETs. MGMT deficiency was associated with response, and although 
routine MGMT testing is not recommended, it can be considered for select 
patients in need of objective response (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: 
NCT01824875).

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.22.01013
PMCID: PMC9995105
PMID: 36260828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The following represents disclosure information 
provided by authors of this manuscript. All relationships are considered 
compensated unless otherwise noted. Relationships are self-held unless noted. I 
= Immediate Family Member, Inst = My Institution. Relationships may not relate 
to the subject matter of this manuscript. For more information about ASCO's 
conflict of interest policy, please refer to www.asco.org/rwc or 
ascopubs.org/jco/authors/author-center. Open Payments is a public database 
containing information reported by companies about payments made to US-licensed 
physicians (Open Payments). Al B. Benson Consulting or Advisory Role: Merck 
Sharp & Dohme, Array BioPharma, Bristol Myers Squibb, Samsung Bioepis, Pfizer, 
HalioDx, AbbVie, Janssen Oncology, Natera, Apexigen, Artemida Pharma, Xencor, 
TheraBionic, Mirati Therapeutics, Boston Scientific, HUTCHMED Research Funding: 
Infinity Pharmaceuticals (Inst), Merck Sharp & Dohme (Inst), Taiho 
Pharmaceutical (Inst), Bristol Myers Squibb (Inst), Celgene (Inst), Rafael 
Pharmaceuticals (Inst), MedImmune (Inst), Xencor (Inst), Astellas Pharma (Inst), 
Amgen (Inst), SynCoreBio (Inst), Elevar Therapeutics (Inst), Tyme Inc (Inst), ST 
Pharm (Inst), ITM Solucin (Inst) No other potential conflicts of interest were 
reported.