---
reference_id: "PMID:18300568"
title: Associations between serum anti-CCP antibody, rheumatoid factor levels and HLA-DR4 expression in Hungarian patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
authors:
- Kapitány A
- Szabó Z
- Lakos G
- Aleksza M
- Végvári A
- Soós L
- Karányi Z
- Sipka S
- Szegedi G
- Szekanecz Z
journal: Isr Med Assoc J
year: '2008'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Associations between serum anti-CCP antibody, rheumatoid factor levels and HLA-DR4 expression in Hungarian patients with rheumatoid arthritis.
**Authors:** Kapitány A, Szabó Z, Lakos G, Aleksza M, Végvári A, Soós L, Karányi Z, Sipka S, Szegedi G, Szekanecz Z
**Journal:** Isr Med Assoc J (2008)

## Content

1. Isr Med Assoc J. 2008 Jan;10(1):32-6.

Associations between serum anti-CCP antibody, rheumatoid factor levels and 
HLA-DR4 expression in Hungarian patients with rheumatoid arthritis.

Kapitány A(1), Szabó Z, Lakos G, Aleksza M, Végvári A, Soós L, Karányi Z, Sipka 
S, Szegedi G, Szekanecz Z.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Third Department of Medicine, University of 
Debrecen Medical Centre, Debrecen, Hungary.

BACKGROUND: The presence of anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide autoantibody is 
highly specific for rheumatoid arthritis. Certain HLA-DR4 (HLA-DRB1*04) alleles, 
also known as the "shared epitope," are associated with increased susceptibility 
to RA. In addition, these alleles may also have relevance for disease outcome. 
Anti-CCP antibody positivity has been associated with the presence of HLA-DR4 
alleles in patients with RA. However, there is little information regarding a 
relationship between quantitative anti-CCP production (serum anti-CCP 
concentrations) and the shared epitope.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the association between anti-CCP antibody production 
and various HLA-DRB1 alleles.
METHODS: Serum anti-CCP, rheumatoid factor and C-reactive protein levels were 
assessed in 53 RA patients. All these patients underwent HLA-DRB1 genotyping.
RESULTS: Of the 53 patients 33 (62%) were positive for anti-CCP antibody. We 
found significant correlations between anti-CCP and RF positivity (chi-square = 
6.717, P < 0.01), as well as between anti-CCP and HLA-DRB1*04 positivity 
(chi-square = 5.828, P < 0.01). There was no correlation between RF positivity 
and serum levels, CRP serum levels and HLA-DRB1*04 positivity. When 
quantitatively comparing serum anti-CCP levels with shared epitope positivity, 
patients carrying one or two copies of HLA-DRB1*04 alleles had significantly 
higher anti-CCP concentrations (530.0 +/- 182.6 U/ml) compared to 
DRB1*04-negative patients (56.8 +/- 27.4 U/ml) (P < 0.01). There was no 
difference in serum anti-CCP antibody concentrations between patients carrying 
only one HLA-DRB1*01 allele but no HLA-DRB1*04 allele (12.0 +/- 8.6 U/ml) 
compared to SE-negative patients (76.8 +/- 56.2 U/ml). Regarding non-SE HLA-DRB1 
genotypes, all 6 patients (100%) carrying DRB1*15 alleles and 6 of 7 (85%) 
patients carrying DRB1*13 were anti-CCP positive. In addition, patients with 
HLA-DRB1*13 (282.5 +/- 23.8 U/ml) and DRB1*15 (398.7 +/- 76.2 U/ml) produced 
significantly more anti-CCP than did any other non-SE HLA-DRB1 subtypes (P < 
0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: There is significant association between anti-CCP and RF, as well 
as between anti-CCP and SE positivity in RA. In addition, the presence of one or 
two copies of HLA-DRB1*04 alleles has been associated with higher serum anti-CCP 
antibody levels. Thus, patients carrying HLA-DRB1*04 alleles exhibited an 
overall tenfold increase in serum anti-CCP antibody levels in comparison to 
HLA-DRB1*04-negative subjects. Increased anti-CCP production may also be 
associated with other non-SE HLA-DRB1 genotypes, such as DRB1*13 or DRB1*15. In 
reports by other investigators, both anti-CCP concentrations and SE positivity 
were related to more rapid disease progression and unfavorable outcome.

PMID: 18300568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]