---
reference_id: "PMID:40310720"
title: Activity-dependent degradation of Kv4.2 contributes to synaptic plasticity and behavior in Angelman syndrome model mice.
authors:
- Hu JH
- Malloy C
- Liu Y
- Park JM
- Pratt A
- Welch M
- Murphy JG
- Abebe D
- Karlsson RM
- Cameron HA
- Hoffman DA
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2025.115583
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Activity-dependent degradation of Kv4.2 contributes to synaptic plasticity and behavior in Angelman syndrome model mice.
**Authors:** Hu JH, Malloy C, Liu Y, Park JM, Pratt A, Welch M, Murphy JG, Abebe D, Karlsson RM, Cameron HA, Hoffman DA
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2025.115583](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2025.115583)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2025 May 27;44(5):115583. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2025.115583. Epub
2025  Apr 29.

Activity-dependent degradation of Kv4.2 contributes to synaptic plasticity and 
behavior in Angelman syndrome model mice.

Hu JH(1), Malloy C(2), Liu Y(2), Park JM(2), Pratt A(2), Welch M(2), Murphy 
JG(2), Abebe D(2), Karlsson RM(3), Cameron HA(3), Hoffman DA(4).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neurophysiology and Biophysics Section, The Eunice Kennedy Shriver 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Bethesda, MD 20892, 
USA. Electronic address: huj8@mail.nih.gov.
(2)Molecular Neurophysiology and Biophysics Section, The Eunice Kennedy Shriver 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Bethesda, MD 20892, 
USA.
(3)Section on Neuroplasticity, National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA.
(4)Molecular Neurophysiology and Biophysics Section, The Eunice Kennedy Shriver 
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Bethesda, MD 20892, 
USA. Electronic address: hoffmand@mail.nih.gov.

Angelman syndrome (AS) is a severe neurological disorder characterized by 
intellectual disability, absence of speech, spontaneous seizure, and motor 
dysfunction. The absence of functional maternally derived UBE3A protein is 
considered the primary cause of AS, yet the downstream signaling pathways remain 
elusive. Here, we show the voltage-gated K+ channel Kv4.2 as an 
activity-dependent substrate for UBE3A. We show that UBE3A binding of Kv4.2 at 
its N terminus, ubiquitinating residue K103, induces activity-induced Kv4.2 
protein loss. In a mouse model of AS, we observe elevated Kv4.2 protein level 
and abolished kainic acid-induced Kv4.2 protein loss. Moreover, deficits in 
mEPSC frequency and spike-timing-dependent long-term potentiation, as well as 
certain behaviors including cognitive inflexibility found in AS mice, are 
rescued when bred with Kv4.2 conditional knockout mice. These findings indicate 
a UBE3A downstream pathway regulating plasticity and cognitive behaviors and 
provide potential targets for the treatment of AS.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2025.115583
PMCID: PMC12232208
PMID: 40310720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare 
they have no competing interests.