---
reference_id: "PMID:36122315"
title: "Selpercatinib in Patients With RET Fusion-Positive Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer: Updated Safety and Efficacy From the Registrational LIBRETTO-001 Phase I/II Trial."
authors:
- Drilon A
- Subbiah V
- Gautschi O
- Tomasini P
- de Braud F
- Solomon BJ
- Shao-Weng Tan D
- Alonso G
- Wolf J
- Park K
- Goto K
- Soldatenkova V
- Szymczak S
- Barker SS
- Puri T
- Bence Lin A
- Loong H
- Besse B
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.22.00393
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- Pyridines
- Pyrazoles/therapeutic use
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/adverse effects
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Selpercatinib in Patients With RET Fusion-Positive Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer: Updated Safety and Efficacy From the Registrational LIBRETTO-001 Phase I/II Trial.
**Authors:** Drilon A, Subbiah V, Gautschi O, Tomasini P, de Braud F, Solomon BJ, Shao-Weng Tan D, Alonso G, Wolf J, Park K, Goto K, Soldatenkova V, Szymczak S, Barker SS, Puri T, Bence Lin A, Loong H, Besse B
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.22.00393](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.22.00393)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2023 Jan 10;41(2):385-394. doi: 10.1200/JCO.22.00393. Epub 2022
Sep 19.

Selpercatinib in Patients With RET Fusion-Positive Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer:
Updated Safety and Efficacy From the Registrational LIBRETTO-001 Phase I/II
Trial.

Drilon A(1), Subbiah V(2), Gautschi O(3), Tomasini P(4), de Braud F(5), Solomon
BJ(6), Shao-Weng Tan D(7), Alonso G(8), Wolf J(9), Park K(10), Goto K(11),
Soldatenkova V(12), Szymczak S(13), Barker SS(12), Puri T(12), Bence Lin A(12),
Loong H(14), Besse B(15).

Author information:
(1)Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center and Weill Cornell Medical Center, New
York, NY.
(2)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX.
(3)University of Berne and Cantonal Hospital of Lucerne, Lucerne, Switzerland.
(4)Hôpitaux Universitaires, de Marseille Timone, France.
(5)University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(6)Peter MacCallum Cancer Center, Melbourne, Australia.
(7)National Cancer Center Singapore, Singapore.
(8)Vall d'Hebron University Hospital and Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology,
Barcelona, Spain.
(9)Center for Integrated Oncology, University Hospital Cologne, Cologne,
Germany.
(10)Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul,
South Korea.
(11)National Cancer Center Hospital East, Kashiwa, Japan.
(12)Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN.
(13)Eli Lilly Polska, Warsaw, Poland.
(14)Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(15)Paris-Saclay University, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.

Erratum in
    J Clin Oncol. 2023 Nov 1;41(31):4941. doi: 10.1200/JCO.23.01849.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2023 Jan 10;41(2):410-412. doi: 10.1200/JCO.22.01644.
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2022 Dec;19(12):747. doi: 10.1038/s41571-022-00694-2.
    Transl Lung Cancer Res. 2023 Jul 31;12(7):1655-1657. doi:
10.21037/tlcr-23-202.

PURPOSE: Selpercatinib, a first-in-class, highly selective, and potent
CNS-active RET kinase inhibitor, is currently approved for the treatment of
patients with RET fusion-positive non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC). We provide
a registrational data set update in more than double (n = 316) of the original
reported population (n = 144) and better characterization of long-term efficacy
and safety.
METHODS: Patients were enrolled to LIBRETTO-001, a phase I/II, single-arm,
open-label study of selpercatinib in patients with RET-altered cancers. An
analysis of patients with RET fusion-positive NSCLC, including 69
treatment-naive and 247 with prior platinum-based chemotherapy, was performed.
The primary end point was objective response rate (ORR; RECIST v1.1, independent
review committee). Secondary end points included duration of response (DoR),
progression-free survival (PFS), overall survival, and safety.
RESULTS: In treatment-naive patients, the ORR was 84% (95% CI, 73 to 92); 6%
achieved complete responses (CRs). The median DoR was 20.2 months (95% CI, 13.0
to could not be evaluated); 40% of responses were ongoing at the data cutoff
(median follow-up of 20.3 months). The median PFS was 22.0 months; 35% of
patients were alive and progression-free at the data cutoff (median follow-up of
21.9 months). In platinum-based chemotherapy pretreated patients, the ORR was
61% (95% CI, 55 to 67); 7% achieved CRs. The median DoR was 28.6 months (95% CI,
20.4 to could not be evaluated); 49% of responses were ongoing (median follow-up
of 21.2 months). The median PFS was 24.9 months; 38% of patients were alive and
progression-free (median follow-up of 24.7 months). Of 26 patients with
measurable baseline CNS metastasis by the independent review committee, the
intracranial ORR was 85% (95% CI, 65 to 96); 27% were CRs. In the full safety
population (n = 796), the median treatment duration was 36.1 months. The safety
profile of selpercatinib was consistent with previous reports.
CONCLUSION: In a large cohort with extended follow-up, selpercatinib continued
to demonstrate durable and robust responses, including intracranial activity, in
previously treated and treatment-naive patients with RET fusion-positive NSCLC.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.22.00393
PMCID: PMC9839260
PMID: 36122315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Benjamin Besse Research Funding: AstraZeneca
(Inst), Pfizer (Inst), Lilly (Inst), Onxeo (Inst), Inivata (Inst), AbbVie
(Inst), Amgen (Inst), Blueprint Medicines (Inst), Celgene (Inst),
GlaxoSmithKline (Inst), Sanofi (Inst), Takeda (Inst), Cristal Therapeutics
(Inst), Daiichi Sankyo (Inst), Janssen Oncology (Inst), OSE Immunotherapeutics
(Inst), BeiGene (Inst), Boehringer Ingelheim (Inst), Roche/Genentech (Inst),
Tolero Pharmaceuticals (Inst), 4D Pharma (Inst), Aptitude Health (Inst),
Cergentis (Inst), Chugai Pharma (Inst), Genzyme (Inst), Ipsen (Inst), Turning
Point Therapeutics (Inst), Eisai (Inst) No other potential conflicts of interest
were reported.
