---
reference_id: "PMID:24107198"
title: Sensory nerve conduction and somatosensory evoked potentials of the trigeminal nerve in horses with idiopathic headshaking.
authors:
- Aleman M
- Williams DC
- Brosnan RJ
- Nieto JE
- Pickles KJ
- Berger J
- Lecouteur RA
- Holliday TA
- Madigan JE
journal: J Vet Intern Med
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1111/jvim.12191
keywords:
- Animals
- Area Under Curve
- Electric Stimulation
- "Evoked Potentials, Somatosensory/physiology"
- "Head/innervation, physiopathology"
- Horse Diseases/physiopathology
- Horses
- Male
- Neural Conduction/physiology
- Prospective Studies
- Seasons
- Trigeminal Nerve/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sensory nerve conduction and somatosensory evoked potentials of the trigeminal nerve in horses with idiopathic headshaking.
**Authors:** Aleman M, Williams DC, Brosnan RJ, Nieto JE, Pickles KJ, Berger J, Lecouteur RA, Holliday TA, Madigan JE
**Journal:** J Vet Intern Med (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jvim.12191](https://doi.org/10.1111/jvim.12191)

## Content

1. J Vet Intern Med. 2013 Nov-Dec;27(6):1571-80. doi: 10.1111/jvim.12191. Epub
2013  Sep 20.

Sensory nerve conduction and somatosensory evoked potentials of the trigeminal 
nerve in horses with idiopathic headshaking.

Aleman M(1), Williams DC, Brosnan RJ, Nieto JE, Pickles KJ, Berger J, Lecouteur 
RA, Holliday TA, Madigan JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Epidemiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of California, Davis, CA.

BACKGROUND: Idiopathic headshaking (HSK) in horses is a distressing disorder in 
which the etiology and pathophysiology are unknown.
HYPOTHESIS: Differences in sensory function of the trigeminal nerve exist 
between healthy and affected horses.
ANIMALS: Six healthy mature geldings and 6 mature geldings with idiopathic HSK.
METHODS: Prospective study. Sensory nerve action and somatosensory evoked 
potentials studies were performed. The stimulus site comprised the gingival 
mucosa dorsal to the maxillary canine. A pair of recording electrodes was placed 
along the sensory pathway of the trigeminal complex at the infraorbital nerve 
(R1), maxillary nerve (R2), spinal tract of trigeminal (R3), and somatosensory 
cortex (R4). Sensory nerve action potential latency (ms), amplitude (μV), 
duration (ms), area under the curve (μVms), and conduction velocity (m/s) were 
calculated.
RESULTS: Threshold for activation of the infraorbital branch of the trigeminal 
nerve was significantly different between 5 affected (≤ 5 mA) and 6 control 
horses (≥ 10 mA). After initiation of an action potential, there were no 
differences in all parameters measured and no differences between left and right 
sides. A horse with seasonal HSK tested during a time of no clinical 
manifestations showed a threshold for activation similar to control horses.
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL IMPORTANCE: This study confirms involvement of the 
trigeminal nerve hyperexcitability in the pathophysiology of disease. Further, 
results might support a functional rather than a structural alteration in the 
sensory pathway of the trigeminal complex that can be seasonal. The horse could 
serve as a natural animal model for humans with idiopathic trigeminal neuralgia.

Copyright © 2013 by the American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/jvim.12191
PMID: 24107198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]