---
reference_id: "PMID:12920066"
title: Molecular characterisation of the 22q13 deletion syndrome supports the role of haploinsufficiency of SHANK3/PROSAP2 in the major neurological symptoms.
authors:
- Wilson HL
- Wong AC
- Shaw SR
- Tse WY
- Stapleton GA
- Phelan MC
- Hu S
- Marshall J
- McDermid HE
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.40.8.575
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular characterisation of the 22q13 deletion syndrome supports the role of haploinsufficiency of SHANK3/PROSAP2 in the major neurological symptoms.
**Authors:** Wilson HL, Wong AC, Shaw SR, Tse WY, Stapleton GA, Phelan MC, Hu S, Marshall J, McDermid HE
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.40.8.575](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.40.8.575)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2003 Aug;40(8):575-84. doi: 10.1136/jmg.40.8.575.

Molecular characterisation of the 22q13 deletion syndrome supports the role of 
haploinsufficiency of SHANK3/PROSAP2 in the major neurological symptoms.

Wilson HL(1), Wong AC, Shaw SR, Tse WY, Stapleton GA, Phelan MC, Hu S, Marshall 
J, McDermid HE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta 
T6G 2E9, Canada.

METHODS: The 22q13 deletion syndrome (MIM 606232) is characterised by moderate 
to profound mental retardation, delay/absence of expressive speech, hypotonia, 
normal to accelerated growth, and mild dysmorphic features. We have determined 
the deletion size and parent of origin in 56 patients with this syndrome.
RESULTS: Similar to other terminal deletion syndromes, there was an 
overabundance of paternal deletions. The deletions vary widely in size, from 130 
kb to over 9 Mb; however all 45 cases that could be specifically tested for the 
terminal region at the site of SHANK3 were deleted for this gene. The molecular 
structure of SHANK3 was further characterised. Comparison of clinical features 
to deletion size showed few correlations. Some measures of developmental 
assessment did correlate to deletion size; however, all patients showed some 
degree of mental retardation and severe delay or absence of expressive speech, 
regardless of deletion size.
CONCLUSION: Our analysis therefore supports haploinsufficiency of the gene 
SHANK3, which codes for a structural protein of the postsynaptic density, as a 
major causative factor in the neurological symptoms of 22q13 deletion syndrome.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.40.8.575
PMCID: PMC1735560
PMID: 12920066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]