---
reference_id: "PMID:29145910"
title: Brain activation during emotion regulation in women with premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
authors:
- Petersen N
- Ghahremani DG
- Rapkin AJ
- Berman SM
- Liang L
- London ED
journal: Psychol Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1017/S0033291717003270
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Brain Mapping/methods
- "Cerebral Cortex/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- Emotions/physiology
- Female
- Follicular Phase/physiology
- Humans
- Luteal Phase/physiology
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- "Prefrontal Cortex/diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder/physiopathology
- Self-Control
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brain activation during emotion regulation in women with premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
**Authors:** Petersen N, Ghahremani DG, Rapkin AJ, Berman SM, Liang L, London ED
**Journal:** Psychol Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S0033291717003270](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291717003270)

## Content

1. Psychol Med. 2018 Aug;48(11):1795-1802. doi: 10.1017/S0033291717003270. Epub 
2017 Nov 17.

Brain activation during emotion regulation in women with premenstrual dysphoric 
disorder.

Petersen N(1), Ghahremani DG(1), Rapkin AJ(2), Berman SM(1), Liang L(1), London 
ED(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, 90024, USA.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, David Geffen School of Medicine, 
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, 90024, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, University of California 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, 90024, USA.
(4)Brain Research Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, 90024, USA.

BACKGROUND: Difficulties in regulating emotions are linked to the core symptoms 
of premenstrual dysphoric disorder (PMDD). We therefore investigated the neural 
substrates of emotion-regulation problems in women with PMDD.
METHODS: On the basis of self-evaluations over 2 months on the Daily Record of 
Severity of Problems, eligible participants were assigned to two groups: PMDD 
and control (18 per group). Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and a 
well-validated task were used to assess brain function during emotion 
regulation. Participants were tested twice, once during the follicular 
(asymptomatic) and once in the late luteal (symptomatic) phase of the menstrual 
cycle.
RESULTS: Women with PMDD gave higher ratings of negative affect in the luteal 
phase than in the follicular phase, and compared with healthy control 
participants during the luteal phase. A region-of-interest fMRI analysis 
indicated that during the late luteal phase, women with PMDD had hypoactivation 
in right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC) during all conditions of the 
emotion-regulation task, not only in the contrast that isolated emotion 
regulation. An exploratory whole-brain, voxel-wise analysis showed that women 
with PMDD had less activation in the precentral gyrus during the luteal phase 
than the follicular phase, and less activation in the postcentral gyrus compared 
with control participants.
CONCLUSIONS: During the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle, women with PMDD 
experience difficulty regulating emotions. Hypoactivation in the right dlPFC may 
contribute to this problem, but may be related more generally to other affective 
symptoms of PMDD. Hypofunction in the right pre- and postcentral gyri warrants 
additional study.

DOI: 10.1017/S0033291717003270
PMCID: PMC9196139
PMID: 29145910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interest. None.