---
reference_id: "PMID:30561247"
title: Inotersen (transthyretin-specific antisense oligonucleotide) for treatment of transthyretin amyloidosis.
authors:
- Benson MD
- Dasgupta NR
- Monia BP
journal: Neurodegener Dis Manag
year: '2019'
doi: 10.2217/nmt-2018-0037
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inotersen (transthyretin-specific antisense oligonucleotide) for treatment of transthyretin amyloidosis.
**Authors:** Benson MD, Dasgupta NR, Monia BP
**Journal:** Neurodegener Dis Manag (2019)
**DOI:** [10.2217/nmt-2018-0037](https://doi.org/10.2217/nmt-2018-0037)

## Content

1. Neurodegener Dis Manag. 2019 Feb;9(1):25-30. doi: 10.2217/nmt-2018-0037. Epub 
2018 Dec 18.

Inotersen (transthyretin-specific antisense oligonucleotide) for treatment of 
transthyretin amyloidosis.

Benson MD(1), Dasgupta NR(1)(2), Monia BP(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University, 
Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Indiana University, 
Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(3)Ionis Pharmaceuticals, Carlsbad, CA, USA.

Hereditary  transthyretin amyloidosis (ATTR) is a fatal systemic disease that 
results from deposition of the misfolded protein transthyretin (TTR) in tissues. 
Common clinical manifestations of ATTR include peripheral neuropathy, 
cardiomyopathy, autonomic dysfunction, diarrhea and constipation. Historically 
there have not been effective therapies for this devastating disease. 
Inotersen/Tegsedi™ (Akcea Therapeutics, MA, USA) is a second-generation 
antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) specific for TTR that inhibits production of TTR 
by the liver. In the recently completed Phase III NEURO-TTR study, inotersen was 
shown to be effective in stabilizing or improving peripheral neuropathy as 
measured by the modified neurologic impairment score +7 (mNIS+7) and improving 
the quality of life assessed by the Norfolk Quality of Life-Diabetic Neuropathy 
(QOL-DN) questionnaire. Inotersen is a breakthrough therapy for treatment of 
ATTR.

DOI: 10.2217/nmt-2018-0037
PMID: 30561247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]