---
reference_id: "PMID:26123494"
title: Identification of a novel MKS locus defined by TMEM107 mutation.
authors:
- Shaheen R
- Almoisheer A
- Faqeih E
- Babay Z
- Monies D
- Tassan N
- Abouelhoda M
- Kurdi W
- Al Mardawi E
- Khalil MM
- Seidahmed MZ
- Alnemer M
- Alsahan N
- Sogaty S
- Alhashem A
- Singh A
- Goyal M
- Kapoor S
- Alomar R
- Ibrahim N
- Alkuraya FS
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv242
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of a novel MKS locus defined by TMEM107 mutation.
**Authors:** Shaheen R, Almoisheer A, Faqeih E, Babay Z, Monies D, Tassan N, Abouelhoda M, Kurdi W, Al Mardawi E, Khalil MM, Seidahmed MZ, Alnemer M, Alsahan N, Sogaty S, Alhashem A, Singh A, Goyal M, Kapoor S, Alomar R, Ibrahim N, Alkuraya FS
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddv242](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddv242)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Sep 15;24(18):5211-8. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv242. Epub 2015
Jun  29.

Identification of a novel MKS locus defined by TMEM107 mutation.

Shaheen R(1), Almoisheer A(1), Faqeih E(2), Babay Z(3), Monies D(4), Tassan 
N(4), Abouelhoda M(4), Kurdi W(5), Al Mardawi E(6), Khalil MM(7), Seidahmed 
MZ(8), Alnemer M(5), Alsahan N(5), Sogaty S(9), Alhashem A(10), Singh A(11), 
Goyal M(11), Kapoor S(12), Alomar R(1), Ibrahim N(1), Alkuraya FS(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and.
(2)Department of Pediatric Subspecialty, Children's Specialized Hospital, King 
Fahad Medical City, Riyadh 59046, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Depatment of Obstetrics and Gynecology, King Khalid University Hospital and 
College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Genetics and Saudi Human Genome Program, King Abdulaziz City 
for Science and Technology, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and 
Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology and.
(7)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Department of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, Menoufiya University, Menoufiya, Egypt.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Security Forces Hospital Program, Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia.
(9)Department of Medical Genetics, King Fahad General Hospital, Jeddah, Saudi 
Arabia.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Prince Sultan Military Medical City, Riyadh 11159, 
Saudi Arabia.
(11)Department of Pediatrics, Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu 
University, Varanasi, UP, India.
(12)Department of Pediatrics Genetic & Research Laboratory, Maulana Azad Medical 
College, New Delhi, India and.
(13)Department of Genetics and Saudi Human Genome Program, King Abdulaziz City 
for Science and Technology, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, Department of Anatomy and Cell 
Biology, College of Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia 
falkuraya@kfshrc.edu.sa alkuraya@outlook.com.

Meckel-Gruber syndrome (MKS) is a perinatally lethal disorder characterized by 
the triad of occipital encephalocele, polydactyly and polycystic kidneys. 
Typical of other disorders related to defective primary cilium (ciliopathies), 
MKS is genetically heterogeneous with mutations in a dozen genes to date known 
to cause the disease. In an ongoing effort to characterize MKS clinically and 
genetically, we implemented a gene panel and next-generation sequencing approach 
to identify the causal mutation in 25 MKS families. Of the three families that 
did not harbor an identifiable causal mutation by this approach, two mapped to a 
novel disease locus in which whole-exome sequencing revealed the likely causal 
mutation as a homozygous splicing variant in TMEM107, which we confirm leads to 
aberrant splicing and nonsense-mediated decay. TMEM107 had been independently 
identified in two mouse models as a cilia-related protein and mutant mice 
display typical ciliopathy phenotypes. Our analysis of patient fibroblasts shows 
marked ciliogenesis defect with an accompanying perturbation of sonic hedgehog 
signaling, highly concordant with the cellular phenotype in Tmem107 mutants. 
This study shows that known MKS loci account for the overwhelming majority of 
MKS cases but additional loci exist including MKS13 caused by TMEM107 mutation.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddv242
PMID: 26123494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]