---
reference_id: "PMID:35487021"
title: A review ofimaging genetics in Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Xin Y
- Sheng J
- Miao M
- Wang L
- Yang Z
- Huang H
journal: J Clin Neurosci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2022.04.017
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A review ofimaging genetics in Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Xin Y, Sheng J, Miao M, Wang L, Yang Z, Huang H
**Journal:** J Clin Neurosci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jocn.2022.04.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocn.2022.04.017)

## Content

1. J Clin Neurosci. 2022 Jun;100:155-163. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2022.04.017. Epub 
2022 Apr 26.

A review ofimaging genetics in Alzheimer's disease.

Xin Y(1), Sheng J(2), Miao M(3), Wang L(4), Yang Z(1), Huang H(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Computer Science, Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 
310018, China; Key Laboratory of Intelligent Image Analysis for Sensory and 
Cognitive Health, Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of China, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310018, China.
(2)College of Computer Science, Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 
310018, China; Key Laboratory of Intelligent Image Analysis for Sensory and 
Cognitive Health, Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of China, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310018, China. Electronic address: j.sheng@ieee.org.
(3)Beijing Hospital, Beijing 100730, China; National Center of Gerontology, 
Beijing 100730, China; Institute of Geriatric Medicine, Chinese Academy of 
Medical Sciences, Beijing 100730, China.
(4)College of Computer Science, Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 
310018, China; Key Laboratory of Intelligent Image Analysis for Sensory and 
Cognitive Health, Ministry of Industry and Information Technology of China, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310018, China; Hangzhou Vocational & Technical College, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310018, China.

Determining the association between genetic variation and phenotype is a key 
step to study the mechanism of Alzheimer's disease (AD), laying the foundation 
for studying drug therapies and biomarkers. AD is the most common type of 
dementia in the aged population. At present, three early-onset AD genes (APP, 
PSEN1, PSEN2) and one late-onset AD susceptibility gene apolipoprotein E (APOE) 
have been determined. However, the pathogenesis of AD remains unknown. Imaging 
genetics, an emerging interdisciplinary field, is able to reveal the complex 
mechanisms from the genetic level to human cognition and mental disorders via 
macroscopic intermediates. This paper reviews methods of establishing 
genotype-phenotype to explore correlations, including sparse canonical 
correlation analysis, sparse reduced rank regression, sparse partial least 
squares and so on. We found that most research work did poorly in supervised 
learning and exploring the nonlinear relationship between SNP-QT.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2022.04.017
PMID: 35487021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]