---
reference_id: "PMID:31046831"
title: Comparative analysis of mitochondrial DNA datasets indicates that Toxascaris leonina represents a species complex.
authors:
- Jin YC
- Li XY
- Liu JH
- Zhu XQ
- Liu GH
journal: Parasit Vectors
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13071-019-3447-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparative analysis of mitochondrial DNA datasets indicates that Toxascaris leonina represents a species complex.
**Authors:** Jin YC, Li XY, Liu JH, Zhu XQ, Liu GH
**Journal:** Parasit Vectors (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13071-019-3447-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13071-019-3447-2)

## Content

1. Parasit Vectors. 2019 May 2;12(1):194. doi: 10.1186/s13071-019-3447-2.

Comparative analysis of mitochondrial DNA datasets indicates that Toxascaris 
leonina represents a species complex.

Jin YC(1), Li XY(2), Liu JH(1)(3), Zhu XQ(4), Liu GH(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory of Protein Engineering in Animal Vaccines, 
College of Veterinary Medicine, Hunan Agricultural University, Changsha, 410128, 
Hunan, People's Republic of China.
(2)Changsha Ecological Zoo, Changsha, 410118, Hunan, China.
(3)Hunan Co-Innovation Center of Animal Production Safety, Changsha, 410128, 
Hunan, People's Republic of China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of 
Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research 
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, 730046, Gansu, 
People's Republic of China.
(5)Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory of Protein Engineering in Animal Vaccines, 
College of Veterinary Medicine, Hunan Agricultural University, Changsha, 410128, 
Hunan, People's Republic of China. liuguohua5202008@163.com.
(6)Hunan Co-Innovation Center of Animal Production Safety, Changsha, 410128, 
Hunan, People's Republic of China. liuguohua5202008@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Toxascaris leonina is one of the most common intestinal parasites of 
canids and felids. In this study, we characterised the entire mitochondrial (mt) 
genome sequence of T. leonina from the cheetah and compared it with that of T. 
leonina from the dog.
RESULTS: The entire mt genome sequence of T. leonina from the cheetah is 
14,685 bp in size, which is 375 bp longer than that from the dog, and it is 
408 bp longer than that from the South China tiger. The overall nucleotide 
sequence (except for the non-coding region) identity was 92.8% between the two 
mt genomes of T. leonina from the cheetah and the dog. For the 12 protein-coding 
genes, sequence difference between T. leonina from the cheetah and the dog was 
5.0-9.7% at the nucleotide level and 1.0-7.2% at the amino acid level. Moreover, 
comparison of mt cox1 sequences among T. leonina isolates (n = 23) from 
different hosts revealed substantial nucleotide differences (10.6%). 
Phylogenetic analysis showed the separation of T. leonina from canid and felid 
hosts into three distinct clades.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these mtDNA datasets indicate that T. leonina from 
canid and felid hosts represents a species complex. Our results have 
implications for further studies of the molecular epidemiology, systematics and 
population genetics of this nematode.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-019-3447-2
PMCID: PMC6498696
PMID: 31046831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.