---
reference_id: "PMID:27955749"
title: "NS1 antigen: A new beam of light in the early diagnosis of dengue infection."
authors:
- Suleman M
- Faryal R
- Alam MM
- Sharif S
- Shaukat S
- Aamir UB
- Khurshid A
- Angez M
- Umair M
- Sufian MM
- Arshad Y
- Mujtaba G
- Zaidi SS
journal: Asian Pac J Trop Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.apjtm.2016.10.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NS1 antigen: A new beam of light in the early diagnosis of dengue infection.
**Authors:** Suleman M, Faryal R, Alam MM, Sharif S, Shaukat S, Aamir UB, Khurshid A, Angez M, Umair M, Sufian MM, Arshad Y, Mujtaba G, Zaidi SS
**Journal:** Asian Pac J Trop Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.apjtm.2016.10.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apjtm.2016.10.007)

## Content

1. Asian Pac J Trop Med. 2016 Dec;9(12):1212-1214. doi: 
10.1016/j.apjtm.2016.10.007. Epub 2016 Nov 9.

NS1 antigen: A new beam of light in the early diagnosis of dengue infection.

Suleman M(1), Faryal R(2), Alam MM(3), Sharif S(3), Shaukat S(3), Aamir UB(3), 
Khurshid A(3), Angez M(3), Umair M(3), Sufian MM(3), Arshad Y(3), Mujtaba G(3), 
Zaidi SS(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan; 
Department of Virology, National Institute of Health, Park Road, Chak Shahzad, 
Islamabad, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Virology, National Institute of Health, Park Road, Chak 
Shahzad, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(4)Department of Virology, National Institute of Health, Park Road, Chak 
Shahzad, Islamabad, Pakistan. Electronic address: sohailz@live.com.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate NS1 antigen detection ELISA for the early laboratory 
diagnosis of dengue virus infection.
METHODS: The present study was conducted to evaluate the overall positivity of 
NS1 antigen detection ELISA and its comparison with viral RNA detection via real 
time PCR and IgM antibodies detection by ELISA.
RESULTS: A total of 1270 serum samples were tested 86% (1097/1270) were detected 
positive by one or more than one diagnostic test. Out of 1 270, 64% (807/1270) 
were positive by NS1 ELISA and 52% (662/1270), 51% (646/1270) were positive by 
real-time RT-PCR and IgM ELISA respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: NS1 antigen detection ELISA is highly suitable diagnostic tools and 
it also has great value for use in outbreak and epidemic situation.

Copyright © 2016 Hainan Medical University. Production and hosting by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apjtm.2016.10.007
PMID: 27955749