---
reference_id: "PMID:29891059"
title: Episodic ataxias.
authors:
- Jen JC
- Wan J
journal: Handb Clin Neurol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-64189-2.00013-5
keywords:
- "Ataxia/classification, genetics"
- "Channelopathies/etiology, genetics"
- Excitatory Amino Acid Transporter 1/genetics
- Humans
- Kv1.1 Potassium Channel/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Episodic ataxias.
**Authors:** Jen JC, Wan J
**Journal:** Handb Clin Neurol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/B978-0-444-64189-2.00013-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-64189-2.00013-5)

## Content

1. Handb Clin Neurol. 2018;155:205-215. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-64189-2.00013-5.

Episodic ataxias.

Jen JC(1), Wan J(2).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Neurology, Otolaryngology, and Neurosurgery, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States. Electronic address: 
joanna.jen@mssm.edu.
(2)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA, United States.

Primary episodic ataxias (EAs) are a group of dominantly inherited disorders 
characterized by transient recurrent incoordination and truncal instability, 
often triggered by physical exertion and emotional stress, variably associated 
with progressive baseline ataxia. There are now eight designated subtypes based 
largely on genetic loci. Mutations have been identified in multiple individuals 
and families with EA1, EA2, and EA6, mostly with onset before adulthood. EA1 and 
EA2 are prototypical neurologic channelopathies. EA1 is caused by heterozygous 
mutations in KCNA1, which encodes the α1 subunit of a neuronal voltage-gated 
potassium channel, Kv1.1. EA2, the most common and best characterized, is caused 
by heterozygous mutations in CACNA1A, which encodes the α1A subunit of a 
neuronal voltage-gated calcium channel, Cav2.1. EA6 is caused by heterozygous 
mutations in SLC1A3, which encodes a subunit of a glial excitatory amino acid 
transporter, EAAT1. The other EA subtypes were defined in single families 
awaiting gene identification and further confirmation. This chapter focuses on 
the best-characterized EA syndromes, the clinical assessment and genetic 
diagnosis of EA, and the management of EA, as well as newly recognized allelic 
disorders that have greatly expanded the clinical spectrum of EA2. Illustrative 
cases are discussed, with a focus on sporadic patients with congenital features 
without episodic ataxia who present diagnostic and therapeutic challenges.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-444-64189-2.00013-5
PMID: 29891059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]