---
reference_id: "PMID:22158452"
title: "[Disease progression and systolic dysfunction in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: genetic basis, pathophysiology and clinical presentation]."
authors:
- Poggesi G
- Ferrantini C
- Servettini E
- Girolami F
- Cecchi F
- Olivotto I
journal: G Ital Cardiol (Rome)
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1714/996.10826
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Disease progression and systolic dysfunction in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: genetic basis, pathophysiology and clinical presentation].
**Authors:** Poggesi G, Ferrantini C, Servettini E, Girolami F, Cecchi F, Olivotto I
**Journal:** G Ital Cardiol (Rome) (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1714/996.10826](https://doi.org/10.1714/996.10826)

## Content

1. G Ital Cardiol (Rome). 2011 Dec;12(12):815-23. doi: 10.1714/996.10826.

[Disease progression and systolic dysfunction in patients with hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy: genetic basis, pathophysiology and clinical presentation].

[Article in Italian]

Poggesi G(1), Ferrantini C, Servettini E, Girolami F, Cecchi F, Olivotto I.

Author information:
(1)Centro di Riferimento per le cardiomopatie, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria 
Careggi, Firenze.

Progressive heart failure associated with left ventricular remodeling and 
systo-diastolic dysfunction is one of the most severe complications of 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). Such condition, for the lack of a better 
term, is referred to as end-stage (ES) HCM. During the last decade, we have 
begun to understand the mechanisms underlying progression from a hyperdynamic 
left ventricle to the striking patterns of ES. To date, different aspects of HCM 
progression remain obscure, including potential strategies for management and 
prevention. On the basis of recent evidence, it is appropriate to emphasize 
these aspects, which may be difficult to identify, particularly in the early 
stages when systolic function appears relatively preserved. Nevertheless, it is 
at these early stages that treatment may potentially interfere with the clinical 
evolution of HCM toward ES and heart failure. The possibility of early 
identification of patients at risk of ES progression may ultimately impact on 
the natural history of the disease in this challenging patient subgroup.

DOI: 10.1714/996.10826
PMID: 22158452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]