---
reference_id: "PMID:28669361"
title: A systematic review and meta-analysis on the incubation period of Campylobacteriosis.
authors:
- Awofisayo-Okuyelu A
- Hall I
- Adak G
- Hawker JI
- Abbott S
- McCARTHY N
journal: Epidemiol Infect
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1017/S0950268817001303
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A systematic review and meta-analysis on the incubation period of Campylobacteriosis.
**Authors:** Awofisayo-Okuyelu A, Hall I, Adak G, Hawker JI, Abbott S, McCARTHY N
**Journal:** Epidemiol Infect (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S0950268817001303](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0950268817001303)

## Content

1. Epidemiol Infect. 2017 Aug;145(11):2241-2253. doi: 10.1017/S0950268817001303. 
Epub 2017 Jul 3.

A systematic review and meta-analysis on the incubation period of 
Campylobacteriosis.

Awofisayo-Okuyelu A(1), Hall I(2), Adak G(2), Hawker JI(2), Abbott S(3), 
McCARTHY N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology,University of Oxford,Oxford,UK.
(2)National Institute for Health Research, Health Protection Research Unit (NIHR 
HPRU) in Gastrointestinal Infections, University of Liverpool,Liverpool,UK.
(3)Department of Medicine,University of Warwick,Coventry,UK.

Accurate knowledge of pathogen incubation period is essential to inform public 
health policies and implement interventions that contribute to the reduction of 
burden of disease. The incubation period distribution of campylobacteriosis is 
currently unknown with several sources reporting different times. Variation in 
the distribution could be expected due to host, transmission vehicle, and 
organism characteristics, however, the extent of this variation and influencing 
factors are unclear. The authors have undertaken a systematic review of 
published literature of outbreak studies with well-defined point source 
exposures and human experimental studies to estimate the distribution of 
incubation period and also identify and explain the variation in the 
distribution between studies. We tested for heterogeneity using I 2 and 
Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests, regressed incubation period against possible 
explanatory factors, and used hierarchical clustering analysis to define 
subgroups of studies without evidence of heterogeneity. The mean incubation 
period of subgroups ranged from 2·5 to 4·3 days. We observed variation in the 
distribution of incubation period between studies that was not due to chance. A 
significant association between the mean incubation period and age distribution 
was observed with outbreaks involving only children reporting an incubation of 
1·29 days longer when compared with outbreaks involving other age groups.

DOI: 10.1017/S0950268817001303
PMCID: PMC9148824
PMID: 28669361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.