---
reference_id: "PMID:38317675"
title: "Epileptic dyskinetic encephalopathy in KBG syndrome: Expansion of the phenotype."
authors:
- Donnellan EP
- Gorman KM
- Shahwan A
- Allen NM
journal: Epilepsy Behav Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.ebr.2024.100647
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epileptic dyskinetic encephalopathy in KBG syndrome: Expansion of the phenotype.
**Authors:** Donnellan EP, Gorman KM, Shahwan A, Allen NM
**Journal:** Epilepsy Behav Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ebr.2024.100647](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebr.2024.100647)

## Content

1. Epilepsy Behav Rep. 2024 Jan 18;25:100647. doi: 10.1016/j.ebr.2024.100647. 
eCollection 2024.

Epileptic dyskinetic encephalopathy in KBG syndrome: Expansion of the phenotype.

Donnellan EP(1)(2), Gorman KM(3)(4), Shahwan A(3)(5), Allen NM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Paediatrics, Galway University Hospital, Ireland.
(2)Dept. of Paediatrics, School of Medicine, University of Galway, Ireland.
(3)Dept of Paediatric Neurology and Neurophysiology, Children's Health Ireland 
at Temple St., Dublin 1, Ireland.
(4)School of Medicine and Medical Science, University College Dublin, Dublin, 
Ireland.
(5)School of Medicine, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Ireland.

KBG syndrome is characterised by developmental delay, dental (macrodontia of 
upper central incisors), craniofacial and skeletal anomalies. Since the 
identification of variants in the gene (ANKRD11) responsible for KBG syndrome, 
wider phenotypes are emerging. While there is phenotypic variability within many 
features of KBG syndrome, epilepsy is not usually markedly severe and movement 
disorders largely undocumented. Here we describe a novel early onset phenotype 
of dyskinetic epileptic encephalopathy in a male, who presented during infancy 
with a florid hyperkinetic movement disorder and developmental regression. 
Initially he had epileptic spasms and tonic seizures, and EEGs revealed a 
modified hypsarrhythmia. The epilepsy phenotype evolved to Lennox-Gastaut 
syndrome with seizures resistant to multiple anti-seizure therapies and the 
movement disorder evolved to choreoathetosis of limbs and head with oro-lingual 
dyskinesias. Previous extensive neurometabolic and imaging investigations, 
including panel-based exome sequencing were unremarkable. Later trio exome 
sequencing identified a de novo pathogenic heterozygous frameshift deletion of 
ANKRD11 (c.6792delC; p.Ala2265Profs*72). Review of the literature did not 
identify any individuals with such a hyperkinetic movement disorder presentation 
in combination with early-onset epileptic encephalopathy. This report expands 
the phenotype of ANKRD11-related KBG syndrome to include epileptic dyskinetic 
encephalopathy.

© 2024 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebr.2024.100647
PMCID: PMC10839861
PMID: 38317675

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.