---
reference_id: "PMID:18978650"
title: "Chondrodysplasia punctata: a clinical diagnostic and radiological review."
authors:
- Irving MD
- Chitty LS
- Mansour S
- Hall CM
journal: Clin Dysmorphol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1097/MCD.0b013e3282fdcc70
keywords:
- Cholesterol/metabolism
- "Chondrodysplasia Punctata, Rhizomelic/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, etiology, metabolism"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- Peroxisomes/metabolism
- Radiography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chondrodysplasia punctata: a clinical diagnostic and radiological review.
**Authors:** Irving MD, Chitty LS, Mansour S, Hall CM
**Journal:** Clin Dysmorphol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MCD.0b013e3282fdcc70](https://doi.org/10.1097/MCD.0b013e3282fdcc70)

## Content

1. Clin Dysmorphol. 2008 Oct;17(4):229-41. doi: 10.1097/MCD.0b013e3282fdcc70.

Chondrodysplasia punctata: a clinical diagnostic and radiological review.

Irving MD(1), Chitty LS, Mansour S, Hall CM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Guy's and St Thomas' Hospitals Foundation 
Trust, London, UK. Melita.Irving@gstt.nhs.uk

Chondrodysplasia punctata (CDP) is associated with a number of disorders, 
including inborn errors of metabolism, involving peroxisomal and cholesterol 
pathways, embryopathy and chromosomal abnormalities. Several classification 
systems of the different types of CDP have been suggested earlier. More 
recently, the biochemical and molecular basis of a number of CDP syndromes has 
recently been elucidated and a new aetiological classification has emerged. Here 
we provide an updated version with an overview of the different types of CDP, a 
discussion of the aetiology and a description of the clinical and radiographic 
findings. An investigative guideline to help determine the exact diagnosis in 
new cases is also presented.

DOI: 10.1097/MCD.0b013e3282fdcc70
PMID: 18978650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]