---
reference_id: "PMID:28602350"
title: Structure of the Human Lipid Exporter ABCA1.
authors:
- Qian H
- Zhao X
- Cao P
- Lei J
- Yan N
- Gong X
journal: Cell
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2017.05.020
keywords:
- "ATP Binding Cassette Transporter 1/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Cryoelectron Microscopy
- Humans
- "Models, Molecular"
- Protein Domains
- Sequence Alignment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Structure of the Human Lipid Exporter ABCA1.
**Authors:** Qian H, Zhao X, Cao P, Lei J, Yan N, Gong X
**Journal:** Cell (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2017.05.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2017.05.020)

## Content

1. Cell. 2017 Jun 15;169(7):1228-1239.e10. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2017.05.020. Epub
2017 Jun 8.

Structure of the Human Lipid Exporter ABCA1.

Qian H(1), Zhao X(1), Cao P(1), Lei J(2), Yan N(3), Gong X(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Membrane Biology, Tsinghua-Peking Joint Center for
Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences and School of Medicine, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China; Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for
Structural Biology, School of Life Sciences and School of Medicine, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China.
(2)Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Structural Biology, School of Life
Sciences and School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China;
Technology Center for Protein Sciences, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of
Protein Sciences, School of Life Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084,
China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Membrane Biology, Tsinghua-Peking Joint Center for
Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences and School of Medicine, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China. Electronic address: nyan@tsinghua.edu.cn.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Membrane Biology, Tsinghua-Peking Joint Center for
Life Sciences, School of Life Sciences and School of Medicine, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China; Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for
Structural Biology, School of Life Sciences and School of Medicine, Tsinghua
University, Beijing 100084, China. Electronic address:
gongx@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn.

ABCA1, an ATP-binding cassette (ABC) subfamily A exporter, mediates the cellular
efflux of phospholipids and cholesterol to the extracellular acceptor
apolipoprotein A-I (apoA-I) for generation of nascent high-density lipoprotein
(HDL). Mutations of human ABCA1 are associated with Tangier disease and familial
HDL deficiency. Here, we report the cryo-EM structure of human ABCA1 with
nominal resolutions of 4.1 Å for the overall structure and 3.9 Å for the massive
extracellular domain. The nucleotide-binding domains (NBDs) display a
nucleotide-free state, while the two transmembrane domains (TMDs) contact each
other through a narrow interface in the intracellular leaflet of the membrane.
In addition to TMDs and NBDs, two extracellular domains of ABCA1 enclose an
elongated hydrophobic tunnel. Structural mapping of dozens of disease-related
mutations allows potential interpretation of their diverse pathogenic
mechanisms. Structural-based analysis suggests a plausible "lateral access"
mechanism for ABCA1-mediated lipid export that may be distinct from the
conventional alternating-access paradigm.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2017.05.020
PMID: 28602350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
