---
reference_id: "PMID:35150089"
title: A multidisciplinary approach and consensus statement to establish standards of care for Angelman syndrome.
authors:
- Duis J
- Nespeca M
- Summers J
- Bird L
- Bindels-de Heus KGCB
- Valstar MJ
- de Wit MY
- Navis C
- Ten Hooven-Radstaake M
- van Iperen-Kolk BM
- Ernst S
- Dendrinos M
- Katz T
- Diaz-Medina G
- Katyayan A
- Nangia S
- Thibert R
- Glaze D
- Keary C
- Pelc K
- Simon N
- Sadhwani A
- Heussler H
- Wheeler A
- Woeber C
- DeRamus M
- Thomas A
- Kertcher E
- DeValk L
- Kalemeris K
- Arps K
- Baym C
- Harris N
- Gorham JP
- Bohnsack BL
- Chambers RC
- Harris S
- Chambers HG
- Okoniewski K
- Jalazo ER
- Berent A
- Bacino CA
- Williams C
- Anderson A
journal: Mol Genet Genomic Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.1843
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A multidisciplinary approach and consensus statement to establish standards of care for Angelman syndrome.
**Authors:** Duis J, Nespeca M, Summers J, Bird L, Bindels-de Heus KGCB, Valstar MJ, de Wit MY, Navis C, Ten Hooven-Radstaake M, van Iperen-Kolk BM, Ernst S, Dendrinos M, Katz T, Diaz-Medina G, Katyayan A, Nangia S, Thibert R, Glaze D, Keary C, Pelc K, Simon N, Sadhwani A, Heussler H, Wheeler A, Woeber C, DeRamus M, Thomas A, Kertcher E, DeValk L, Kalemeris K, Arps K, Baym C, Harris N, Gorham JP, Bohnsack BL, Chambers RC, Harris S, Chambers HG, Okoniewski K, Jalazo ER, Berent A, Bacino CA, Williams C, Anderson A
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomic Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mgg3.1843](https://doi.org/10.1002/mgg3.1843)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2022 Mar;10(3):e1843. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.1843. Epub 2022
 Feb 11.

A multidisciplinary approach and consensus statement to establish standards of 
care for Angelman syndrome.

Duis J(1), Nespeca M(2), Summers J(3), Bird L(4), Bindels-de Heus KGCB(5)(6), 
Valstar MJ(5), de Wit MY(5)(7), Navis C(5)(8), Ten Hooven-Radstaake M(5)(6), van 
Iperen-Kolk BM(6)(9), Ernst S(10), Dendrinos M(10), Katz T(11), Diaz-Medina 
G(12)(13), Katyayan A(12)(13), Nangia S(14), Thibert R(15), Glaze D(12)(13), 
Keary C(15), Pelc K(16), Simon N(17), Sadhwani A(17), Heussler H(18), Wheeler 
A(19), Woeber C(20), DeRamus M(21), Thomas A(22), Kertcher E(23), DeValk L(24), 
Kalemeris K(25), Arps K(26), Baym C(27), Harris N(27), Gorham JP(28), Bohnsack 
BL(29), Chambers RC(30), Harris S(12)(13), Chambers HG(31), Okoniewski K(19), 
Jalazo ER(32), Berent A(33), Bacino CA(34), Williams C(35), Anderson A(12)(13).

Author information:
(1)Section of Genetics & Inherited Metabolic Disease, Section of Pediatrics, 
Special Care, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital Colorado, University 
of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Rady Children's Hospital, San Diego, California, 
USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Clinical Genetics / Dysmorphology, University of 
California, San Diego, Rady Children's Hospital San Diego, San Diego, 
California, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Erasmus MC Sophia, Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, 
Netherlands.
(6)ENCORE Expertise Center for Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Erasmus MC 
University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Neurology and Pediatric Neurology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(8)Department of ENT (Speech & Language Pathology), Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(9)Department of Physical Therapy, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(10)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA.
(11)Developmental Pediatrics, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital 
Colorado, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA.
(12)Division of Neurology and Developmental Pediatrics, Department of 
Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.
(13)Neurology, Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Child Neurology, Weill Cornell 
Medicine, New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York, USA.
(15)Angelman Syndrome Program, Lurie Center for Autism, Massachusetts General 
Hospital for Children, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(16)Department of Neurology, Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola, 
Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Brussels, Belgium.
(17)Department of Psychiatry, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(18)UQ Child Health Research Centre, Faculty of Medicine, The University of 
Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.
(19)Center for Newborn Screening, RTI International, Research Triangle Park, 
North Carolina, USA.
(20)Audiology, Speech & Learning Services, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, 
Colorado, USA.
(21)Department of Psychiatry, Carolina Institute for Developmental Disabilities, 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(22)New York League for Early Learning William O'connor School, New York, New 
York, USA.
(23)UNC Hospital Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(24)Occupational Therapy, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(25)Department of Pediatric Rehabilitation, Monroe Carell Jr. Children's 
Hospital at Vanderbilt, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.
(26)Department of Physical Therapy, Children's Hospital Colorado, University of 
Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(27)Physical Therapy, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(28)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbo, Michigan, USA.
(29)Division of Ophthalmology, Department of Ophthalmology, Ann & Robert H. 
Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Ann Arbo, Michigan, USA.
(30)Department of Orthopedic Surgery Nationwide Children's Hospital, Columbus, 
Ohio, USA.
(31)Orthopedic Surgery, San Diego Department of Pediatric Orthopedics, 
University of California, Rady Children's Hospital, San Diego, California, USA.
(32)Angelman Syndrome Foundation, Aurora, Illinois, USA.
(33)Foundation for Angelman Syndrome Therapeutics, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(34)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, USA.
(35)Raymond C. Philips Unit, Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of 
Pediatrics, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.

BACKGROUND: Angelman syndrome (AS) is a rare neurogenetic disorder present in 
approximately 1/12,000 individuals and characterized by developmental delay, 
cognitive impairment, motor dysfunction, seizures, gastrointestinal concerns, 
and abnormal electroencephalographic background. AS is caused by absent 
expression of the paternally imprinted gene UBE3A in the central nervous system. 
Disparities in the management of AS are a major problem in preparing for 
precision therapies and occur even in patients with access to experts and 
recognized clinics. AS patients receive care based on collective provider 
experience due to limited evidence-based literature. We present a consensus 
statement and comprehensive literature review that proposes a standard of care 
practices for the management of AS at a critical time when therapeutics to alter 
the natural history of the disease are on the horizon.
METHODS: We compiled the key recognized clinical features of AS based on 
consensus from a team of specialists managing patients with AS. Working groups 
were established to address each focus area with committees comprised of 
providers who manage >5 individuals. Committees developed management guidelines 
for their area of expertise. These were compiled into a final document to 
provide a framework for standardizing management. Evidence from the medical 
literature was also comprehensively reviewed.
RESULTS: Areas covered by working groups in the consensus document include 
genetics, developmental medicine, psychology, general health concerns, neurology 
(including movement disorders), sleep, psychiatry, orthopedics, ophthalmology, 
communication, early intervention and therapies, and caregiver health. Working 
groups created frameworks, including flowcharts and tables, to help with quick 
access for providers. Data from the literature were incorporated to ensure 
providers had review of experiential versus evidence-based care guidelines.
CONCLUSION: Standards of care in the management of AS are keys to ensure optimal 
care at a critical time when new disease-modifying therapies are emerging. This 
document is a framework for providers of all familiarity levels.

© 2021 The Authors. Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.1843
PMCID: PMC8922964
PMID: 35150089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]