---
reference_id: "PMID:34640384"
title: "Clinical Prognostic Factors Associated with Good Outcomes in Pediatric Bell's Palsy."
authors:
- Yoo MC
- Park DC
- Byun JY
- Yeo SG
journal: J Clin Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/jcm10194368
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Prognostic Factors Associated with Good Outcomes in Pediatric Bell's Palsy.
**Authors:** Yoo MC, Park DC, Byun JY, Yeo SG
**Journal:** J Clin Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcm10194368](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm10194368)

## Content

1. J Clin Med. 2021 Sep 24;10(19):4368. doi: 10.3390/jcm10194368.

Clinical Prognostic Factors Associated with Good Outcomes in Pediatric Bell's 
Palsy.

Yoo MC(1), Park DC(2), Byun JY(3), Yeo SG(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, School of Medicine, Kyung 
Hee University, Seoul 02447, Korea.
(2)St. Vincent's Hospital, The Catholic University of Korea, Suwon 16247, Korea.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, School of Medicine, 
Kyung Hee University, Seoul 02447, Korea.

The prognosis of children with Bell's palsy remains unclear due to its 
relatively low incidence, and thus, the small number of patients included in 
individual studies. To evaluate the prognosis of children with Bell's palsy and 
identify the predictive value of specific factors that contribute to complete 
recovery, a retrospective cohort study was conducted of all patients with Bell's 
palsy who visited the outpatient clinic of our university hospital between 
January 2005 and December 2020. We identified the parameters associated with a 
favorable recovery after 6 months in pediatric patients with Bell's palsy. 
Factors recorded for each patient included age, sex, side affected by palsy, 
time between symptom onset and start of treatment, treatment methods, and the 
House-Brackmann grade (H-B) grade. The results of the multivariable analysis 
revealed that the lower degree of initial facial nerve paralysis presented as 
H-B grade II-IV was a significant favorable prognostic factor (OR: 3.86; 95% CI: 
1.27-11.70; p < 0.05). Our results showed that the most important factor 
influencing the complete recovery of Bell's palsy in children was the lower 
initial H-B grade at initial presentation.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm10194368
PMCID: PMC8509832
PMID: 34640384

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.