---
reference_id: "PMID:8449848"
title: Chemoprophylaxis of bacterial meningitis.
authors:
- Cuevas LE
- Hart CA
journal: J Antimicrob Chemother
year: '1993'
doi: 10.1093/jac/31.suppl_b.79
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chemoprophylaxis of bacterial meningitis.
**Authors:** Cuevas LE, Hart CA
**Journal:** J Antimicrob Chemother (1993)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jac/31.suppl_b.79](https://doi.org/10.1093/jac/31.suppl_b.79)

## Content

1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 1993 Feb;31 Suppl B:79-91. doi: 
10.1093/jac/31.suppl_b.79.

Chemoprophylaxis of bacterial meningitis.

Cuevas LE(1), Hart CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Tropical Paediatrics, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, 
University of Liverpool, UK.

Bacterial meningitis continues to be a life-threatening disease and an important 
cause of severe disability in otherwise healthy individuals. This article 
reviews the aspects related to the prevention of secondary cases. Our 
understanding about the factors leading to an epidemic and the identification of 
high risk groups remains limited. For this reason, chemoprophylaxis can be used 
only for the prevention of secondary cases once an index case has been 
identified. The objectives of prophylaxis are threefold: (i) to eliminate 
nasopharyngeal carriage in household contacts; (ii) to prevent contacts from 
acquiring the disease and (iii) to treat infection in those incubating the 
disease. Chemoprophylaxis can only achieve the first of these objectives. 
Nasopharyngeal carriage of meningococci and Haemophilus influenzae can be 
eradicated with the use of antibiotics and their advantages and disadvantages 
are discussed. Prophylaxis should be given to household members and kissing and 
saliva-exchanging contacts of a case of meningococcal meningitis. The decision 
to give prophylaxis to extended family contacts, close neighbour contacts or 
children attending day-care centres where a case has occurred is controversial. 
It does not alter the course of an epidemic and close contacts are liable to 
become reinfected soon after prophylaxis. Prophylaxis of H. influenzae should be 
given to households in which there is at least one child (other than the index 
case) under 48 months of age. There is no agreement on the need to provide 
chemoprophylaxis to children in day-care centres because the risk of secondary 
infections is uncertain. An alternative to chemoprophylaxis is protective 
chemotherapy which can prevent the development of meningitis in individuals 
incubating the disease.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/31.suppl_b.79
PMID: 8449848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]