---
reference_id: "PMID:8675686"
title: A mouse model of gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina. Early retinal pigment epithelium damage and progressive retinal degeneration.
authors:
- Wang T
- Milam AH
- Steel G
- Valle D
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1172/JCI118730
keywords:
- Animals
- Atrophy
- Choroid/pathology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Electroretinography
- Female
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Ornithine/metabolism
- "Ornithine-Oxo-Acid Transaminase/deficiency, metabolism"
- Pigment Epithelium of Eye/pathology
- "Retinal Degeneration/pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A mouse model of gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina. Early retinal pigment epithelium damage and progressive retinal degeneration.
**Authors:** Wang T, Milam AH, Steel G, Valle D
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI118730](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI118730)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 1996 Jun 15;97(12):2753-62. doi: 10.1172/JCI118730.

A mouse model of gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina. Early retinal pigment
epithelium damage and progressive retinal degeneration.

Wang T(1), Milam AH, Steel G, Valle D.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Gyrate atrophy (GA) of the choroid and retina is a blinding chorioretinal
degeneration caused by deficiency of ornithine delta-aminotransferase (OAT). The
phenotype of GA is characterized by progressive concentric reduction of the
visual fields and ornithine accumulation. To understand better the pathogenesis
of GA and to develop a model to test therapeutic strategies, we produced an
OAT-deficient mouse by gene targeting. Like human GA patients, adult
OAT-deficient mice exhibit chronic hyperornithinemia to levels 10-15-fold above
normal and massive ornithinuria. Slowly progressive retinal degeneration is
reflected by a gradual decline in electroretinogram amplitudes over the first 12
mo of life. At 2 mo, the retinal pigment epithelium is histologically normal,
but electron microscopy reveals sporadic degeneration of scattered pigment
epithelial cells. By 6 mo there are more diffuse abnormalities of the pigment
epithelium with accumulation of large phagosomes and crystalloid inclusions.
Although morphologically normal at 2 mo, the photo-receptor outer segments
become highly disorganized and shortened to 60% of control length by 10 mo.
Additionally, there is cumulative loss of the photoreceptor cells, which reaches
33% by 10 mo and is most pronounced in the central region of the retina. Our
results indicate that retinal pigment epithelial cells are the initial site of
insult in GA and that the OAT-deficient mouse is an excellent animal model of GA
in human patients.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI118730
PMCID: PMC507368
PMID: 8675686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
