---
reference_id: "PMID:17173049"
title: Mutations in the gene encoding the synaptic scaffolding protein SHANK3 are associated with autism spectrum disorders.
authors:
- Durand CM
- Betancur C
- Boeckers TM
- Bockmann J
- Chaste P
- Fauchereau F
- Nygren G
- Rastam M
- Gillberg IC
- Anckarsäter H
- Sponheim E
- Goubran-Botros H
- Delorme R
- Chabane N
- Mouren-Simeoni MC
- de Mas P
- Bieth E
- Rogé B
- Héron D
- Burglen L
- Gillberg C
- Leboyer M
- Bourgeron T
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1038/ng1933
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the gene encoding the synaptic scaffolding protein SHANK3 are associated with autism spectrum disorders.
**Authors:** Durand CM, Betancur C, Boeckers TM, Bockmann J, Chaste P, Fauchereau F, Nygren G, Rastam M, Gillberg IC, Anckarsäter H, Sponheim E, Goubran-Botros H, Delorme R, Chabane N, Mouren-Simeoni MC, de Mas P, Bieth E, Rogé B, Héron D, Burglen L, Gillberg C, Leboyer M, Bourgeron T
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1933](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1933)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2007 Jan;39(1):25-7. doi: 10.1038/ng1933. Epub 2006 Dec 17.

Mutations in the gene encoding the synaptic scaffolding protein SHANK3 are 
associated with autism spectrum disorders.

Durand CM(1), Betancur C, Boeckers TM, Bockmann J, Chaste P, Fauchereau F, 
Nygren G, Rastam M, Gillberg IC, Anckarsäter H, Sponheim E, Goubran-Botros H, 
Delorme R, Chabane N, Mouren-Simeoni MC, de Mas P, Bieth E, Rogé B, Héron D, 
Burglen L, Gillberg C, Leboyer M, Bourgeron T.

Author information:
(1)Human Genetics and Cognitive Functions, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

SHANK3 (also known as ProSAP2) regulates the structural organization of 
dendritic spines and is a binding partner of neuroligins; genes encoding 
neuroligins are mutated in autism and Asperger syndrome. Here, we report that a 
mutation of a single copy of SHANK3 on chromosome 22q13 can result in language 
and/or social communication disorders. These mutations concern only a small 
number of individuals, but they shed light on one gene dosage-sensitive synaptic 
pathway that is involved in autism spectrum disorders.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1933
PMCID: PMC2082049
PMID: 17173049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]