---
reference_id: "PMID:11005730"
title: "Clinical, radiographic, and genetic evaluation of a novel form of autosomal-dominant oligodontia."
authors:
- Goldenberg M
- Das P
- Messersmith M
- Stockton DW
- Patel PI
- "D'Souza RN"
journal: J Dent Res
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1177/00220345000790070701
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Anodontia/diagnostic imaging, genetics, pathology"
- Child
- Computer Simulation
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Female
- Frameshift Mutation
- "Genes, Dominant"
- "Genes, Homeobox"
- Genetic Linkage
- Homeodomain Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- MSX1 Transcription Factor
- Male
- PAX9 Transcription Factor
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Radiography
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical, radiographic, and genetic evaluation of a novel form of autosomal-dominant oligodontia.
**Authors:** Goldenberg M, Das P, Messersmith M, Stockton DW, Patel PI, D'Souza RN
**Journal:** J Dent Res (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1177/00220345000790070701](https://doi.org/10.1177/00220345000790070701)

## Content

1. J Dent Res. 2000 Jul;79(7):1469-75. doi: 10.1177/00220345000790070701.

Clinical, radiographic, and genetic evaluation of a novel form of 
autosomal-dominant oligodontia.

Goldenberg M(1), Das P, Messersmith M, Stockton DW, Patel PI, D'Souza RN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthodontics, University of Texas at Houston Health Science 
Center, 77030, USA.

A frameshift mutation recently identified within the paired domain of the 
transcription factor, PAX9, has been linked to a unique form of oligodontia in a 
single, multigenerational family (Stockton et al., 2000). We now describe the 
phenotypic and segregation analyses of this remarkable kindred, the initial 
approach taken to identify a candidate gene involved in this form of 
oligodontia, and the power of this single-family pedigree to generate 
significant linkage in a genome search. Of the 43 family members enrolled in 
this study, 21 individuals were affected with several congenitally missing 
permanent teeth. The pattern of inheritance of the oligodontia trait suggested 
the involvement of a single gene bearing a dominant mutation. To various 
degrees, affected members lacked permanent first, second, and third molars in 
all four quadrants. Several individuals with missing molars also lacked second 
premolars- most commonly, maxillary second premolars and mandibular central 
incisors. To the best of our knowledge, this pattern of non-syndromic, familial 
tooth agenesis has not been previously described in the literature. Since a 
missense mutation in the homeobox gene, MSX1, was previously linked to tooth 
agenesis in a single family lacking second premolars and third molars, we 
performed a mutational analysis of MSX1 by PCR. The absence of a mutation in 
exons 1 and 2 of MSX1 suggested that allelic mutations in the coding region of 
MSX1 are not associated with this phenotypically distinct form of oligodontia. 
Computer simulation of linkage analysis further proved that this pedigree alone 
was sufficient to generate a significant result for a total genome scan.

DOI: 10.1177/00220345000790070701
PMID: 11005730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]