---
reference_id: "PMID:25863560"
title: "Tuberculosis and vitamin D: what's the rest of the story?"
authors:
- Cegielski P
- Vernon A
journal: Lancet Infect Dis
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(15)70163-5
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Tuberculosis and vitamin D: what's the rest of the story?
**Authors:** Cegielski P, Vernon A
**Journal:** Lancet Infect Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1473-3099(15)70163-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(15)70163-5)

## Content

1. Lancet Infect Dis. 2015 May;15(5):489-90. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(15)70163-5. 
Epub 2015 Apr 8.

Tuberculosis and vitamin D: what's the rest of the story?

Cegielski P(1), Vernon A(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Tuberculosis Elimination, The National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral 
Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, US Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Atlanta, GA 30329, USA.
(2)Division of Tuberculosis Elimination, The National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral 
Hepatitis, STD, and TB Prevention, US Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, Atlanta, GA 30329, USA. Electronic address: anv3@cdc.gov.

Comment on
    Lancet Infect Dis. 2015 May;15(5):528-34. doi: 
10.1016/S1473-3099(15)70053-8.

DOI: 10.1016/S1473-3099(15)70163-5
PMCID: PMC4696485
PMID: 25863560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Both protein–energy undernutrition and specific micronutrient deficiencies
debilitate the cell-mediated immune system important in protection against
tuberculosis.1 However, once
tuberculosis de velops, the disease itself induces a catabolic state resulting in
negative nitrogen balance and micronutrient deficiencies. Generations of clinicians
treating patients with tuberculosis believed that nutritional support was crucial to
proper patient care. Why, then, has it been so difficult to prove through randomised
controlled clinical trials that nutritional interventions improve tuberculosis treatment
outcomes? Findings from systematic reviews2–6 have not shown
any clear, consistent benefit in terms of tuberculosis-specific outcomes, although they
do show improvements in nutritional status.

In the past 30 years, researchers have discovered many roles and mechanisms of
vitamin D action in both the innate and adaptive immune systems.7 Vitamin D promotes macrophage-mediated
killing of Mycobacterium tuberculosis,8 an observation that has led to several phase 2
trials2–6 of vitamin D sup plementation, nearly all of which have
shown no substantial benefit in terms of tuberculosis treatment outcomes. In The
Lancet Infectious Diseases, Peter Daley and colleagues9 report findings from another such trial,
and again the findings are negative. The randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial was well designed to address an important issue with use of an inexpensive, simple
intervention. Study treatment was given under direct observation; randomisation involved
well concealed treatment allocation; masking of the intervention between the groups was
reportedly good; at baseline the study groups were reasonably matched, although
pulmonary cavitation was unknown; assessment of endpoints was masked; dedicated study
staff collected all patient data; smears and cultures were processed in one laboratory
by one experienced technologist who was masked to treatment allocation; and withdrawals,
exclusions, and dropouts were noted. Thus, the methods seem to be robust, despite the
absence of a traditional CONSORT diagram or use of multivariable regression methods in
the analysis. Furthermore, the trial was reasonably powered for its primary outcome of
time to sputum culture conversion. Median time to sputum culture conversion was similar
between participants in the vitamin D and placebo groups (43·0 days [95% CI
33·3–52·8] and 42·0 days [33·9–50·1],
respectively), as were the proportions of patients with positive sputum cultures at 2
months. Does this mean that vitamin D supplementation is of no value in the management
of pulmonary tuberculosis? The answer is not yet clear, but different questions should
now be asked. Although vitamin D stimulates macrophage-mediated killing of M
tuberculosis through the innate immune system, it also regulates this
response by inducing mechanisms to inactivate some aspects of the immune responses and
modulate others. Vitamin D itself induces mechanisms for inactivation of vitamin D and
vitamin D-mediated innate immune responses and inflammation.10 In terms of the adaptive immune response, vitamin D
suppresses T-helper type 1 cellular responses crucial in host defense against
tuberculosis, promoting a T-helper type 2 predominance associated with immunological
tolerance, humoral immunity, and defense against viral infections.11 An extensive body of scientific
literature has developed elucidating the effects of vitamin D on these and other
cellular components of the immune system, many of which have suppressor
functions.7,12

Some research has suggested that the antimyco-bacterial activity of vitamin D
might operate at the level of the initial implantation and ingestion of bacilli by
alveolar macrophages and tissue dendritic cells.13,14 In other words,
vitamin D might also be important for prevention of symptomatic disease. Rather than
pharmacological doses given at discrete moments after a patient develops active disease,
a constant level of vitamin D sufficiency might be important in the bolstering of
resistance to tuberculosis so that the initial response to an inhaled bacillus is
optimum at the moment it happens. This initial response is dependent not only on vitamin
D, but also on various micronutrients and protein–energy nutrition, so
optimisation of this initial response might require consideration of nutritional status
more broadly.

Trials assessing sputum conversion could be misdirected if the major action of
vitamin D, in the context of active tuberculosis disease, is to mitigate the
inflammatory and immune response.4,5 This function would be better shown
through restriction of tissue damage or prevention of relapse, rather than with
acceleration of sputum conversion; however, such trials are longer and more difficult
and costly to perform. A therapeutic effect might be assessed by addition of a vitamin D
intervention to a large phase 3 trial with a factorial design. The results of recent
clinical trials and advances in immunology suggest that investigation of the role of
vitamin D in tuberculosis prevention might be fruitful.