---
reference_id: "PMID:28242515"
title: "Emotional word usage in groups at risk for schizophrenia-spectrum disorders: An objective investigation of attention to emotion."
authors:
- Fung CK
- Moore MM
- Karcher NR
- Kerns JG
- Martin EA
journal: Psychiatry Res
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2017.01.098
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Emotional word usage in groups at risk for schizophrenia-spectrum disorders: An objective investigation of attention to emotion.
**Authors:** Fung CK, Moore MM, Karcher NR, Kerns JG, Martin EA
**Journal:** Psychiatry Res (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.psychres.2017.01.098](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2017.01.098)

## Content

1. Psychiatry Res. 2017 Jun;252:29-37. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2017.01.098. Epub 
2017 Feb 22.

Emotional word usage in groups at risk for schizophrenia-spectrum disorders: An 
objective investigation of attention to emotion.

Fung CK(1), Moore MM(1), Karcher NR(2), Kerns JG(2), Martin EA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Social Behavior, University of California, 
Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Psychological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, 
USA.
(3)Department of Psychology and Social Behavior, University of California, 
Irvine, Irvine, CA, USA. Electronic address: emartin8@uci.edu.

Both extreme levels of social anhedonia (SocAnh) and extreme levels of 
perceptual aberration/magical ideation (PerMag) indicate increased risk for 
schizophrenia-spectrum disorders and are associated with emotional deficits. For 
SocAnh, there is evidence of self-reported decreased trait positive affect and 
abnormalities in emotional attention. For PerMag, there is evidence of increased 
trait negative affect and increased attention to negative emotion. Yet, the 
nature of more objective emotional abnormalities in these groups is unclear. The 
goal of this study was to assess attention to emotions more objectively in a 
SocAnh, PerMag, and control group by using a positive (vs. neutral) mood 
induction procedure followed by a free writing period. Linguistic analyses 
revealed that the SocAnh group used fewer positive emotion words than the 
control group, with the PerMag group falling in between the others. In addition, 
both at-risk groups used more negative emotion words than the control group. 
Also, for the control group only, those in the positive mood induction used more 
positive emotion words, suggesting their emotions influenced their linguistic 
expression. Overall, SocAnh is associated with decreased positive emotional 
expression and at-risk groups are associated with increased negative emotional 
expression and a decreased influence of emotions on linguistic expression.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2017.01.098
PMCID: PMC5438895
PMID: 28242515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: None.