---
reference_id: "PMID:12161072"
title: "Altered ryanodine receptor function in central core disease: leaky or uncoupled Ca(2+) release channels?"
authors:
- Dirksen RT
- Avila G
journal: Trends Cardiovasc Med
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1016/s1050-1738(02)00163-9
keywords:
- Calcium/metabolism
- Humans
- Muscle Contraction/physiology
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism, physiology"
- Mutation
- "Myopathy, Central Core/genetics, metabolism"
- "Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/genetics, metabolism"
- Sarcoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Altered ryanodine receptor function in central core disease: leaky or uncoupled Ca(2+) release channels?
**Authors:** Dirksen RT, Avila G
**Journal:** Trends Cardiovasc Med (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s1050-1738(02)00163-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/s1050-1738(02)00163-9)

## Content

1. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2002 Jul;12(5):189-97. doi:
10.1016/s1050-1738(02)00163-9.

Altered ryanodine receptor function in central core disease: leaky or uncoupled
Ca(2+) release channels?

Dirksen RT(1), Avila G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.
Robert_Dirksen@URMC.rochester.edu

Central core disease (CCD) is an autosomal-dominant human congenital myopathy
that is associated with at least 22 different mutations in the skeletal muscle
isoform of ryanodine receptor (RyR1). CCD mutations in RyR1 have been proposed
to lead to the formation of sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) Ca(2+) release channels
that are excessively leaky to Ca(2+). Although some of the CCD mutations in RyR1
may indeed result in leaky SR Ca(2+) release channels, the leaky-channel
hypothesis may not represent the only mechanism for muscle weakness in this
disorder. The presence of an alternate mechanism of muscle weakness in CCD is
supported by the observation that muscle cells expressing a CCD mutation in the
putative pore-forming segment of RyR1 (I4898T) exhibit a functional uncoupling
of SR Ca(2+) release from sarcolemmal depolarization. These observations cannot
be explained by the leaky-channel hypothesis and indicate that muscle weakness
in some forms of CCD arises from an alternate and completely unexpected
mechanism, termed "excitation-contraction uncoupling."

DOI: 10.1016/s1050-1738(02)00163-9
PMID: 12161072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
