---
reference_id: "PMID:27080696"
title: A novel de novo Myocilin variant in a patient with sporadic juvenile open angle glaucoma.
authors:
- Souzeau E
- Burdon KP
- Ridge B
- Dubowsky A
- Ruddle JB
- Craig JE
journal: BMC Med Genet
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s12881-016-0291-5
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Cytoskeletal Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Eye Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Genetic Testing
- Genetic Variation
- "Glaucoma, Open-Angle/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Glycoproteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Pedigree
- White People/genetics
- Myocilin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel de novo Myocilin variant in a patient with sporadic juvenile open angle glaucoma.
**Authors:** Souzeau E, Burdon KP, Ridge B, Dubowsky A, Ruddle JB, Craig JE
**Journal:** BMC Med Genet (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12881-016-0291-5](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12881-016-0291-5)

## Content

1. BMC Med Genet. 2016 Apr 14;17:30. doi: 10.1186/s12881-016-0291-5.

A novel de novo Myocilin variant in a patient with sporadic juvenile open angle 
glaucoma.

Souzeau E(1), Burdon KP(2), Ridge B(3), Dubowsky A(4), Ruddle JB(5), Craig 
JE(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Flinders University, Flinders Medical Centre, 
Adelaide, Australia. emmanuelle.souzeau@flinders.edu.au.
(2)Menzies Institute for Medical Research, University of Tasmania, Hobart, 
Australia.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Flinders University, Flinders Medical Centre, 
Adelaide, Australia.
(4)SA Pathology, Flinders Medical Centre, Adelaide, Australia.
(5)Centre for Eye Research Australia, University of Melbourne, Royal Victorian 
Eye & Ear Hospital, Melbourne, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Glaucoma is a leading cause of irreversible blindness. Pathogenic 
variants in the Myocilin gene (MYOC) cause juvenile open angle glaucoma (JOAG) 
in 8-36% of cases, and display an autosomal dominant inheritance with high 
penetrance. Molecular diagnosis is important for early identification as 
therapies are effective in minimizing vision loss and MYOC variants can be 
associated to severe glaucoma. MYOC variants are usually inherited, however a 
fifth of carriers do not report a family history. The occurrence of de novo MYOC 
variants is currently unknown.
CASE PRESENTATION: In this study we investigated a 14 year old male Caucasian 
patient diagnosed with JOAG, and no family history of glaucoma. A novel probably 
deleterious MYOC:p.(Pro254Leu) variant was identified in the index case. This 
variant was not present in the parents or the siblings.
CONCLUSION: This is the second report of a de novo MYOC variant in a sporadic 
case of JOAG and it is currently unknown if this mechanism occurs more 
frequently. This finding emphasizes the importance of screening individuals with 
JOAG for MYOC mutations irrespective of a negative family history.

DOI: 10.1186/s12881-016-0291-5
PMCID: PMC4831102
PMID: 27080696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]