---
reference_id: "PMID:27358211"
title: "CCL19 as a Chemokine Risk Factor for Posttreatment Lyme Disease Syndrome: a Prospective Clinical Cohort Study."
authors:
- Aucott JN
- Soloski MJ
- Rebman AW
- Crowder LA
- Lahey LJ
- Wagner CA
- Robinson WH
- Bechtold KT
journal: Clin Vaccine Immunol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1128/CVI.00071-16
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Chemokine CCL19/blood
- Chronic Disease
- Female
- Humans
- "Lyme Disease/drug therapy, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prospective Studies
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CCL19 as a Chemokine Risk Factor for Posttreatment Lyme Disease Syndrome: a Prospective Clinical Cohort Study.
**Authors:** Aucott JN, Soloski MJ, Rebman AW, Crowder LA, Lahey LJ, Wagner CA, Robinson WH, Bechtold KT
**Journal:** Clin Vaccine Immunol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1128/CVI.00071-16](https://doi.org/10.1128/CVI.00071-16)

## Content

1. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2016 Sep 6;23(9):757-66. doi: 10.1128/CVI.00071-16.
Print  2016 Sep.

CCL19 as a Chemokine Risk Factor for Posttreatment Lyme Disease Syndrome: a 
Prospective Clinical Cohort Study.

Aucott JN(1), Soloski MJ(2), Rebman AW(2), Crowder LA(3), Lahey LJ(4), Wagner 
CA(4), Robinson WH(4), Bechtold KT(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Lutherville, Maryland, USA jaucott2@jhmi.edu.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Lutherville, Maryland, USA.
(3)Lyme Disease Research Foundation, Lutherville, Maryland, USA.
(4)Division of Immunology and Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Stanford 
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA, and Veterans Affairs 
Palo Alto Health Care System CCSR, Palo Alto, California, USA.
(5)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Approximately 10% to 20% of patients optimally treated for early Lyme disease 
develop persistent symptoms of unknown pathophysiology termed posttreatment Lyme 
disease syndrome (PTLDS). The objective of this study was to investigate 
associations between PTLDS and immune mediator levels during acute illness and 
at several time points following treatment. Seventy-six participants with 
physician-documented erythema migrans and 26 healthy controls with no history of 
Lyme disease were enrolled. Sixty-four cytokines, chemokines, and inflammatory 
markers were measured at each visit for a total of 6 visits over 1 year. An 
operationalized definition of PTLDS incorporating symptoms and functional impact 
was applied at 6 months and 1 year following treatment completion, and clinical 
outcome groups were defined as the return-to-health, symptoms-only, and PTLDS 
groups. Significance analysis of microarrays identified 7 of the 64 immune 
mediators to be differentially regulated by group. Generalized logit regressions 
controlling for potential confounders identified posttreatment levels of the 
T-cell chemokine CCL19 to be independently associated with clinical outcome 
group. Receiver operating characteristic analysis identified a CCL19 cutoff of 
>111.67 pg/ml at 1 month following treatment completion to be 82% sensitive and 
83% specific for later PTLDS. We speculate that persistently elevated CCL19 
levels among participants with PTLDS may reflect ongoing, immune-driven 
reactions at sites distal to secondary lymphoid tissue. Our findings suggest the 
relevance of CCL19 both during acute infection and as an immunologic risk factor 
for PTLDS during the posttreatment phase. Identification of a potential 
biomarker predictor for PTLDS provides the opportunity to better understand its 
pathophysiology and to develop early interventions in the context of appropriate 
and specific clinical information.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/CVI.00071-16
PMCID: PMC5014924
PMID: 27358211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]