---
reference_id: "PMID:18838545"
title: Aquaporin-4-binding autoantibodies in patients with neuromyelitis optica impair glutamate transport by down-regulating EAAT2.
authors:
- Hinson SR
- Roemer SF
- Lucchinetti CF
- Fryer JP
- Kryzer TJ
- Chamberlain JL
- Howe CL
- Pittock SJ
- Lennon VA
journal: J Exp Med
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1084/jem.20081241
keywords:
- "Aquaporin 4/immunology, metabolism"
- "Astrocytes/cytology, metabolism"
- "Autoantibodies/immunology, metabolism"
- Biological Transport/immunology
- "Blotting, Western"
- Cell Membrane/drug effects
- Complement System Proteins/toxicity
- DNA Primers/genetics
- Excitatory Amino Acid Transporter 2
- Gene Expression Regulation/immunology
- Glutamate Plasma Membrane Transport Proteins/metabolism
- Glutamic Acid/metabolism
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin G/metabolism
- Immunoprecipitation
- "Neuromyelitis Optica/immunology, pathology"
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Spinal Cord/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aquaporin-4-binding autoantibodies in patients with neuromyelitis optica impair glutamate transport by down-regulating EAAT2.
**Authors:** Hinson SR, Roemer SF, Lucchinetti CF, Fryer JP, Kryzer TJ, Chamberlain JL, Howe CL, Pittock SJ, Lennon VA
**Journal:** J Exp Med (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1084/jem.20081241](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20081241)

## Content

1. J Exp Med. 2008 Oct 27;205(11):2473-81. doi: 10.1084/jem.20081241. Epub 2008
Oct  6.

Aquaporin-4-binding autoantibodies in patients with neuromyelitis optica impair
glutamate transport by down-regulating EAAT2.

Hinson SR(1), Roemer SF, Lucchinetti CF, Fryer JP, Kryzer TJ, Chamberlain JL,
Howe CL, Pittock SJ, Lennon VA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Neuromyelitis optica (NMO)-immunoglobulin G (IgG) is a clinically validated
serum biomarker that distinguishes relapsing central nervous system (CNS)
inflammatory demyelinating disorders related to NMO from multiple sclerosis.
This autoantibody targets astrocytic aquaporin-4 (AQP4) water channels.
Clinical, radiological, and immunopathological data suggest that NMO-IgG might
be pathogenic. Characteristic CNS lesions exhibit selective depletion of AQP4,
with and without associated myelin loss; focal vasculocentric deposits of IgG,
IgM, and complement; prominent edema; and inflammation. The effect of NMO-IgG on
astrocytes has not been studied. In this study, we demonstrate that exposure to
NMO patient serum and active complement compromises the membrane integrity of
CNS-derived astrocytes. Without complement, astrocytic membranes remain intact,
but AQP4 is endocytosed with concomitant loss of Na(+)-dependent glutamate
transport and loss of the excitatory amino acid transporter 2 (EAAT2) . Our data
suggest that EAAT2 and AQP4 exist in astrocytic membranes as a macromolecular
complex. Transport-competent EAAT2 protein is up-regulated in differentiating
astrocyte progenitors and in nonneural cells expressing AQP4 transgenically.
Marked reduction of EAAT2 in AQP4-deficient regions of NMO patient spinal cord
lesions supports our immunocytochemical and immunoprecipitation data. Thus,
binding of NMO-IgG to astrocytic AQP4 initiates several potentially
neuropathogenic mechanisms: complement activation, AQP4 and EAAT2
down-regulation, and disruption of glutamate homeostasis.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20081241
PMCID: PMC2571922
PMID: 18838545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
