---
reference_id: "PMID:11438988"
title: "Genetic and clinical aspects of X-linked hydrocephalus (L1 disease): Mutations in the L1CAM gene."
authors:
- Weller S
- Gärtner J
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1002/humu.1144
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Genetic Linkage/genetics
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Hydrocephalus/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Introns/genetics
- Leukocyte L1 Antigen Complex
- "Membrane Glycoproteins/chemistry, genetics"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- "Neural Cell Adhesion Molecules/chemistry, genetics"
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Genetic/genetics"
- RNA Splice Sites/genetics
- Syndrome
- X Chromosome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic and clinical aspects of X-linked hydrocephalus (L1 disease): Mutations in the L1CAM gene.
**Authors:** Weller S, Gärtner J
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.1144](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.1144)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2001;18(1):1-12. doi: 10.1002/humu.1144.

Genetic and clinical aspects of X-linked hydrocephalus (L1 disease): Mutations 
in the L1CAM gene.

Weller S(1), Gärtner J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Heinrich Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany.

L1 disease is a group of overlapping clinical phenotypes including X-linked 
hydrocephalus, MASA syndrome, spastic paraparesis type 1, and X-linked agenesis 
of corpus callosum. The patients are characterized by hydrocephalus, agenesis or 
hypoplasia of corpus callosum and corticospinal tracts, mental retardation, 
spastic paraplegia, and adducted thumbs. The responsible gene, L1CAM, encodes 
the L1 protein which is a member of the immunoglobulin superfamily of neuronal 
cell adhesion molecules. The L1 protein is expressed in neurons and Schwann 
cells and seems to be essential for nervous system development and function. The 
patients' gene mutations are distributed over the functional protein domains. 
The exact mechanisms by which these mutations cause a loss of L1 protein 
function are unknown. There appears to be a relationship between the patients' 
clinical phenotype and the genotype. Missense mutations in extracellular domains 
or mutations in cytoplasmic regions cause milder phenotypes than those leading 
to truncation in extracellular domains or to non-detectable L1 protein. 
Diagnosis of patients and carriers, including prenatal testing, is based on the 
characteristic clinical picture and DNA mutation analyses. At present, there is 
no therapy for the prevention or cure of patients' neurological disabilities.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.1144
PMID: 11438988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]