---
reference_id: "PMID:27219042"
title: Skeletal manifestations of renal disease in childhood.
authors:
- Denburg MR
journal: Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1097/MNH.0000000000000233
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Skeletal manifestations of renal disease in childhood.
**Authors:** Denburg MR
**Journal:** Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MNH.0000000000000233](https://doi.org/10.1097/MNH.0000000000000233)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2016 Jul;25(4):292-300. doi: 
10.1097/MNH.0000000000000233.

Skeletal manifestations of renal disease in childhood.

Denburg MR(1).

Author information:
(1)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Perelman School of Medicine at the 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review summarizes recent findings on musculoskeletal 
health in three chronic renal conditions of childhood: chronic kidney disease 
stages 2-5D, nephrotic syndrome, and urolithiasis. Findings with important 
clinical implications warranting further investigation are highlighted.
RECENT FINDINGS: Recent cohort studies have demonstrated a high burden of 
fracture and progressive deficits of cortical bone in children with chronic 
kidney disease. Lower cortical density is associated with incident fracture and 
may be an important therapeutic target. Parathyroid hormone and calcium are 
independent correlates of cortical density, and modifiable factors for fracture 
include parathyroid hormone and phosphate binder use. Children with nephrotic 
syndrome, even with normal renal function, have evidence of abnormal bone 
metabolism and structure, and vitamin D deficiency may be an important 
modifiable risk factor in this population. Urolithiasis has been associated with 
reduced bone mineral density and is increasingly common in children and 
adolescents. Population-based data found a significantly increased risk of 
fracture in adolescent males and young women.
SUMMARY: Recent findings substantiate concern regarding the particular 
vulnerability of the growing skeleton to chronic renal disease. Studies are 
needed to determine how to optimize assessment and management of bone health in 
children with these conditions, particularly in terms of calcium and vitamin D 
requirements, with the goal of improving childhood bone accrual for lifelong 
fracture prevention.

DOI: 10.1097/MNH.0000000000000233
PMID: 27219042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]