---
reference_id: "PMID:7899371"
title: "[Rheumatic manifestations of parvovirus B19 infection]."
authors:
- Wendling D
- Lorge JF
- Kremer P
journal: Presse Med
year: '1995'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Rheumatic manifestations of parvovirus B19 infection].
**Authors:** Wendling D, Lorge JF, Kremer P
**Journal:** Presse Med (1995)

## Content

1. Presse Med. 1995 Jan 28;24(4):233-6.

[Rheumatic manifestations of parvovirus B19 infection].

[Article in French]

Wendling D(1), Lorge JF, Kremer P.

Author information:
(1)Service de Rhumatologie, Hôpital J. Minjoz, Besançon.

Parvoviruses are small single-strand DNA viruses. Human parvovirus (PV B19) was 
isolated in the 1970s and recognized as a pathogen in the 80s. Its role was 
first demonstrated in acute erythroblastopenia in patients with chronic 
haemolytic anaemia, then in epidemic megalerythema. More recently PVB19 has been 
shown to be the aetiologic agent in fetal loss and chronic infection in 
immunodepressed patients. Further attention has focused on rheumatologic 
manifestations, particularly in prolonged joint diseases raising the problem of 
differential diagnosis and a possible pathogenic relationship with rheumatoid 
arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus. Clinically, subjects with parvovirus 
B19 infection have flu-like manifestations of joint pain and myalgia lasting for 
about 1 week. Generally, the joint pain is symmetrical, of inflammatory type 
usually involving proximal joints (phalangeal joints in two-thirds of the 
cases). Acute back pain or associated extra-articular signs are often absent. 
Signs regress spontaneously in 10 to 15 days although longer periods have been 
observed. Diagnosis can be confirmed by ELISA identification of specific IgM 
antibodies. Nonsteroid antiinflammatory drugs are generally effective.

PMID: 7899371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]