---
reference_id: "PMID:27132795"
title: "Lysosomal Acid Phosphatase Biosynthesis and Dysfunction: A Mini Review Focused on Lysosomal Enzyme Dysfunction in Brain."
authors:
- Ashtari N
- Jiao X
- Rahimi-Balaei M
- Amiri S
- Mehr SE
- Yeganeh B
- Marzban H
journal: Curr Mol Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.2174/1566524016666160429115834
keywords:
- Acid Phosphatase/metabolism
- Animals
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- "Lysosomal Storage Diseases/metabolism, pathology"
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- "Neurodegenerative Diseases/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lysosomal Acid Phosphatase Biosynthesis and Dysfunction: A Mini Review Focused on Lysosomal Enzyme Dysfunction in Brain.
**Authors:** Ashtari N, Jiao X, Rahimi-Balaei M, Amiri S, Mehr SE, Yeganeh B, Marzban H
**Journal:** Curr Mol Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1566524016666160429115834](https://doi.org/10.2174/1566524016666160429115834)

## Content

1. Curr Mol Med. 2016;16(5):439-46. doi: 10.2174/1566524016666160429115834.

Lysosomal Acid Phosphatase Biosynthesis and Dysfunction: A Mini Review Focused 
on Lysosomal Enzyme Dysfunction in Brain.

Ashtari N, Jiao X, Rahimi-Balaei M, Amiri S, Mehr SE, Yeganeh B, Marzban H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Anatomy & Cell Science, Rm. 129, BMSB, 745 Bannatyne 
Avenue, College of Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, 
Winnipeg, Manitoba, R3E 0J9, Canada. Hassan.Marzban@umanitoba.ca.

Lysosomes are membrane-bound organelles that are responsible for degrading and 
recycling macromolecules. Lysosomal dysfunction occurs in enzymatic and 
non-enzymatic deficiencies, which result in abnormal accumulation of materials. 
Although lysosomal storage disorders affect different organs, the central 
nervous system is the most vulnerable. Evidence shows the role of lysosomal 
dysfunction in different neurodegenerative diseases, such as Niemann-Pick Type C 
disease, juvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, Alzheimer's disease and 
Parkinson's disease. Lysosomal enzymes such as lysosomal acid phosphatase 2 
(Acp2) play a critical role in mannose-6-phosphate removal and Acp2 controls 
molecular and cellular functions in the brain during development and adulthood. 
Acp2 is essential in cerebellar development, and mutations in this gene cause 
severe cerebellar neurodevelopmental and neurodegenerative disorders. In this 
mini-review, we highlight lysosomal dysfunctions in the pathogenesis of 
neurodevelopmental and/or neurodegenerative diseases with special attention to 
Acp2 dysfunction.

DOI: 10.2174/1566524016666160429115834
PMID: 27132795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]