---
reference_id: "PMID:11730591"
title: "[Achondrogenesis type II-hypochondrogenesis: radiological features.Case report]."
authors:
- Delgado Carrasco J
- Casanova Morcillo A
- Zabalza Alvillos M
- Ayala Garcés A
journal: An Esp Pediatr
year: '2001'
keywords:
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 12"
- Collagen Type II/genetics
- Fatal Outcome
- Female
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/congenital, diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Radiography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Achondrogenesis type II-hypochondrogenesis: radiological features.Case report].
**Authors:** Delgado Carrasco J, Casanova Morcillo A, Zabalza Alvillos M, Ayala Garcés A
**Journal:** An Esp Pediatr (2001)

## Content

1. An Esp Pediatr. 2001 Dec;55(6):553-7.

[Achondrogenesis type II-hypochondrogenesis: radiological features.Case report].

[Article in Spanish]

Delgado Carrasco J(1), Casanova Morcillo A, Zabalza Alvillos M, Ayala Garcés A.

Author information:
(1)Sección de Radiodiagnóstico Pediátrico.Hospital General Universitario 
Gregorio Marañón. Universidad Complutense. Madrid.

We present a case of lethal dysplasia in the neonatal period. The abnormality 
was suspected after ultrasonography of a pregnant woman presenting weak fetal 
movements revealed shortening of the extremities, voluminous cranium and 
polyhydramnios. Clinical and radiological findings showed platyspondylic 
dwarfism with short extremities, narrow thorax and hydropic appearance. The 
infant died on the third day of life from progressive respiratory distress. In 
the absence of histological, chondro-osseus and molecular studies, detailed 
clinical and radiological studies, as well as the lethal evolution during the 
neonatal period, guided the diagnosis of hypochondrogenesis. This entity, 
together with achondrogenesis II (and other dysplasias), forms part of the same 
spectrum of collagen type II abnormalities produced by a defect in the gene 
(COL2A1) that codifies collagen II, located in chromosome 12 I(12q13.1-13.2). 
When a heterozygote is produced, transmission is dominant autosomal. The 
phenotype shows wide variation and severity depends on the mechanism and 
location of the mutation. The definitive diagnosis is given by cytomolecular 
studies, while individualization of the different entities is based on 
histological data from the cartilage; clinical findings and skeletal radiology 
serve as a guide.

PMID: 11730591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]