---
reference_id: "PMID:28033660"
title: "Wide spectrum of NR5A1-related phenotypes in 46,XY and 46,XX individuals."
authors:
- Domenice S
- Machado AZ
- Ferreira FM
- Ferraz-de-Souza B
- Lerario AM
- Lin L
- Nishi MY
- Gomes NL
- da Silva TE
- Silva RB
- Correa RV
- Montenegro LR
- Narciso A
- Costa EM
- Achermann JC
- Mendonca BB
journal: Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1002/bdrc.21145
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adrenal Insufficiency
- Adult
- Brazil
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Disorders of Sex Development/genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- "Gonadal Disorders/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Primary Ovarian Insufficiency/genetics, metabolism"
- "Steroidogenic Factor 1/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Wide spectrum of NR5A1-related phenotypes in 46,XY and 46,XX individuals.
**Authors:** Domenice S, Machado AZ, Ferreira FM, Ferraz-de-Souza B, Lerario AM, Lin L, Nishi MY, Gomes NL, da Silva TE, Silva RB, Correa RV, Montenegro LR, Narciso A, Costa EM, Achermann JC, Mendonca BB
**Journal:** Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1002/bdrc.21145](https://doi.org/10.1002/bdrc.21145)

## Content

1. Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today. 2016 Dec;108(4):309-320. doi: 
10.1002/bdrc.21145.

Wide spectrum of NR5A1-related phenotypes in 46,XY and 46,XX individuals.

Domenice S(1), Machado AZ(1), Ferreira FM(2), Ferraz-de-Souza B(1), Lerario 
AM(1), Lin L(3), Nishi MY(1), Gomes NL(1), da Silva TE(1), Silva RB(1), Correa 
RV(4), Montenegro LR(1), Narciso A(1), Costa EM(1), Achermann JC(3), Mendonca 
BB(1).

Author information:
(1)Sorahia Domenice, Aline Zamboni Machado, Bruno Ferraz-de-Souza, Antonio 
Marcondes Lerario, Mirian Yumie Nishi, Nathalia Lisboa Gomes, Thatiana Evelin da 
Silva, Rosana Barbosa Silva, Luciana R. Montenegro, Amanda Narciso, Elaine Maria 
Frade Costa, and Berenice Bilharinho Mendonca are from the Laboratório de 
Hormônios e Genética Molecular (LIM/42), Unidade de Endocrinologia do 
Desenvolvimento, Disciplina de Endocrinologia e Metabologia do Hospital das 
Clínicas, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brasil.
(2)Frederico Moraes Ferreira is from the Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Santo 
Amaro, São Paulo, Brasil and Laboratorio de Imunologia, Instituto do Coração, 
Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brasil.
(3)Lin Lin and John C. Achermann are form the Genetics & Genomic Medicine, 
University College London (UCL) Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, 
University College London, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Rafaela V. Correa is from the Núcleo de Atenção Médica Integrada (NAMI), 
Universidade de Fortaleza, Ceará, Brasil.

Steroidogenic factor 1 (NR5A1, SF-1, Ad4BP) is a transcriptional regulator of 
genes involved in adrenal and gonadal development and function. Mutations in 
NR5A1 have been among the most frequently identified genetic causes of gonadal 
development disorders and are associated with a wide phenotypic spectrum. In 
46,XY individuals, NR5A1-related phenotypes may range from disorders of sex 
development (DSD) to oligo/azoospermia, and in 46,XX individuals, from 46,XX 
ovotesticular and testicular DSD to primary ovarian insufficiency (POI). The 
most common 46,XY phenotype is atypical or female external genitalia with 
clitoromegaly, palpable gonads, and absence of Müllerian derivatives. Notably, 
an undervirilized external genitalia is frequently seen at birth, while 
spontaneous virilization may occur later, at puberty. In 46,XX individuals, 
NR5A1 mutations are a rare genetic cause of POI, manifesting as primary or 
secondary amenorrhea, infertility, hypoestrogenism, and elevated gonadotropin 
levels. Mothers and sisters of 46,XY DSD patients carrying heterozygous NR5A1 
mutations may develop POI, and therefore require appropriate counseling. 
Moreover, the recurrent heterozygous p.Arg92Trp NR5A1 mutation is associated 
with variable degrees of testis development in 46,XX patients. A clear 
genotype-phenotype correlation is not seen in patients bearing NR5A1 mutations, 
suggesting that genetic modifiers, such as pathogenic variants in other 
testis/ovarian-determining genes, may contribute to the phenotypic expression. 
Here, we review the published literature on NR5A1-related disease, and discuss 
our findings at a single tertiary center in Brazil, including ten novel NR5A1 
mutations identified in 46,XY DSD patients. The ever-expanding phenotypic range 
associated with NR5A1 variants in XY and XX individuals confirms its pivotal 
role in reproductive biology, and should alert clinicians to the possibility of 
NR5A1 defects in a variety of phenotypes presenting with gonadal dysfunction. 
Birth Defects Research (Part C) 108:309-320, 2016. © 2016 The Authors Birth 
Defects Research Part C: Embryo Today: Reviews Published by Wiley Periodicals, 
Inc.

© 2016 The Authors Birth Defects Research Part C: Embryo Today: Reviews 
Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bdrc.21145
PMCID: PMC5347970
PMID: 28033660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]