---
reference_id: "PMID:29498764"
title: "Recurrent attacks of acute hepatic porphyria: major role of the chronic inflammatory response in the liver."
authors:
- Schmitt C
- Lenglet H
- Yu A
- Delaby C
- Benecke A
- Lefebvre T
- Letteron P
- Paradis V
- Wahlin S
- Sandberg S
- Harper P
- Sardh E
- Sandvik AK
- Hov JR
- Aarsand AK
- Chiche L
- Bazille C
- Scoazec JY
- To-Figueras J
- Carrascal M
- Abian J
- Mirmiran A
- Karim Z
- Deybach JC
- Puy H
- "Peoc'h K"
- Manceau H
- Gouya L
journal: J Intern Med
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/joim.12750
keywords:
- 5-Aminolevulinate Synthetase/blood
- Acute Disease
- Animals
- Cohort Studies
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Heme Oxygenase-1/metabolism
- "Hemin/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Humans
- Hydroxymethylbilane Synthase/physiology
- "Liver/drug effects, physiopathology"
- Membrane Proteins/metabolism
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Oxidative Stress/drug effects
- "Porphyria, Acute Intermittent/diagnosis, epidemiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Recurrence
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recurrent attacks of acute hepatic porphyria: major role of the chronic inflammatory response in the liver.
**Authors:** Schmitt C, Lenglet H, Yu A, Delaby C, Benecke A, Lefebvre T, Letteron P, Paradis V, Wahlin S, Sandberg S, Harper P, Sardh E, Sandvik AK, Hov JR, Aarsand AK, Chiche L, Bazille C, Scoazec JY, To-Figueras J, Carrascal M, Abian J, Mirmiran A, Karim Z, Deybach JC, Puy H, Peoc'h K, Manceau H, Gouya L
**Journal:** J Intern Med (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/joim.12750](https://doi.org/10.1111/joim.12750)

## Content

1. J Intern Med. 2018 Jul;284(1):78-91. doi: 10.1111/joim.12750. Epub 2018 Mar
26.

Recurrent attacks of acute hepatic porphyria: major role of the chronic
inflammatory response in the liver.

Schmitt C(1)(2)(3), Lenglet H(2)(3), Yu A(4), Delaby C(5), Benecke A(6)(7),
Lefebvre T(1)(2)(3), Letteron P(2), Paradis V(2)(8), Wahlin S(9), Sandberg
S(10)(11), Harper P(12), Sardh E(12), Sandvik AK(13), Hov JR(14), Aarsand
AK(10)(11), Chiche L(15), Bazille C(16), Scoazec JY(17), To-Figueras J(18),
Carrascal M(19), Abian J(19), Mirmiran A(2)(3), Karim Z(2)(3), Deybach
JC(1)(2)(3), Puy H(1)(2)(3), Peoc'h K(2)(3)(20), Manceau H(2)(3)(20), Gouya
L(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre Français des Porphyries, Hôpital Louis Mourier, Assistance
publique-Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Colombes, France.
(2)Centre de Recherche sur l'Inflammation (CRI), UMR1149 INSERM, Université
Paris Diderot, site Bichat, Paris, France.
(3)Laboratoire d'excellence, GR-Ex, Paris, France.
(4)STIM CNRS ERL 7368, Physiologie des Cellules Cardiaques et Vasculaires,
Tours, France.
(5)Laboratory for Clinical Biochemistry and Proteomics, Institute for
Regenerative Medicine and Biotherapy (IRMB), CHU de Montpellier and Université
Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(6)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Institut des Hautes Études
Scientifiques, Bures-sur-Yvette, France.
(7)Center for Innate Immunity and Immune Disease (CIIID), University of
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA.
(8)DHU Unity, Pathology Department, Hôpital Beaujon, AP-HP, Clichy, France.
(9)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Karolinska University Hospital
and Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(10)Laboratory for Clinical Biochemistry, Norwegian Porphyria Centre (NAPOS),
Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(11)Department of Global Health and Primary Health Care, University of Bergen,
Bergen, Norway.
(12)Porphyria Centre Sweden, Centre for Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Karolinska
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(13)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, St. Olav's University
Hospital, Trondheim, Norway.
(14)Department of Transplantation Medicine, Norwegian PSC Research Center and
Section of Gastroenterology, Oslo University Hospital and University of Oslo,
Oslo, Norway.
(15)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Bordeaux, Chirurgie Hépatobiliaire et
Pancréatique, Maison du Haut Lévèque, Bordeaux, France.
(16)Service d'Anatomie Pathologique, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire de Caen,
Caen, France.
(17)Service d'anatomopathologie, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.
(18)Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics Department, Hospital Clínic, IDIBAPS,
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(19)CSIC/UAB Proteomics Laboratory, IIBB-CSIC, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain.
(20)Laboratory for Clinical Biochemistry, Hôpital Beaujon, AP-HP, Clichy,
France.

BACKGROUND: Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) is an inherited disorder of haem
metabolism characterized by life-threatening acute neurovisceral attacks due to
the induction of hepatic δ-aminolevulinic acid synthase 1 (ALAS1) associated
with hydroxymethylbilane synthase (HMBS) deficiency. So far, the treatment of
choice is hemin which represses ALAS1. The main issue in the medical care of AIP
patients is the occurrence of debilitating recurrent attacks.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to determine whether chronic hemin
administration contributes to the recurrence of acute attacks.
METHODS: A follow-up study was conducted between 1974 and 2015 and included 602
French AIP patients, of whom 46 had recurrent AIP. Moreover, we studied the
hepatic transcriptome, serum proteome, liver macrophage polarization and
oxidative and inflammatory profiles of Hmbs-/- mice chronically treated by hemin
and extended the investigations to five explanted livers from recurrent AIP
patients.
RESULTS: The introduction of hemin into the pharmacopeia has coincided with a
4.4-fold increase in the prevalence of chronic patients. Moreover, we showed
that both in animal model and in human liver, frequent hemin infusions generate
a chronic inflammatory hepatic disease which induces HO1 remotely to hemin
treatment and maintains a high ALAS1 level responsible for recurrence.
CONCLUSION: Altogether, this study has important impacts on AIP care underlying
that hemin needs to be restricted to severe neurovisceral crisis and suggests
that alternative treatment targeting the liver such as ALAS1 and HO1 inhibitors,
and anti-inflammatory therapies should be considered in patients with recurrent
AIP.

© 2018 The Association for the Publication of the Journal of Internal Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/joim.12750
PMID: 29498764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
