---
reference_id: "PMID:20301335"
title: Camurati-Engelmann Disease.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Wallace SE
- Wilcox WR
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Camurati-Engelmann Disease.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Wallace SE, Wilcox WR

## Content

1. Camurati-Engelmann Disease.

Wallace SE(1), Wilcox WR(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2004 Jun 25 [updated 2023 Aug 31].

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetic Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle Children's 
Hospital, Seattle, Washington
(2)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
Georgia

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Camurati-Engelmann disease (CED) is characterized by 
hyperostosis of the long bones and the skull, proximal muscle weakness, limb 
pain, a wide-based, waddling gait, and joint contractures. Facial features such 
as macrocephaly, frontal bossing, enlargement of the mandible, proptosis, and 
cranial nerve impingement resulting in facial palsy are seen in severely 
affected individuals later in life.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of CED is established in a proband with the 
characteristic radiographic findings or (if radiographic findings are 
inconclusive) a heterozygous pathogenic variant in TGFB1 identified by molecular 
genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapy: Corticosteroid therapy as needed to control 
symptoms; losartan may be a helpful adjuvant therapy to minimize the need for 
steroids to control pain. Supportive care: Management of muscle weakness and 
gait issues per physical medicine and rehabilitation specialists and physical 
therapist. Treatment of joint contractures and other musculoskeletal 
manifestations per orthopedist with experience in skeletal dysplasias; pain is 
also managed with analgesics, non-pharmacologic methods, and on occasion 
surgical treatment. Management of hearing loss per otolaryngologist; bilateral 
myringotomy can improve conductive hearing loss resulting from serous otitis. 
Treatment of ocular manifestations per ophthalmic subspecialist with low vision 
services as needed; craniectomy may be needed to reduce intracranial pressure 
and relieve symptoms in individuals with several cranial sclerosis. Adjustment 
of corticosteroids or losartan as needed for hyper- or hypotension; treatment 
with antihypertensives as needed; mobility assessment with adaptive devices and 
fall precautions. Surveillance: Assess development of gross motor skills 
throughout childhood; assess for mobility issues, weakness, contractures, bone 
pain, and other musculoskeletal manifestations at each visit; serum ESR and bone 
scan as needed in those with acute bone pain to assess disease activity; 
evaluation of bone mineral density annually in those treated with 
corticosteroids; annual neurologic examination to assess for cranial nerve 
deficits and headaches; monitor for signs and symptoms of increased intracranial 
pressure at each visit; head and neck CT as needed in those with sclerosis of 
the skull base and neurologic symptoms to determine extent of disease and allow 
consideration of surgical treatment options; annual audiology evaluation with 
BAER and inner ear CT as needed; monitor linear growth and pubertal development 
at each visit throughout childhood; assess blood pressure at each visit; annual 
CBC. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Excess phosphate. Evaluation of relatives at 
risk: It is appropriate to evaluate relatives at risk in order to identify the 
diagnosis as early as possible, avoid potential misdiagnosis, and provide 
appropriate treatment for extremity pain.
GENETIC COUNSELING: CED is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Many 
individuals diagnosed with CED have an affected parent; some individuals 
diagnosed with CED may have the disorder as the result of a de novo TGFB1 
pathogenic variant. Each child of an individual with CED has a 50% chance of 
inheriting the TGFB1 pathogenic variant. Once the TGFB1 pathogenic variant has 
been identified in an affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation 
genetic testing for CED are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301335