---
reference_id: "PMID:30771152"
title: "Association and gene-gene interaction analyses for polymorphic variants in CTLA-4 and FOXP3 genes: role in susceptibility to autoimmune thyroid disease."
authors:
- Fathima N
- Narne P
- Ishaq M
journal: Endocrine
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s12020-019-01859-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association and gene-gene interaction analyses for polymorphic variants in CTLA-4 and FOXP3 genes: role in susceptibility to autoimmune thyroid disease.
**Authors:** Fathima N, Narne P, Ishaq M
**Journal:** Endocrine (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12020-019-01859-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12020-019-01859-3)

## Content

1. Endocrine. 2019 Jun;64(3):591-604. doi: 10.1007/s12020-019-01859-3. Epub 2019 
Feb 15.

Association and gene-gene interaction analyses for polymorphic variants in 
CTLA-4 and FOXP3 genes: role in susceptibility to autoimmune thyroid disease.

Fathima N(1), Narne P(2), Ishaq M(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Osmania University, Hyderabad, Telangana, India.
(2)Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, University of Hyderabad, 
Hyderabad, Telangana, India. parimala_narne@yahoo.co.in.
(3)Department of Genetics, Osmania University, Hyderabad, Telangana, India. 
ishaq_50@rediffmail.com.
(4)Salar-E-Millat, Research Centre for Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Princess 
Esra Hospital, Deccan College of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad, Telangana, India. 
ishaq_50@rediffmail.com.

PURPOSE: Polymorphic variants of cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen-4 (CTLA-4) and 
forkhead box protein P3 (FOXP3) genes are implicated in dysregulated immune 
homeostasis and autoimmune disorders. We analyzed the association between CTLA-4 
rs231775 and FOXP3 rs3761548, rs3761549 polymorphisms and predisposition to 
autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD), inclusive of Hashimoto's thyroiditis (HT) and 
Graves' disease (GD) in South-Indian population.
METHODS: A total of 355 AITD subjects (comprising 275 HT and 80 GD) and 285 
randomly selected age- and sex-matched control subjects were genotyped for the 
aforementioned polymorphisms by PCR-RFLP method.
RESULTS: The rs231775 "G" allele was preponderant in HT and GD subjects when 
compared with controls and exerted a dominant influence on the susceptibility to 
HT (p = 0.009) and GD (p = 0.02), respectively. There was no allelic association 
of rs3761548 and rs3761549 polymorphisms with AITD susceptibility, albeit a 
significant difference in genotype distribution with respect to rs3761549. 
Haplotype analysis revealed an increased frequency of rs3761548 "C"-rs3761549 
"T" in HT and GD subjects, thereby associating it with disease predisposition 
(p = 0.03). Epistatic interaction analysis by multifactor dimensionality 
reduction approach revealed redundancy between CTLA-4 and FOXP3 genes in 
influencing the susceptibility to AITD.
CONCLUSIONS: The genetic variation in CTLA-4 gene with reference to rs231775 
polymorphism contributes to an increased predisposition to HT and GD. Also, in 
conjunction with FOXP3 gene variants it seems to influence the susceptibility to 
HT and GD respectively. The significance of these findings in combination with 
antithyroid antibody screening could plausibly contribute towards meticulous 
case-finding for effective treatment of HT and GD.

DOI: 10.1007/s12020-019-01859-3
PMID: 30771152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]