---
reference_id: "PMID:21675912"
title: Mutations in CYP24A1 and idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia.
authors:
- Schlingmann KP
- Kaufmann M
- Weber S
- Irwin A
- Goos C
- John U
- Misselwitz J
- Klaus G
- Kuwertz-Bröking E
- Fehrenbach H
- Wingen AM
- Güran T
- Hoenderop JG
- Bindels RJ
- Prosser DE
- Jones G
- Konrad M
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1103864
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Cricetinae
- Cricetulus
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- "Hypercalcemia/chemically induced, genetics"
- Infant
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Risk Factors
- "Steroid Hydroxylases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Vitamin D/adverse effects, metabolism, therapeutic use"
- Vitamin D3 24-Hydroxylase
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in CYP24A1 and idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia.
**Authors:** Schlingmann KP, Kaufmann M, Weber S, Irwin A, Goos C, John U, Misselwitz J, Klaus G, Kuwertz-Bröking E, Fehrenbach H, Wingen AM, Güran T, Hoenderop JG, Bindels RJ, Prosser DE, Jones G, Konrad M
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1103864](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1103864)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2011 Aug 4;365(5):410-21. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1103864. Epub 2011
Jun 15.

Mutations in CYP24A1 and idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia.

Schlingmann KP(1), Kaufmann M, Weber S, Irwin A, Goos C, John U, Misselwitz J,
Klaus G, Kuwertz-Bröking E, Fehrenbach H, Wingen AM, Güran T, Hoenderop JG,
Bindels RJ, Prosser DE, Jones G, Konrad M.

Author information:
(1)University Children's Hospital, Muenster, Germany.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2011 Nov 3;365(18):1741; author reply 1742-3. doi:
10.1056/NEJMc1110226.
    N Engl J Med. 2011 Nov 3;365(18):1741-2; author reply 1742-3. doi:
10.1056/NEJMc1110226.

BACKGROUND: Vitamin D supplementation for the prevention of rickets is one of
the oldest and most effective prophylactic measures in medicine, having
virtually eradicated rickets in North America. Given the potentially toxic
effects of vitamin D, the recommendations for the optimal dose are still
debated, in part owing to the increased incidence of idiopathic infantile
hypercalcemia in Britain in the 1950s during a period of high vitamin D
supplementation in fortified milk products. We investigated the molecular basis
of idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia, which is characterized by severe
hypercalcemia, failure to thrive, vomiting, dehydration, and nephrocalcinosis.
METHODS: We used a candidate-gene approach in a cohort of familial cases of
typical idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia with suspected autosomal recessive
inheritance. Identified mutations in the vitamin D-metabolizing enzyme CYP24A1
were evaluated with the use of a mammalian expression system.
RESULTS: Sequence analysis of CYP24A1, which encodes 25-hydroxyvitamin D
24-hydroxylase, the key enzyme of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) degradation,
revealed recessive mutations in six affected children. In addition, CYP24A1
mutations were identified in a second cohort of infants in whom severe
hypercalcemia had developed after bolus prophylaxis with vitamin D. Functional
characterization revealed a complete loss of function in all CYP24A1 mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of CYP24A1 mutations explains the increased
sensitivity to vitamin D in patients with idiopathic infantile hypercalcemia and
is a genetic risk factor for the development of symptomatic hypercalcemia that
may be triggered by vitamin D prophylaxis in otherwise apparently healthy
infants.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1103864
PMID: 21675912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
