---
reference_id: "PMID:16714198"
title: Onchocerciasis--river blindness.
authors:
- Enk CD
journal: Clin Dermatol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.clindermatol.2005.11.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Onchocerciasis--river blindness.
**Authors:** Enk CD
**Journal:** Clin Dermatol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clindermatol.2005.11.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clindermatol.2005.11.008)

## Content

1. Clin Dermatol. 2006 May-Jun;24(3):176-80. doi: 
10.1016/j.clindermatol.2005.11.008.

Onchocerciasis--river blindness.

Enk CD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, The Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, 
Jerusalem, Israel. enk@md.huji.ac.il

Onchocerciasis results from infestation by the nematode Onchocerca volvulus and 
is characterized by troublesome itching, skin lesions, and eye manifestations. 
Although partially controlled by international mass prevention programs, 
onchocerciasis remains a major health hazard and is endemic in Africa, Arabia, 
and the Americas. Onchocerciasis is spread by bites from infested black flies, 
which transmit larvae that subsequently develop into adult filariae. Skin 
symptoms are commonly nonspecific and include severe pruritus, acute and chronic 
dermatitis, vitiligo-like hypopigmentation, and atrophy. Onchocercal ocular 
disease covers a large spectrum of manifestations, which in severe cases, may 
lead to blindness. Diagnosis is usually made by direct visualization of the 
larvae emerging from superficial skin biopsies, "skin snips." In some cases, the 
microfilariae can also be directly observed at the slit lamp when migrating into 
the anterior chamber of the eye. Ivermectin is, at present, the drug of choice 
for skin and ocular manifestations. Recent research using a chemotherapeutic 
approach that targets filarial Wolbachia symbionts in the treatment and control 
of onchocerciasis, however, suggests that 100 mg/d of doxycycline for 6 weeks 
might be effective in reducing the filarial load and preventing ocular symptoms.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clindermatol.2005.11.008
PMID: 16714198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]