---
reference_id: "PMID:36978966"
title: Neuroimaging in Primary Coenzyme-Q(10)-Deficiency Disorders.
authors:
- Münch J
- Prasuhn J
- Laugwitz L
- Fung CW
- Chung BH
- Bellusci M
- Mayatepek E
- Klee D
- Distelmaier F
journal: Antioxidants (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/antiox12030718
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neuroimaging in Primary Coenzyme-Q(10)-Deficiency Disorders.
**Authors:** Münch J, Prasuhn J, Laugwitz L, Fung CW, Chung BH, Bellusci M, Mayatepek E, Klee D, Distelmaier F
**Journal:** Antioxidants (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/antiox12030718](https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox12030718)

## Content

1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2023 Mar 14;12(3):718. doi: 10.3390/antiox12030718.

Neuroimaging in Primary Coenzyme-Q(10)-Deficiency Disorders.

Münch J(1), Prasuhn J(2)(3)(4), Laugwitz L(5)(6), Fung CW(7), Chung BH(7), 
Bellusci M(8)(9)(10), Mayatepek E(1), Klee D(11), Distelmaier F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Pediatrics, Neonatology and Pediatric Cardiology, 
University Children's Hospital, Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University 
Düsseldorf, Moorenstr. 5, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.
(2)Institute of Neurogenetics, University of Lübeck, 23588 Lübeck, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein, Campus 
Lübeck, 23562 Lübeck, Germany.
(4)Center for Brain, Behavior, and Metabolism, University of Lübeck, 23562 
Lübeck, Germany.
(5)Department of Neuropediatrics, Developmental Neurology and Social Pediatrics, 
University of Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.
(6)Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen, 
72076 Tübingen, Germany.
(7)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Li Ka Shing Faculty of 
Medicine Queen Mary Hospital, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(8)Reference Center for Inherited Metabolic Disorders, MetabERN Center "12 de 
Octubre" University Hospital, 28041 Madrid, Spain.
(9)Mitochondrial & Neuromuscular Disorders Research Group, Instituto de 
Investigación Sanitaria "12 de Octubre" (imas12), 28041 Madrid, Spain.
(10)Spanish Biomedical Research Networking Center in Rare Diseases (CIBERER), 
28029 Madrid, Spain.
(11)Department of Pediatric Radiology, Medical Faculty, Institute of Radiology, 
Heinrich-Heine-University, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.

Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) is an endogenously synthesized lipid molecule. It is best 
known for its role as a cofactor within the mitochondrial respiratory chain 
where it functions in electron transfer and ATP synthesis. However, there are 
many other cellular pathways that also depend on the CoQ10 supply (redox 
homeostasis, ferroptosis and sulfide oxidation). The CoQ10 biosynthesis pathway 
consists of several enzymes, which are encoded by the nuclear DNA. The majority 
of these enzymes are responsible for modifications of the CoQ-head group 
(benzoquinone ring). Only three enzymes (PDSS1, PDSS2 and COQ2) are required for 
assembly and attachment of the polyisoprenoid side chain. The head-modifying 
enzymes may assemble into resolvable domains, representing COQ complexes. During 
the last two decades, numerous inborn errors in CoQ10 biosynthesis enzymes have 
been identified. Thus far, 11 disease genes are known (PDSS1, PDSS2, COQ2, COQ4, 
COQ5, COQ6, COQ7, COQ8A, COQ8B, COQ9 and HPDL). Disease onset is highly variable 
and ranges from the neonatal period to late adulthood. CoQ10 deficiency exerts 
detrimental effects on the nervous system. Potential consequences are neuronal 
death, neuroinflammation and cerebral gliosis. Clinical features include 
encephalopathy, regression, movement disorders, epilepsy and intellectual 
disability. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the most important tool 
for diagnostic evaluation of neurological damage in individuals with CoQ10 
deficiency. However, due to the rarity of the different gene defects, 
information on disease manifestations within the central nervous system is 
scarce. This review aims to provide an overview of brain MRI patterns observed 
in primary CoQ10 biosynthesis disorders and to highlight disease-specific 
findings.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox12030718
PMCID: PMC10045115
PMID: 36978966

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.