---
reference_id: "PMID:36596648"
title: Retinal Degeneration Animal Models in Bardet-Biedl Syndrome and Related Ciliopathies.
authors:
- Delvallée C
- Dollfus H
journal: Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a041303
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Retinal Degeneration Animal Models in Bardet-Biedl Syndrome and Related Ciliopathies.
**Authors:** Delvallée C, Dollfus H
**Journal:** Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1101/cshperspect.a041303](https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a041303)

## Content

1. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2023 Jan 3;13(1):a041303. doi: 
10.1101/cshperspect.a041303.

Retinal Degeneration Animal Models in Bardet-Biedl Syndrome and Related 
Ciliopathies.

Delvallée C(1), Dollfus H(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale UMRS1112, Centre de Recherche Biomédicale 
de Strasbourg, CRBS, Institut de Génétique Médicale d'Alsace, IGMA, Strasbourg 
67000, France.

Retinal degeneration due to photoreceptor ciliary-related proteins dysfunction 
accounts for more than 25% of all inherited retinal dystrophies. The cilium, 
being an evolutionarily conserved and ubiquitous organelle implied in many 
cellular functions, can be investigated by way of many models from invertebrate 
models to nonhuman primates, all these models have massively contributed to the 
pathogenesis understanding of human ciliopathies. Taking the Bardet-Biedl 
syndrome (BBS) as an emblematic example as well as other related syndromic 
ciliopathies, the contribution of a wide range of models has enabled to 
characterize the role of the BBS proteins in the archetypical cilium but also at 
the level of the connecting cilium of the photoreceptors. There are more than 24 
BBS genes encoding for proteins that form different complexes such as the BBSome 
and the chaperone proteins complex. But how they lead to retinal degeneration 
remains a matter of debate with the possible accumulation of proteins in the 
inner segment and/or accumulation of unwanted proteins in the outer segment that 
cannot return in the inner segment machinery. Many BBS proteins (but not the 
chaperonins for instance) can be modeled in primitive organisms such as 
Paramecium, Chlamydomonas reinardtii, Trypanosoma brucei, and Caenorhabditis 
elegans These models have enabled clarifying the role of a subset of BBS 
proteins in the primary cilium as well as their relations with other modules 
such as the intraflagellar transport (IFT) module, the nephronophthisis (NPHP) 
module, or the Meckel-Gruber syndrome (MKS)/Joubert syndrome (JBTS) module 
mostly involved with the transition zone of the primary cilia. Assessing the 
role of the primary cilia structure of the connecting cilium of the 
photoreceptor cells has been very much studied by way of zebrafish modeling 
(Danio rerio) as well as by a plethora of mouse models. More recently, large 
animal models have been described for three BBS genes and one nonhuman primate 
model in rhesus macaque for BBS7 In completion to animal models, human cell 
models can now be used notably thanks to gene editing and the use of induced 
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). All these models are not only important for 
pathogenesis understanding but also very useful for studying therapeutic 
avenues, their pros and cons, especially for gene replacement therapy as well as 
pharmacological triggers.

Copyright © 2023 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1101/cshperspect.a041303
PMCID: PMC9808547
PMID: 36596648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]