---
reference_id: "PMID:36422706"
title: International Consensus Classification of acute lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma.
authors:
- Duffield AS
- Mullighan CG
- Borowitz MJ
journal: Virchows Arch
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00428-022-03448-8
keywords:
- Humans
- "Precursor T-Cell Lymphoblastic Leukemia-Lymphoma/drug therapy, metabolism, pathology"
- "Precursor Cell Lymphoblastic Leukemia-Lymphoma/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Precursor B-Cell Lymphoblastic Leukemia-Lymphoma/drug therapy, metabolism, pathology"
- Lymphoma
content_type: abstract_only
---

# International Consensus Classification of acute lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma.
**Authors:** Duffield AS, Mullighan CG, Borowitz MJ
**Journal:** Virchows Arch (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00428-022-03448-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00428-022-03448-8)

## Content

1. Virchows Arch. 2023 Jan;482(1):11-26. doi: 10.1007/s00428-022-03448-8. Epub
2022  Nov 24.

International Consensus Classification of acute lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma.

Duffield AS(1)(2), Mullighan CG(3), Borowitz MJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital, 
New York, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 
USA.
(4)Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD, USA. mborowit@jhmi.edu.

The updated International Consensus Classification (ICC) of B-acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) and T-acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) 
includes both revisions to subtypes previously outlined in the 2016 WHO 
classification and several newly described entities. The ICC classification 
incorporates recent clinical, cytogenetic, and molecular data, with a particular 
emphasis on whole transcriptome analysis and gene expression (GEX) clustering 
studies. B-ALL classification is modified to further subclassify 
BCR::ABL1-positive B-ALL and hypodiploid B-ALL. Additionally, nine new 
categories of B-ALL are defined, including seven that contain distinguishing 
gene rearrangements, as well as two new categories that are characterized by a 
specific single gene mutation. Four provisional entities are also included in 
the updated B-ALL classification, although definitive identification of these 
subtypes requires GEX studies. T-ALL classification is also updated to 
incorporate BCL11B-activating rearrangements into early T-precursor (ETP) ALL 
taxonomy. Additionally, eight new provisional entities are added to the T-ALL 
subclassification. The clinical implications of the new entities are discussed, 
as are practical approaches to the use of different technologies in diagnosis. 
The enhanced specificity of the new classification will allow for improved risk 
stratification and optimized treatment plans for patients with ALL.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00428-022-03448-8
PMCID: PMC10646822
PMID: 36422706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: Authors A.S.D. and M.J.B. 
declare no competing interests. Author C.G.M. has received speaker (Illumina and 
Amgen) and consultant (Faze, Beam) honoraria, and receives research funding from 
AbbVie and Pfizer.