---
reference_id: "PMID:38502138"
title: "High Clinical Exome Sequencing Diagnostic Rates and Novel Phenotypic Expansions for Nonisolated Microphthalmia, Anophthalmia, and Coloboma."
authors:
- Kunisetty B
- Martin-Giacalone BA
- Zhao X
- Luna PN
- Brooks BP
- Hufnagel RB
- Shaw CA
- Rosenfeld JA
- Agopian AJ
- Lupo PJ
- Scott DA
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1167/iovs.65.3.25
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- "Anophthalmos/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Coloboma/diagnosis, genetics"
- Exome Sequencing
- "Microphthalmos/diagnosis, genetics"
- Algorithms
- DNA Helicases
- Nuclear Proteins
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Histone Acetyltransferases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High Clinical Exome Sequencing Diagnostic Rates and Novel Phenotypic Expansions for Nonisolated Microphthalmia, Anophthalmia, and Coloboma.
**Authors:** Kunisetty B, Martin-Giacalone BA, Zhao X, Luna PN, Brooks BP, Hufnagel RB, Shaw CA, Rosenfeld JA, Agopian AJ, Lupo PJ, Scott DA
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1167/iovs.65.3.25](https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.65.3.25)

## Content

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2024 Mar 5;65(3):25. doi: 10.1167/iovs.65.3.25.

High Clinical Exome Sequencing Diagnostic Rates and Novel Phenotypic Expansions 
for Nonisolated Microphthalmia, Anophthalmia, and Coloboma.

Kunisetty B(1), Martin-Giacalone BA(2)(3), Zhao X(1)(4), Luna PN(1), Brooks 
BP(5), Hufnagel RB(5), Shaw CA(1), Rosenfeld JA(1), Agopian AJ(6), Lupo PJ(3), 
Scott DA(1)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas, United States.
(2)Division of Public Health Sciences, Department of Surgery, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States.
(3)Section of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States.
(4)Baylor Genetics, Houston, Texas, United States.
(5)Ophthalmic Genetics & Visual Function Branch, National Eye Institute, NIH, 
Bethesda, Maryland, United States.
(6)Department of Epidemiology, Human Genetics & Environmental Sciences, UTHealth 
School of Public Health, Houston, Texas, United States.
(7)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States.

PURPOSE: A molecular diagnosis is only made in a subset of individuals with 
nonisolated microphthalmia, anophthalmia, and coloboma (MAC). This may be due to 
underutilization of clinical (whole) exome sequencing (cES) and an incomplete 
understanding of the genes that cause MAC. The purpose of this study is to 
determine the efficacy of cES in cases of nonisolated MAC and to identify new 
MAC phenotypic expansions.
METHODS: We determined the efficacy of cES in 189 individuals with nonisolated 
MAC. We then used cES data, a validated machine learning algorithm, and 
previously published expression data, case reports, and animal models to 
determine which candidate genes were most likely to contribute to the 
development of MAC.
RESULTS: We found the efficacy of cES in nonisolated MAC to be between 32.3% 
(61/189) and 48.1% (91/189). Most genes affected in our cohort were not among 
genes currently screened in clinically available ophthalmologic gene panels. A 
subset of the genes implicated in our cohort had not been clearly associated 
with MAC. Our analyses revealed sufficient evidence to support low-penetrance 
MAC phenotypic expansions involving nine of these human disease genes.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that cES is an effective means of identifying a 
molecular diagnosis in individuals with nonisolated MAC and may identify 
putatively damaging variants that would be missed if only a clinically available 
ophthalmologic gene panel was obtained. Our data also suggest that deleterious 
variants in BRCA2, BRIP1, KAT6A, KAT6B, NSF, RAC1, SMARCA4, SMC1A, and TUBA1A 
can contribute to the development of MAC.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.65.3.25
PMCID: PMC10959191
PMID: 38502138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: B. Kunisetty, None; B.A. 
Martin-Giacalone, None; X. Zhao, None; P.N. Luna, None; B.P. Brooks, None; R.B. 
Hufnagel, None; C.A. Shaw, None; J.A. Rosenfeld, None; A.J. Agopian, None; P.J. 
Lupo, None; D.A. Scott, None