---
reference_id: "PMID:21389642"
title: "Variant angina and coronary artery spasm: the clinical spectrum, pathophysiology, and management."
authors:
- Kusama Y
- Kodani E
- Nakagomi A
- Otsuka T
- Atarashi H
- Kishida H
- Mizuno K
journal: J Nippon Med Sch
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1272/jnms.78.4
keywords:
- "Angina Pectoris, Variant/drug therapy, pathology, physiopathology"
- Anti-Arrhythmia Agents/therapeutic use
- Calcium Channel Blockers/therapeutic use
- Circadian Rhythm/physiology
- "Coronary Vasospasm/drug therapy, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Drug Therapy, Combination"
- Electrocardiography/methods
- Humans
- Nicorandil/therapeutic use
- Nitrates/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variant angina and coronary artery spasm: the clinical spectrum, pathophysiology, and management.
**Authors:** Kusama Y, Kodani E, Nakagomi A, Otsuka T, Atarashi H, Kishida H, Mizuno K
**Journal:** J Nippon Med Sch (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1272/jnms.78.4](https://doi.org/10.1272/jnms.78.4)

## Content

1. J Nippon Med Sch. 2011;78(1):4-12. doi: 10.1272/jnms.78.4.

Variant angina and coronary artery spasm: the clinical spectrum, 
pathophysiology, and management.

Kusama Y(1), Kodani E, Nakagomi A, Otsuka T, Atarashi H, Kishida H, Mizuno K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Hepatology, Geriatrics, and Integrated Medicine, 
Department of Internal Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Nippon Medical 
School, Tokyo, Japan. y-kusama@nms.ac.jp

Variant angina is a form of angina pectoris that shows transient ST-segment 
elevation on electrocardiogram during an attack of chest pain. Ischemic episodes 
of variant angina show circadian variation and often occur at rest from midnight 
to early morning. Ischemic episodes also occur during mild exercise in the early 
morning. However, they are not usually induced by strenuous exercise in the 
afternoon. Other important clinical features of variant angina include the high 
frequency of asymptomatic ischemic episodes and the syncope that sometimes occur 
during the ischemic episodes. Syncope is due to severe arrhythmias, including 
ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation, and high-degree 
atrioventricular block. Coronary artery spasm is the mechanism of ischemic 
episodes in variant angina. The incidence of coronary artery spasm shows a 
racial difference and is higher in Japanese than in Caucasians. Coronary 
arteriograms are normal or near-normal in most Japanese patients with variant 
angina. Deficient basal release of nitric oxide (NO) due to endothelial 
dysfunction, and enhanced vascular smooth muscle contractility with the 
involvement of the Rho/Rho-kinase pathway are reported to play important roles 
in the pathogenesis of coronary artery spasm. Other precipitating factors of 
coronary artery spasm include imbalance in autonomic nervous activity, increased 
oxidative stress, chronic low-grade inflammation, magnesium deficiency, and 
genetic susceptibility. The genetic risk factors associated with coronary artery 
spasm include gene polymorphisms of endothelial NO synthase (NOS), paraoxonase, 
and other genes. Calcium channel blockers are extremely effective in preventing 
coronary spasm. The long-acting nitrate, nicorandil, and Rho-kinase inhibitor 
are also useful for inhibiting coronary artery spasm. Because variant angina can 
lead to acute myocardial infarction, fatal arrhythmias, and sudden death, early 
treatment is important. The prognosis of patients with variant angina is 
favorable, if early complications can be overcome. However, because coronary 
artery spasm cannot be suppressed in some patients, even with multiple 
medications, medications to suppress intractable coronary artery spasm must be 
developed.

DOI: 10.1272/jnms.78.4
PMID: 21389642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]