---
reference_id: "PMID:38182796"
title: Inhibiting anti-angiogenic VEGF165b activates a miR-17-20a-Calcipressin-3 pathway that revascularizes ischemic muscle in peripheral artery disease.
authors:
- Batan S
- Kuppuswamy S
- Wood M
- Reddy M
- Annex B
- Ganta V
journal: Commun Med (Lond)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s43856-023-00431-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inhibiting anti-angiogenic VEGF165b activates a miR-17-20a-Calcipressin-3 pathway that revascularizes ischemic muscle in peripheral artery disease.
**Authors:** Batan S, Kuppuswamy S, Wood M, Reddy M, Annex B, Ganta V
**Journal:** Commun Med (Lond) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s43856-023-00431-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s43856-023-00431-5)

## Content

1. Commun Med (Lond). 2024 Jan 5;4(1):3. doi: 10.1038/s43856-023-00431-5.

Inhibiting anti-angiogenic VEGF165b activates a miR-17-20a-Calcipressin-3 
pathway that revascularizes ischemic muscle in peripheral artery disease.

Batan S(1), Kuppuswamy S(1), Wood M(2), Reddy M(2), Annex B(1), Ganta V(3).

Author information:
(1)Vascular Biology Center, Department of Medicine, Augusta University, Augusta, 
GA, 30912, USA.
(2)Medical College of Georgia, Augusta University, Augusta, GA, 30912, USA.
(3)Vascular Biology Center, Department of Medicine, Augusta University, Augusta, 
GA, 30912, USA. vganta@augusta.edu.

Update of
    Res Sq. 2023 Aug 14:rs.3.rs-3213504. doi: 10.21203/rs.3.rs-3213504/v1.

BACKGROUND: VEGF165a increases the expression of the microRNA-17-92 cluster, 
promoting developmental, retinal, and tumor angiogenesis. We have previously 
shown that VEGF165b, an alternatively spliced anti-angiogenic VEGF-A isoform, 
inhibits the VEGFR-STAT3 pathway in ischemic endothelial cells (ECs) to decrease 
their angiogenic capacity. In ischemic macrophages (Møs), VEGF165b inhibits 
VEGFR1 to induce S100A8/A9 expression, which drives M1-like polarization. Our 
current study aims to determine whether VEGF165b inhibition promotes perfusion 
recovery by regulating the microRNA(miR)-17-92 cluster in preclinical PAD.
METHODS: Femoral artery ligation and resection was used as a preclinical PAD 
model. Hypoxia serum starvation (HSS) was used as an in vitro PAD model. 
VEGF165b was inhibited/neutralized by an isoform-specific VEGF165b antibody.
RESULTS: Here, we show that VEGF165b-inhibition induces the expression of 
miR-17-20a (within miR-17-92 (miR-17-18a-19a-19b-20a-92) cluster) in HSS-ECs and 
HSS-Møs vs. respective normal and/or isotype-matched IgG controls to enhance 
perfusion recovery. Consistent with the bioinformatics analysis that revealed 
RCAN3 as a common target of miR-17 and miR-20a, Argonaute-2 pull-down assays 
showed decreased miR-17-20a expression and higher RCAN3 expression in the 
RNA-induced silencing complex of HSS-ECs and HSS-Møs vs. respective controls. 
Inhibiting miR-17-20a induced RCAN3 levels to decrease ischemic angiogenesis and 
promoted M1-like polarization to impair perfusion recovery. Finally, using STAT3 
inhibitors, S100A8/A9 silencers, and VEGFR1-deficient ECs and Møs, we show that 
VEGF165b-inhibition activates the miR-17-20a-RCAN3 pathway independent of 
VEGFR1-STAT3 or VEGFR1-S100A8/A9 in ischemic-ECs and ischemic-Møs respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data revealed a hereunto unrecognized therapeutic 
'miR-17-20a-RCAN3' pathway in the ischemic vasculature that is 
VEGFR1-STAT3/S100A8/A9 independent and is activated only upon 
VEGF165b-inhibition in PAD.

Plain Language Summary: Therapies that can grow new blood vessels in the 
ischemic muscle are necessary to restore blood flow and provide relief to 
patients with peripheral artery disease (PAD). We have previously shown that 
blocking VEGF165b, a small protein involved in the regulation of regenerating 
blood vessels, promotes the growth of new blood vessels in the ischemic muscle. 
However, the mechanism by which this occurs is not clear. Here, we build on this 
existing knowledge and show the complex processes driving the growth of new 
blood vessels, which will help to supply blood to the ischemic muscle and 
provide therapeutic relief from PAD.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s43856-023-00431-5
PMCID: PMC10770062
PMID: 38182796

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.