---
reference_id: "PMID:10372507"
title: GABA-ergic neurons and the neurobiology of schizophrenia and other psychoses.
authors:
- Keverne EB
journal: Brain Res Bull
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1016/s0361-9230(99)00025-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GABA-ergic neurons and the neurobiology of schizophrenia and other psychoses.
**Authors:** Keverne EB
**Journal:** Brain Res Bull (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0361-9230(99)00025-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0361-9230(99)00025-8)

## Content

1. Brain Res Bull. 1999 Mar 15;48(5):467-73. doi: 10.1016/s0361-9230(99)00025-8.

GABA-ergic neurons and the neurobiology of schizophrenia and other psychoses.

Keverne EB(1).

Author information:
(1)Sub-Department of Animal Behaviour, University of Cambridge, UK. 
ebk10@ms.cam.ac.uk

There are a number of disorders in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders (DSM IV) that are characterised by having psychotic symptoms as 
the defining feature [17]. The narrowest definition of psychosis is restricted 
to delusions or prominent hallucinations, with the hallucinations occurring in 
the absence of insight into their pathological nature. Schizophrenia is the most 
prevalent form of psychosis, but this may also occur due to other medical 
conditions (e.g., Prader-Willi syndrome, epilepsy), in the early post-partum 
period, at menopause, and as a result of drug use. This article attempts to draw 
together an underlying causation across the various forms of psychotic disorder 
and, by integrating this with what is known about the genetics, neuroanatomy and 
neuropharmacology of the positive symptoms in schizophrenia, produce a broader 
understanding. At the cellular level, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-ergic 
interneurons are a common feature in psychotic states, and are a principal focus 
for serotonin and dopamine innervations, as well as playing an important role in 
cortical development. At the systems level, prefrontal and medial temporal 
cortices are implicated with activity levels out of synchrony in schizophrenics. 
How these vast areas of disparately functioning cortical networks are "bound" 
together to provide coherent conscious experiences is again a function of 
GABA-ergic interneurons. These interneurons have highly divergent inhibitory 
projections to large numbers of pyramidal neurons and are themselves 
synchronised by the ascending dopamine and serotonin innervations.

DOI: 10.1016/s0361-9230(99)00025-8
PMID: 10372507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]