---
reference_id: "PMID:34840991"
title: "IL-18: The Forgotten Cytokine in Dengue Immunopathogenesis."
authors:
- Nanda JD
- Ho TS
- Satria RD
- Jhan MK
- Wang YT
- Lin CF
journal: J Immunol Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1155/2021/8214656
content_type: abstract_only
---

# IL-18: The Forgotten Cytokine in Dengue Immunopathogenesis.
**Authors:** Nanda JD, Ho TS, Satria RD, Jhan MK, Wang YT, Lin CF
**Journal:** J Immunol Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2021/8214656](https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/8214656)

## Content

1. J Immunol Res. 2021 Nov 19;2021:8214656. doi: 10.1155/2021/8214656.
eCollection  2021.

IL-18: The Forgotten Cytokine in Dengue Immunopathogenesis.

Nanda JD(1), Ho TS(2)(3), Satria RD(4)(5)(6), Jhan MK(7)(8), Wang YT(7), Lin 
CF(1)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)International Ph.D. Program in Cell Therapy and Regenerative Medicine, 
College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 110, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, College of 
Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 704, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Tainan Hospital, Ministry of Health and Welfare, 
Tainan 700, Taiwan.
(4)International Ph.D. Program in Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical 
University, Taipei 110, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Clinical Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of 
Medicine, Public Health and Nursing, Universitas Gadjah Mada, Yogyakarta 55281, 
Indonesia.
(6)Clinical Laboratory Installation, Dr. Sardjito Central General Hospital, 
Yogyakarta 55281, Indonesia.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, College of 
Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 110, Taiwan.
(8)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical 
University, Taipei 110, Taiwan.

Dengue fever is an infection by the dengue virus (DENV) transmitted by vector 
mosquitoes. It causes many infections in tropical and subtropical countries 
every year, thus posing a severe disease threat. Cytokine storms, one condition 
where many proinflammatory cytokines are mass-produced, might lead to cellular 
dysfunction in tissue/organ failures and often facilitate severe dengue disease 
in patients. Interleukin- (IL-) 18, similar to IL-1β, is a proinflammatory 
cytokine produced during inflammation following inflammasome activation. 
Inflammatory stimuli, including microbial infections, damage signals, and 
cytokines, all induce the production of IL-18. High serum IL-18 is remarkably 
correlated with severely ill dengue patients; however, its possible roles have 
been less explored. Based on the clinical and basic findings, this review 
discusses the potential immunopathogenic role of IL-18 when it participates in 
DENV infection and dengue disease progression based on existing findings and 
related past studies.

Copyright © 2021 Josephine Diony Nanda et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/8214656
PMCID: PMC8626198
PMID: 34840991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interest.