---
reference_id: "PMID:31088326"
title: Clinical value of fecal calprotectin.
authors:
- Ricciuto A
- Griffiths AM
journal: Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1080/10408363.2019.1619159
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical value of fecal calprotectin.
**Authors:** Ricciuto A, Griffiths AM
**Journal:** Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1080/10408363.2019.1619159](https://doi.org/10.1080/10408363.2019.1619159)

## Content

1. Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci. 2019 Aug;56(5):307-320. doi: 
10.1080/10408363.2019.1619159. Epub 2019 Jun 6.

Clinical value of fecal calprotectin.

Ricciuto A(1), Griffiths AM(1).

Author information:
(1)a Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, The Hospital for 
Sick Children , University of Toronto , Toronto , Canada.

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) denotes a group of chronic incurable disorders 
characterized by relapsing-remitting inflammation of the gastrointestinal tract. 
IBD represents a growing global burden with a prevalence exceeding 0.3% in the 
Western world and an accelerating incidence in newly industrialized countries. 
The target for treating IBD has shifted in recent years from symptom control to 
mucosal healing (MH), which has been shown to be associated with favorable 
long-term outcomes. The gold standard for ascertaining MH is endoscopic 
assessment, but endoscopy is limited by its invasive nature, high cost, and 
finite availability. Surrogate biomarkers are therefore of great utility. 
Calprotectin, a cytosolic protein derived predominantly from neutrophils, is now 
widely used in this capacity. Calprotectin is found in various bodily fluids at 
concentrations proportional to the degree of inflammation, including in feces at 
levels roughly six times higher than in the blood. Fecal calprotectin (FCP) 
therefore reflects intestinal inflammation. Various assays, including 
point-of-care and home-based tests, are now available for measuring FCP. FCP is 
used for screening purposes, to aid in distinguishing inflammatory from 
non-inflammatory gastrointestinal conditions like irritable bowel syndrome 
(IBS), as well as in the monitoring of known IBD. The aims of this review are to 
provide an overview of the methods used to measure FCP and to review the 
evidence supporting the use of FCP in IBD, particularly as it pertains to 
screening, monitoring and predicting disease relapse.

DOI: 10.1080/10408363.2019.1619159
PMID: 31088326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]