---
reference_id: "PMID:20301597"
title: Medium-Chain Acyl-Coenzyme A Dehydrogenase Deficiency.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Chang IJ
- Lam C
- Vockley J
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Medium-Chain Acyl-Coenzyme A Dehydrogenase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Chang IJ, Lam C, Vockley J

## Content

1. Medium-Chain Acyl-Coenzyme A Dehydrogenase Deficiency.

Chang IJ(1), Lam C(2), Vockley J(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2000 Apr 20 [updated 2024 Sep 26].

Author information:
(1)Assistant Professor, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, California
(2)Associate Professor, University of Washington;, Seattle Children's Hospital,
Seattle, Washington
(3)Professor, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Individuals with medium-chain acyl-coenzyme A
dehydrogenase (MCAD) deficiency typically appear normal at birth, and many are
diagnosed through newborn screening programs. Symptomatic individuals experience
hypoketotic hypoglycemia in response to either prolonged fasting (e.g., weaning
the infant from nighttime feedings) or during intercurrent and common infections
(e.g., viral gastrointestinal or upper respiratory tract infections), which
typically cause loss of appetite and increased energy requirements when fever is
present. Untreated severe hypoglycemic episodes can be accompanied by seizures,
vomiting, lethargy, coma, and death. Metabolic decompensation during these
episodes can result in elevated liver transaminases and hyperammonemia.
Individuals with MCAD deficiency who have experienced the effects of
uncontrolled metabolic decompensation are also at risk for chronic myopathy.
Early identification and avoidance of prolonged fasting can ameliorate these
findings. However, children with MCAD deficiency are at risk for obesity after
initiation of treatment due to the frequency of feeding.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of MCAD deficiency is established in a proband
through biochemical testing (prominent accumulation of C8-acylcarnitine
(octanoylcarnitine) with lesser elevations of C6-, C10-, and
C10:1-acylcarnitines and elevated C8/C2 and C8/C10 ratios) AND/OR by
identification of biallelic pathogenic variants in ACADM by molecular genetic
testing OR by significantly reduced activity of MCAD activity in blood or
cultured skin fibroblasts. Because of its relatively high sensitivity, ACADM
molecular genetic testing can obviate the need for enzymatic testing, which is
available only in limited academic centers.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: For routine daily treatment, fasting
should be avoided and may require frequent feeding (every 2-3 hours) in infancy,
overnight feeding, a bedtime snack, or 2 g/kg of uncooked cornstarch to maintain
blood glucose levels during sleep. A normal, healthy diet containing no more
than 30% of total energy from fat is recommended. All individuals with MCAD
deficiency should avoid skipping meals and weight loss diets that recommend
fasting. Prolonged or intense exercise should be covered by adequate
carbohydrate intake and hydration. Intravenous glucose is recommended for
surgical procedures that require several hours of fasting. Weight control
measures such as regular education about proper nutrition and recommended
physical exercise should be discussed to help avoid obesity. Standard treatment
for developmental delay / aphasia, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and
muscle weakness. For acute inpatient treatment, IV administration of glucose
should be initiated immediately with 10% dextrose with appropriate electrolytes
at a rate of 1.5 times maintenance rate or at 10-12 mg glucose/kg/minute to
achieve and maintain a blood glucose level higher than 5 mmol/L, or between 120
and 170 mg/dL. Address electrolyte and pH imbalances with intravenous fluid
management and initiate appropriate treatment for what triggered the metabolic
stress. Surveillance: Infants should establish care with a biochemical genetics
clinic including a metabolic dietitian as soon as possible following a positive
newborn screen. A metabolic dietician should be involved to ensure proper
nutrition in terms of quality and quantity. Affected infants should be seen in
team clinic in two to three months, then every six to 12 months if otherwise
clinically well; however, the frequency of routine follow-up visits is
individualized based on comfort level of the affected persons, their families,
and health care providers. Routine assessments for growth, acquisition of
developmental milestones, neurobehavioral issues, and secondary carnitine
deficiency are recommended. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Hypoglycemia; infant
formulas, coconut oil, and other manufactured foods containing medium-chain
triglycerides as the primary source of fat; popular high-fat/low-carbohydrate
diets; alcohol consumption, in particular acute alcohol intoxication (e.g.,
binge drinking), which can elicit metabolic decompensation; aspirin. Evaluation
of relatives at risk: It is appropriate to evaluate the older and younger sibs
and offspring of a proband in order to identify as early as possible those who
would benefit from treatment and preventive measures. Pregnancy management:
Pregnant women who have MCAD deficiency must avoid catabolism. This is supported
by several case reports describing carnitine deficiency, acute liver failure,
and HELLP syndrome (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, low platelets) in
pregnant women with MCAD deficiency.
GENETIC COUNSELING: MCAD deficiency is inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner. At conception, the sibs of an affected individual are at a 25% risk of
being affected, a 50% risk of being asymptomatic carriers, and a 25% risk of
being unaffected and not carriers. Because of the high carrier frequency for the
ACADM c.985A>G pathogenic variant in individuals of northern European origin,
carrier testing should be discussed with reproductive partners of individuals
with MCAD deficiency. Once both ACADM pathogenic variants have been identified
in an affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing for
MCAD deficiency are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301597
