---
reference_id: "PMID:23756437"
title: Severe forms of Baraitser-Winter syndrome are caused by ACTB mutations rather than ACTG1 mutations.
authors:
- Di Donato N
- Rump A
- Koenig R
- Der Kaloustian VM
- Halal F
- Sonntag K
- Krause C
- Hackmann K
- Hahn G
- Schrock E
- Verloes A
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.130
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/classification, genetics, pathology"
- Actins/genetics
- Adolescent
- Child
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Phenotype
- Severity of Illness Index
- Syndrome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Severe forms of Baraitser-Winter syndrome are caused by ACTB mutations rather than ACTG1 mutations.
**Authors:** Di Donato N, Rump A, Koenig R, Der Kaloustian VM, Halal F, Sonntag K, Krause C, Hackmann K, Hahn G, Schrock E, Verloes A
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2013.130](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2013.130)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 Feb;22(2):179-83. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.130. Epub 2013 
Jun 12.

Severe forms of Baraitser-Winter syndrome are caused by ACTB mutations rather 
than ACTG1 mutations.

Di Donato N(1), Rump A(1), Koenig R(2), Der Kaloustian VM(3), Halal F(4), 
Sonntag K(1), Krause C(1), Hackmann K(1), Hahn G(5), Schrock E(1), Verloes A(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Clinical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine Carl Gustav Carus TU 
Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(2)Institute of Human Genetics, Johann Wolfgang Goethe University Hospital, 
Frankfurt/Main, Germany.
(3)Departments of Pediatrics and Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, 
PQ, Canada.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, Montreal Children's Hospital, McGill 
University Health Centre, Montreal, PQ, Canada.
(5)Institute of Diagnostic Radiology, Department of Pediatric Radiology, Faculty 
of Medicine Carl Gustav Carus TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(6)Department of Genetics, Robert-Debré Hospital, Paris, France.

ACTB and ACTG1 mutations have recently been reported to cause Baraitser-Winter 
syndrome (BRWS) - a rare condition characterized by ptosis, colobomata, neuronal 
migration disorder, distinct facial anomalies and intellectual disability. One 
of the patients carrying an ACTB mutation was previously diagnosed with 
Fryns-Aftimos syndrome (FAS), which is a rare and severe, multiple congenital 
anomaly (MCA) syndrome whose symptoms partially overlap with that of BRWS. 
However, several patients with Fryns-Aftimos were considered not to fit into the 
ACTB and ACTG1 spectrum because of their severe impairment and additional 
malformations. We report on three patients who had been diagnosed with FAS. All 
three patients carry a mutation in the ACTB gene. On the basis of the ACTB 
mutations and analysis of the clinical findings, we reclassify the diagnosis of 
these patients as severe BRWS. We suggest that mutations in ACTB cause a 
distinctly more severe phenotype than ACTG1 mutations, despite the structural 
similarity of beta- and gamma-actins and their overlapping expression pattern. 
We expand the spectrum of BRWS and confirm that FAS is not a separate entity but 
an early and severe manifestation of BRWS.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.130
PMCID: PMC3895648
PMID: 23756437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]