---
reference_id: "PMID:25283854"
title: "Human parvovirus B19: a review."
authors:
- Rogo LD
- Mokhtari-Azad T
- Kabir MH
- Rezaei F
journal: Acta Virol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.4149/av_2014_03_199
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human parvovirus B19: a review.
**Authors:** Rogo LD, Mokhtari-Azad T, Kabir MH, Rezaei F
**Journal:** Acta Virol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.4149/av_2014_03_199](https://doi.org/10.4149/av_2014_03_199)

## Content

1. Acta Virol. 2014;58(3):199-213. doi: 10.4149/av_2014_03_199.

Human parvovirus B19: a review.

Rogo LD, Mokhtari-Azad T, Kabir MH, Rezaei F.

Parvovirus B19 (B19V) is a small non-enveloped single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) virus 
of the family Parvoviridae, the subfamily Parvovirinae, the genus Erythrovirus 
and Human parvovirus B19 type species. It is a common community-acquired 
respiratory pathogen without ethnic, socioeconomic, gender, age or geographic 
boundaries. Moreover, the epidemiological and ecological relationships between 
human parvovirus B19, man and environment have aroused increasing interest in 
this virus. B19V infection is associated with a wide spectrum of clinical 
manifestations, some of which were well established and some are still 
controversial, however, it is also underestimated from a clinical perspective. 
B19V targets the erythroid progenitors in the bone marrow by binding to the 
glycosphingolipid globoside (Gb4), leading to large receptor-induced structural 
changes triggering cell death either by lysis or by apoptosis mediated by the 
nonstructural (NS)1 protein. The pattern of genetic evolution, its peculiar 
properties and functional profile, the characteristics of its narrow tropism and 
restricted replication, its complex relationship with the host and its ample 
pathogenetic potential are all topics that are far from a comprehensive 
understanding. The lack of efficient adaptation to in vitro cellular cultures 
and the absence of animal models have limited classical virological studies and 
made studies on B19V dependent on molecular biology. The present review looks at 
the nature of this virus with the view to provide more information about its 
biology, which may be useful to the present and future researchers.
KEYWORDS: human parvovirus B19; respiratory pathogen; biology; genome; fifth 
disease; transient aplastic crisis; anemia.

DOI: 10.4149/av_2014_03_199
PMID: 25283854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]