---
reference_id: "PMID:37973818"
title: Perspectives of current understanding and therapeutics of Diamond-Blackfan anemia.
authors:
- Liu Y
- Karlsson S
journal: Leukemia
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41375-023-02082-w
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Perspectives of current understanding and therapeutics of Diamond-Blackfan anemia.
**Authors:** Liu Y, Karlsson S
**Journal:** Leukemia (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41375-023-02082-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41375-023-02082-w)

## Content

1. Leukemia. 2024 Jan;38(1):1-9. doi: 10.1038/s41375-023-02082-w. Epub 2023 Nov
16.

Perspectives of current understanding and therapeutics of Diamond-Blackfan 
anemia.

Liu Y(1)(2), Karlsson S(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Hematology and Regenerative Medicine, Department of Medicine 
Huddinge, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, 
Sweden. yang.liu.3@ki.se.
(2)Division of Molecular Medicine and Gene Therapy, Lund Stem Cell Center, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden. yang.liu.3@ki.se.
(3)Division of Molecular Medicine and Gene Therapy, Lund Stem Cell Center, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden. stefan.karlsson@lu.se.

Erratum in
    Leukemia. 2024 Jan;38(1):228. doi: 10.1038/s41375-023-02101-w.

Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) is a rare congenital bone marrow failure disorder 
characterized by erythroid hypoplasia. It primarily affects infants and is often 
caused by heterozygous allelic variations in ribosomal protein (RP) genes. 
Recent studies also indicated that non-RP genes like GATA1, TSR2, are associated 
with DBA. P53 activation, translational dysfunction, inflammation, imbalanced 
globin/heme synthesis, and autophagy dysregulation were shown to contribute to 
disrupted erythropoiesis and impaired red blood cell production. The main 
therapeutic option for DBA patients is corticosteroids. However, half of these 
patients become non-responsive to corticosteroid therapy over prolonged 
treatment and have to be given blood transfusions. Hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation is currently the sole curative option, however, the treatment is 
limited by the availability of suitable donors and the potential for serious 
immunological complications. Recent advances in gene therapy using lentiviral 
vectors have shown promise in treating RPS19-deficient DBA by promoting normal 
hematopoiesis. With deepening insights into the molecular framework of DBA, 
emerging therapies like gene therapy hold promise for providing curative 
solutions and advancing comprehension of the underlying disease mechanisms.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41375-023-02082-w
PMCID: PMC10776401
PMID: 37973818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.