---
reference_id: PMID:19911140
title: Vitiligo in children.
authors:
- Kakourou T
journal: World J Pediatr
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1007/s12519-009-0050-1
keywords:
- Child
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- Prevalence
- Treatment Outcome
- "Vitiligo/diagnosis, drug therapy, epidemiology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vitiligo in children.
**Authors:** Kakourou T
**Journal:** World J Pediatr (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12519-009-0050-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12519-009-0050-1)

## Content

1. World J Pediatr. 2009 Nov;5(4):265-8. doi: 10.1007/s12519-009-0050-1. Epub
2009  Nov 13.

Vitiligo in children.

Kakourou T(1).

Author information:
(1)First Pediatric Department Athens University, Aghia Sophia Children's 
Hospital, Athens, Greece. Kakst@otenet.gr

BACKGROUND: Vitiligo is an acquired depigmentary disorder affecting around 1% of 
the world's population. In 25% of cases it has its onset prior to the age of 14 
years.
DATA SOURCES: Articles on vitiligo in children published after 1995 were 
retrieved from PubMed. The prevalence, etiology, clinical presentation, 
differential diagnosis, treatment and management of vitiligo in children were 
summarized.
RESULTS: Vitiligo is characterized by acquired, sharply demarcated depigmented 
macules or patches on the skin, the mucous membranes and/or white hair and it is 
mainly differentiated from congenital achromic skin lesions. It is frequently 
associated with various autoimmune diseases. Hashimoto's thyroiditis is the most 
common association in children. Information on the nature, possible causes and 
course of the disease leads to acceptance of the disorder and higher compliance 
with the treatment. The choice of medical treatment depends on the type, 
location and duration of lesions as well as the eagerness of the child and 
his/her parents to pursue therapy.
CONCLUSION: The management of childhood vitiligo includes information and 
reassurance of young patients and their parents on the disease, thyroid 
investigation, avoidance of trigger factors, topical treatment and proper 
follow-up.

DOI: 10.1007/s12519-009-0050-1
PMID: 19911140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]