---
reference_id: "PMID:28620541"
title: "Polycystic ovary syndrome and risk of endometrial, ovarian, and breast cancer: a systematic review."
authors:
- Harris HR
- Terry KL
journal: Fertil Res Pract
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1186/s40738-016-0029-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Polycystic ovary syndrome and risk of endometrial, ovarian, and breast cancer: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Harris HR, Terry KL
**Journal:** Fertil Res Pract (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40738-016-0029-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40738-016-0029-2)

## Content

1. Fertil Res Pract. 2016 Dec 5;2:14. doi: 10.1186/s40738-016-0029-2. eCollection
 2016.

Polycystic ovary syndrome and risk of endometrial, ovarian, and breast cancer: a 
systematic review.

Harris HR(1)(2), Terry KL(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Program in Epidemiology, Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson 
Cancer Research Center, M4-859 Seattle, WA USA.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA USA.
(3)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, 
Boston, MA USA.

BACKGROUND: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a complex endocrine disorder 
with an estimated prevalence of 4-21% in reproductive aged women. The altered 
metabolic and hormonal environment among women with PCOS may increase their risk 
of some types of cancer.
METHODS: We performed a comprehensive review of the literature using numerous 
search terms for all studies examining the associations between polycystic ovary 
syndrome and related characteristics and cancer published in English through 
October 2016. This review summarizes the epidemiological findings on the 
associations between PCOS and endometrial, ovarian, and breast cancers and 
discusses the methodological issues, complexities, and underlying mechanisms of 
these associations.
RESULTS: We identified 11 individual studies and 3 meta-analyses on the 
associations between PCOS and endometrial cancer, 8 studies and 1 meta-analysis 
for ovarian cancer, and 10 studies and 1 meta-analysis for breast cancer. 
Multiple studies reported that women with PCOS were at a higher risk for 
endometrial cancer; however, many did not take into account body mass index 
(BMI), a strong and well-established risk factor for endometrial cancer. The 
association with ovarian cancer was less clear, but a potentially increased risk 
of the borderline serous subtype was reported by two studies. No consistent 
association between PCOS risk and breast cancer was observed.
CONCLUSION: The associations between PCOS and endometrial, ovarian, and breast 
cancer are complex, with the need to consider many methodological issues in 
future analyses. Larger well-designed studies, or pooled analyses, may help 
clarify these complex associations.

DOI: 10.1186/s40738-016-0029-2
PMCID: PMC5424400
PMID: 28620541