---
reference_id: "PMID:36944680"
title: Cellular mechanisms of heterogeneity in NF2-mutant schwannoma.
authors:
- Chiasson-MacKenzie C
- Vitte J
- Liu CH
- Wright EA
- Flynn EA
- Stott SL
- Giovannini M
- McClatchey AI
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-37226-0
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- Humans
- Neurofibromatosis 2/genetics
- "Neurilemmoma/genetics, pathology"
- Neurofibromin 2/genetics
- Mutation
- Schwann Cells/pathology
- "Genes, Tumor Suppressor"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cellular mechanisms of heterogeneity in NF2-mutant schwannoma.
**Authors:** Chiasson-MacKenzie C, Vitte J, Liu CH, Wright EA, Flynn EA, Stott SL, Giovannini M, McClatchey AI
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-023-37226-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-37226-0)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2023 Mar 21;14(1):1559. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-37226-0.

Cellular mechanisms of heterogeneity in NF2-mutant schwannoma.

Chiasson-MacKenzie C(1)(2), Vitte J(3), Liu CH(1)(2), Wright EA(1)(2), Flynn 
EA(1)(4), Stott SL(1)(4), Giovannini M(3), McClatchey AI(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School, 149 
13th Street, Charlestown, MA, 02129, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, 55 Fruit Street, Boston, MA, 02114, USA.
(3)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA 
and Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center (JCCC), University of California Los 
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA.
(4)Center for Engineering in Medicine and BioMEMS Resource Center, Surgical 
Services, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 114 16th 
Street, Charlestown, MA, 02129, USA.
(5)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School, 149 
13th Street, Charlestown, MA, 02129, USA. mcclatch@helix.mgh.harvard.edu.
(6)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, 55 Fruit Street, Boston, MA, 02114, USA. mcclatch@helix.mgh.harvard.edu.

Schwannomas are common sporadic tumors and hallmarks of familial 
neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) that develop predominantly on cranial and spinal 
nerves. Virtually all schwannomas result from inactivation of the NF2 tumor 
suppressor gene with few, if any, cooperating mutations. Despite their genetic 
uniformity schwannomas exhibit remarkable clinical and therapeutic 
heterogeneity, which has impeded successful treatment. How heterogeneity 
develops in NF2-mutant schwannomas is unknown. We have found that loss of the 
membrane:cytoskeleton-associated NF2 tumor suppressor, merlin, yields unstable 
intrinsic polarity and enables Nf2-/- Schwann cells to adopt distinct programs 
of ErbB ligand production and polarized signaling, suggesting a self-generated 
model of schwannoma heterogeneity. We validated the heterogeneous distribution 
of biomarkers of these programs in human schwannoma and exploited the 
synchronous development of lesions in a mouse model to establish a quantitative 
pipeline for studying how schwannoma heterogeneity evolves. Our studies 
highlight the importance of intrinsic mechanisms of heterogeneity across human 
cancers.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-37226-0
PMCID: PMC10030849
PMID: 36944680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.