---
reference_id: "PMID:36445400"
title: "Early onset hereditary neuronopathies: an update on non-5q motor neuron diseases."
authors:
- Zambon AA
- Pini V
- Bosco L
- Falzone YM
- Munot P
- Muntoni F
- Previtali SC
journal: Brain
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awac452
keywords:
- Humans
- Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease/genetics
- "Muscular Atrophy, Spinal/genetics"
- Phenotype
- Genetic Testing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early onset hereditary neuronopathies: an update on non-5q motor neuron diseases.
**Authors:** Zambon AA, Pini V, Bosco L, Falzone YM, Munot P, Muntoni F, Previtali SC
**Journal:** Brain (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awac452](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awac452)

## Content

1. Brain. 2023 Mar 1;146(3):806-822. doi: 10.1093/brain/awac452.

Early onset hereditary neuronopathies: an update on non-5q motor neuron 
diseases.

Zambon AA(1)(2), Pini V(2), Bosco L(1), Falzone YM(1), Munot P(3), Muntoni 
F(2)(3), Previtali SC(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuromuscular Repair Unit, Institute of Experimental Neurology (InSpe), 
Division of Neuroscience, IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele, 20132 Milan, Italy.
(2)Dubowitz Neuromuscular Centre, UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child 
Health and Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, WC1N 1EH, UK.
(3)NIHR Great Ormond Street Hospital Biomedical Research Centre, London, WC1N 
1EH, UK.

Hereditary motor neuropathies (HMN) were first defined as a group of 
neuromuscular disorders characterized by lower motor neuron dysfunction, slowly 
progressive length-dependent distal muscle weakness and atrophy, without sensory 
involvement. Their cumulative estimated prevalence is 2.14/100 000 and, to date, 
around 30 causative genes have been identified with autosomal dominant, 
recessive,and X-linked inheritance. Despite the advances of next generation 
sequencing, more than 60% of patients with HMN remain genetically 
uncharacterized. Of note, we are increasingly aware of the broad range of 
phenotypes caused by pathogenic variants in the same gene and of the 
considerable clinical and genetic overlap between HMN and other conditions, such 
as Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 2 (axonal), spinal muscular atrophy with lower 
extremities predominance, neurogenic arthrogryposis multiplex congenita and 
juvenile amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Considering that most HMN present during 
childhood, in this review we primarily aim to summarize key clinical features of 
paediatric forms, including recent data on novel phenotypes, to help guide 
differential diagnosis and genetic testing. Second, we describe newly identified 
causative genes and molecular mechanisms, and discuss how the discovery of these 
is changing the paradigm through which we approach this group of conditions.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awac452
PMCID: PMC9976982
PMID: 36445400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]