---
reference_id: "PMID:40533795"
title: Genetics and phenotypic heterogeneity of Galloway-Mowat syndrome.
authors:
- Huang L
- Wang Y
- Zhang Y
- Fu H
- Mao J
journal: Cell Commun Signal
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s12964-025-02307-8
keywords:
- Humans
- Phenotype
- "Microcephaly/genetics, pathology"
- "Hernia, Hiatal/genetics, pathology, diagnosis"
- "Nephrosis/genetics, pathology"
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics and phenotypic heterogeneity of Galloway-Mowat syndrome.
**Authors:** Huang L, Wang Y, Zhang Y, Fu H, Mao J
**Journal:** Cell Commun Signal (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12964-025-02307-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12964-025-02307-8)

## Content

1. Cell Commun Signal. 2025 Jun 18;23(1):289. doi: 10.1186/s12964-025-02307-8.

Genetics and phenotypic heterogeneity of Galloway-Mowat syndrome.

Huang L(1), Wang Y(2), Zhang Y(3), Fu H(1), Mao J(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Children's Hospital, National clinical research
center for child health, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, 3333 Binsheng
Road, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Clinical Center of Pediatric Nephrology of Henan
Province, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou,
Henan Province, China.
(4)Department of Nephrology, Children's Hospital, National clinical research
center for child health, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, 3333 Binsheng
Road, Hangzhou, China. maojh88@zju.edu.cn.

Galloway-Mowat syndrome (GAMOS) is a rare autosomal recessive genetic disorder
that is underrecognized. The phenotype is heterogeneous, but it is now widely
accepted that early-onset nephrotic syndrome (SRNS) and microcephaly with brain
malformation are characteristic features of Galloway-Mowat syndrome. Although
the five subunits that encode the KEOPS complex, OSGEP/TP53RK/TPRKB/LAGE3/GON7,
are known to cause Galloway-Mowat syndrome, the mutation of the WDR73, WDR4,
NUP107, NUP133, and PRDM15 genes can lead to Galloway-Mowat syndrome, which
makes the diagnosis more challenging. This review outlines current knowledge
regarding Galloway-Mowat syndrome from another perspective. Starting from the
history of Galloway-Mowat syndrome and reviewing the clinical details of
patients with and without genetic traits, we discuss the phenotypic and genetic
heterogeneity of the disease. We pay particular attention to all confounding
clinical signs and symptoms that may lead to misdiagnosis. Indeed, some patients
with Galloway-Mowat syndrome have a clinical condition of nephrotic range
proteinuria, with or without hematuria, such as glomerular disease or chronic
kidney disease of unknown origin. Although glomerular injury is frequently
documented in biopsies of patients with Galloway-Mowat syndrome, there is
currently no reliable evidence that renal biopsy has diagnostic or prognostic
value. We reviewed published histopathological reports of renal tubule and
glomerular injury in these patients and discussed the current knowledge on the
role of genes that contribute to the onset of Galloway-Mowat syndrome in
glomerular function.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12964-025-02307-8
PMCID: PMC12177991
PMID: 40533795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to
participate: The study was carried out after the protocol was approved by the
Ethics Committee of The First Afliated Hospital of Zhejiang University School of
Medicine. I confrm that all methods were performed in accordance with the
relevant guidelines. All procedures were performed in accordance with the
ethical standards laid down in the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki and its later
amendments. Consent for publication: Written informed consent was obtained from
the participant and their guardians prior to enrollment. Competing interests:
The authors declare no competing interests.
