---
reference_id: "PMID:38525769"
title: "Whipple Disease Presenting as Isolated Transverse Myelitis with Permanent Neurological Damage in a Patient with Systemic Lupus Erythematosus: A Case Report of a Difficult Diagnosis with a Literature Review."
authors:
- Saffioti C
- Nebiolo M
- Caorsi R
- Mesini A
- Severino M
- Brisca G
- Castagnola E
- Gattorno M
journal: Infect Dis Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/idr16020022
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whipple Disease Presenting as Isolated Transverse Myelitis with Permanent Neurological Damage in a Patient with Systemic Lupus Erythematosus: A Case Report of a Difficult Diagnosis with a Literature Review.
**Authors:** Saffioti C, Nebiolo M, Caorsi R, Mesini A, Severino M, Brisca G, Castagnola E, Gattorno M
**Journal:** Infect Dis Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/idr16020022](https://doi.org/10.3390/idr16020022)

## Content

1. Infect Dis Rep. 2024 Mar 19;16(2):269-280. doi: 10.3390/idr16020022.

Whipple Disease Presenting as Isolated Transverse Myelitis with Permanent 
Neurological Damage in a Patient with Systemic Lupus Erythematosus: A Case 
Report of a Difficult Diagnosis with a Literature Review.

Saffioti C(1), Nebiolo M(2), Caorsi R(3), Mesini A(1), Severino M(4), Brisca 
G(5), Castagnola E(1), Gattorno M(3).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Infectious Diseases Unit, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, 16147 
Genoa, Italy.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology, Genetics, Maternal 
and Child Health (DINOGMI), University of Genoa, 16132 Genoa, Italy.
(3)Rheumatolgy and Autoinflammatory Diseases Unit, IRCCS Istituto Giannina 
Gaslini, 16147 Genoa, Italy.
(4)Neuroradiology Unit, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, 16147 Genoa, Italy.
(5)Paediatric and Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, IRCCS Istituto Giannina Gaslini, 
16147 Genoa, Italy.

We describe an atypical case of Whipple disease exclusively involving the spinal 
cord in an adolescent receiving immunosuppressive therapy for systemic lupus 
erythematosus. The diagnosis was particularly difficult since lupus and Whipple 
disease can present similar clinical features and the patient's prolonged 
contact with sewage was initially not mentioned. A literature review of the 
clinical, imaging, diagnostic, and therapeutic challenges of Whipple disease is 
also performed.

DOI: 10.3390/idr16020022
PMCID: PMC10961757
PMID: 38525769

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.