---
reference_id: "PMID:28242392"
title: Two novel mutations in the PPIB gene cause a rare pedigree of osteogenesis imperfecta type IX.
authors:
- Jiang Y
- Pan J
- Guo D
- Zhang W
- Xie J
- Fang Z
- Guo C
- Fang Q
- Jiang W
- Guo Y
journal: Clin Chim Acta
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2017.02.019
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Asian People/genetics
- Base Sequence
- Conserved Sequence
- "Cyclophilins/chemistry, genetics"
- Female
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Genotype
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Osteogenesis Imperfecta/genetics
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two novel mutations in the PPIB gene cause a rare pedigree of osteogenesis imperfecta type IX.
**Authors:** Jiang Y, Pan J, Guo D, Zhang W, Xie J, Fang Z, Guo C, Fang Q, Jiang W, Guo Y
**Journal:** Clin Chim Acta (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cca.2017.02.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cca.2017.02.019)

## Content

1. Clin Chim Acta. 2017 Jun;469:111-118. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2017.02.019. Epub
2017  Feb 27.

Two novel mutations in the PPIB gene cause a rare pedigree of osteogenesis 
imperfecta type IX.

Jiang Y(1), Pan J(2), Guo D(3), Zhang W(4), Xie J(1), Fang Z(1), Guo C(2), Fang 
Q(5), Jiang W(1), Guo Y(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou 510080, China.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Fujian 
Medical University, Quanzhou 362000, China.
(3)Clinical Medicine, Grade 2014, Medical College, Xiamen University, Xiamen 
361102, China.
(4)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics, BCM (Baylor College of Medicine), 
One Baylor Plaza, Nab 2015, Houston, TX 77030, USA; AmCare Genomics Laboratory, 
Guangzhou 510300, China.
(5)Fetal Medicine Center, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, 
Guangzhou 510080, China.
(6)Department of Medical Genetics, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou 510080, China. Electronic address: 
guoyibin@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a rare genetic skeletal disorder 
characterized by increased bone fragility and vulnerability to fractures. PPIB 
is identified as a candidate gene for OI-IX, here we detect two pathogenic 
mutations in PPIB and analyze the genotype-phenotype correlation in a Chinese 
family with OI.
METHODS: Next-generation sequencing (NGS) was used to screen the whole exome of 
the parents of proband. Screening of variation frequency, evolutionary 
conservation comparisons, pathogenicity evaluation, and protein structure 
prediction were conducted to assess the pathogenicity of the novel mutations. 
Sanger sequencing was used to confirm the candidate variants. RTQ-PCR was used 
to analyze the PPIB gene expression.
RESULTS: All mutant genes screened out by NGS were excluded except PPIB. Two 
novel heterozygous PPIB mutations (father, c.25A>G; mother, c.509G>A) were 
identified in relation to osteogenesis imperfecta type IX. Both mutations were 
predicted to be pathogenic by bioinformatics analysis and RTQ-PCR analysis 
revealed downregulated PPIB expression in the two carriers.
CONCLUSION: We report a rare pedigree with an autosomal recessive osteogenesis 
imperfecta type IX (OI-IX) caused by two novel PPIB mutations identified for the 
first time in China. The current study expands our knowledge of PPIB mutations 
and their associated phenotypes, and provides new information on the genetic 
defects associated with this disease for clinical diagnosis.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2017.02.019
PMID: 28242392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]