---
reference_id: "PMID:11423718"
title: "The association between asthma and dental caries in children and adolescents: A population-based case-control study."
authors:
- Shulman JD
- Taylor SE
- Nunn ME
journal: Caries Res
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1159/000047464
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The association between asthma and dental caries in children and adolescents: A population-based case-control study.
**Authors:** Shulman JD, Taylor SE, Nunn ME
**Journal:** Caries Res (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000047464](https://doi.org/10.1159/000047464)

## Content

1. Caries Res. 2001 Jul-Aug;35(4):240-6. doi: 10.1159/000047464.

The association between asthma and dental caries in children and adolescents: A 
population-based case-control study.

Shulman JD(1), Taylor SE, Nunn ME.

Author information:
(1)Baylor College of Dentistry, Dallas, Tex 75246, USA. JSHULMAN@TAMBCD.EDU

This study explored the potential association between childhood asthma and 
caries using oral examination and health interview data from the Third National 
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 1988-1994 (NHANES III). We fitted GEE 
Poisson regression models with adjustment for parents' income, gender, race, 
exposure to potentially xerostomic drugs, and the presence of pit and fissure 
sealants. There was no association between the use of drugs commonly used by 
asthmatics (antihistamines, corticosteroids, and antiasthmatic inhalers) and 
df/DMF scores. Asthmatic children 4-10 years of age at all severity levels had 
similar dfs scores to the controls, however, severely asthmatic children 4-10 
years of age had significantly lower DMFS (p = 0.010) and DMFT (0.049) scores 
than controls. Similarly, severely asthmatic children 11-16 years of age had 
significantly lower DMFT scores than controls (p = 0.024) and DMFS scores 
approaching statistical significance (p = 0.053). While our analysis adjusted 
for covariates, potential confounders such as fluoride intake from water, diet, 
use of topical fluorides, and dose of antiasthmatic medication could not be 
addressed. Our results indicate that any association between asthma and dental 
caries may occur primarily in younger children with no evidence of an 
association between asthma and dental caries as children mature.

DOI: 10.1159/000047464
PMID: 11423718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]