---
reference_id: "PMID:27548435"
title: CD1a on Langerhans cells controls inflammatory skin disease.
authors:
- Kim JH
- Hu Y
- Yongqing T
- Kim J
- Hughes VA
- Le Nours J
- Marquez EA
- Purcell AW
- Wan Q
- Sugita M
- Rossjohn J
- Winau F
journal: Nat Immunol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1038/ni.3523
keywords:
- Animals
- "Antibodies, Blocking/administration & dosage"
- "Antigens, CD1/genetics, immunology, metabolism"
- Autoantigens/metabolism
- "Catechols/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Crystallography, X-Ray"
- "Dermatitis, Toxicodendron/immunology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- Interleukin-17/metabolism
- Interleukins/metabolism
- Langerhans Cells/immunology
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Protein Conformation
- Psoriasis/immunology
- Th17 Cells/immunology
- Toxicodendron/immunology
- Interleukin-22
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CD1a on Langerhans cells controls inflammatory skin disease.
**Authors:** Kim JH, Hu Y, Yongqing T, Kim J, Hughes VA, Le Nours J, Marquez EA, Purcell AW, Wan Q, Sugita M, Rossjohn J, Winau F
**Journal:** Nat Immunol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ni.3523](https://doi.org/10.1038/ni.3523)

## Content

1. Nat Immunol. 2016 Oct;17(10):1159-66. doi: 10.1038/ni.3523. Epub 2016 Aug 22.

CD1a on Langerhans cells controls inflammatory skin disease.

Kim JH(1), Hu Y(1), Yongqing T(2)(3), Kim J(1), Hughes VA(2)(3), Le Nours 
J(2)(3), Marquez EA(2)(3), Purcell AW(2), Wan Q(1), Sugita M(4), Rossjohn 
J(2)(3)(5), Winau F(1).

Author information:
(1)Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, 
Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Infection and Immunity Program &Department of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology, Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, 
Australia.
(3)Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence in Advanced Molecular 
Imaging, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.
(4)Laboratory of Cell Regulation, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto, Japan.
(5)Institute of Infection and Immunity, Cardiff University, School of Medicine, 
Cardiff, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2016 Sep 20;17(10):1133-4. doi: 10.1038/ni.3557.

CD1a is a lipid-presenting molecule that is abundantly expressed on Langerhans 
cells. However, the in vivo role of CD1a has remained unclear, principally 
because CD1a is lacking in mice. Through the use of mice with transgenic 
expression of CD1a, we found that the plant-derived lipid urushiol triggered 
CD1a-dependent skin inflammation driven by CD4(+) helper T cells that produced 
the cytokines IL-17 and IL-22 (TH17 cells). Human subjects with poison-ivy 
dermatitis had a similar cytokine signature following CD1a-mediated recognition 
of urushiol. Among various urushiol congeners, we identified diunsaturated 
pentadecylcatechol (C15:2) as the dominant antigen for CD1a-restricted T cells. 
We determined the crystal structure of the CD1a-urushiol (C15:2) complex, 
demonstrating the molecular basis of urushiol interaction with the 
antigen-binding cleft of CD1a. In a mouse model and in patients with psoriasis, 
CD1a amplified inflammatory responses that were mediated by TH17 cells that 
reacted to self lipid antigens. Treatment with blocking antibodies to CD1a 
alleviated skin inflammation. Thus, we propose CD1a as a potential therapeutic 
target in inflammatory skin diseases.

DOI: 10.1038/ni.3523
PMCID: PMC5791155
PMID: 27548435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]