---
reference_id: "PMID:38541742"
title: "Chronic Kidney Disease with Mineral Bone Disorder and Vascular Calcification: An Overview."
authors:
- Izzo C
- Secondulfo C
- Bilancio G
- Visco V
- Virtuoso N
- Migliarino S
- Ciccarelli M
- Di Pietro P
- La Mura L
- Damato A
- Carrizzo A
- Vecchione C
journal: Life (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/life14030418
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic Kidney Disease with Mineral Bone Disorder and Vascular Calcification: An Overview.
**Authors:** Izzo C, Secondulfo C, Bilancio G, Visco V, Virtuoso N, Migliarino S, Ciccarelli M, Di Pietro P, La Mura L, Damato A, Carrizzo A, Vecchione C
**Journal:** Life (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/life14030418](https://doi.org/10.3390/life14030418)

## Content

1. Life (Basel). 2024 Mar 21;14(3):418. doi: 10.3390/life14030418.

Chronic Kidney Disease with Mineral Bone Disorder and Vascular Calcification: An 
Overview.

Izzo C(1)(2), Secondulfo C(1), Bilancio G(1), Visco V(1), Virtuoso N(2), 
Migliarino S(2), Ciccarelli M(1), Di Pietro P(1), La Mura L(3), Damato A(4), 
Carrizzo A(1)(4), Vecchione C(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Surgery and Dentistry, University of Salerno, Via 
Salvador Allende, 84081 Baronissi, Italy.
(2)Cardiology Unit, University Hospital "San Giovanni di Dio e Ruggi d'Aragona", 
84131 Salerno, Italy.
(3)Centro Medico Ascione Srl, 80059 Torre del Greco, Italy.
(4)Vascular Physiopathology Unit, IRCCS Neuromed, 86077 Pozzilli, Italy.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is a global health issue with a rising prevalence, 
affecting 697.5 million people worldwide. It imposes a substantial burden, 
contributing to 35.8 million disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) and 1.2 
million deaths in 2017. The mortality rate for CKD has increased by 41.5% 
between 1990 and 2017, positioning it as a significant cause of global 
mortality. CKD is associated with diverse health complications, impacting 
cardiovascular, neurological, nutritional, and endocrine aspects. One prominent 
complication is CKD-mineral and bone disorder (MBD), a complex condition 
involving dysregulation of bone turnover, mineralization, and strength, 
accompanied by soft tissue and vascular calcification. Alterations in mineral 
metabolism, including calcium, phosphate, parathyroid hormone (PTH), vitamin D, 
fibroblast growth factor-23 (FGF-23), and Klotho, play pivotal roles in CKD-MBD. 
These disturbances, observed early in CKD, contribute to the progression of bone 
disorders and renal osteodystrophy (ROD). Vascular calcification (VC) is a key 
component of CKD-MBD, accelerated by CKD. The pathophysiology involves complex 
processes in vascular smooth muscle cells and the formation of calciprotein 
particles (CPP). VC is closely linked to cardiovascular events and mortality, 
emphasizing its prognostic significance. Various serum markers and imaging 
techniques, including lateral plain X-ray, Kauppila Score, Adragao Score, and 
pulse wave velocity, aid in VC detection. Additionally, pQCT provides valuable 
information on arterial calcifications, offering an advantage over traditional 
scoring systems. CKD poses a substantial global health burden, and its 
complications, including CKD-MBD and VC, significantly contribute to morbidity 
and mortality. Understanding the intricate relationships between mineral 
metabolism, bone disorders, and vascular calcification is crucial for effective 
diagnosis and therapeutic interventions.

DOI: 10.3390/life14030418
PMCID: PMC10971621
PMID: 38541742

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.