---
reference_id: "PMID:38887284"
title: "Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: the biology of a neglected disease."
authors:
- Arron HE
- Marsh BD
- Kell DB
- Khan MA
- Jaeger BR
- Pretorius E
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1386607
keywords:
- "Fatigue Syndrome, Chronic/diagnosis, immunology, therapy, etiology"
- Humans
- Neglected Diseases
- Dysbiosis
- Animals
- Gastrointestinal Microbiome/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: the biology of a neglected disease.
**Authors:** Arron HE, Marsh BD, Kell DB, Khan MA, Jaeger BR, Pretorius E
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2024.1386607](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2024.1386607)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2024 Jun 3;15:1386607. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1386607. 
eCollection 2024.

Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: the biology of a neglected 
disease.

Arron HE(1), Marsh BD(2), Kell DB(1)(3)(4), Khan MA(5), Jaeger BR(6), Pretorius 
E(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, Faculty of Science, Stellenbosch 
University, Stellenbosch, South Africa.
(2)MRCPCH Consultant Paediatric Neurodisability, Exeter, Devon, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Systems Biology, Institute of Systems, 
Molecular and Integrative Biology, Faculty of Health and Life Sciences, 
University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(4)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Centre for Biosustainability, Technical 
University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark.
(5)Directorate of Respiratory Medicine, Manchester University Hospitals, 
Wythenshawe Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(6)Long COVID department, Clinic St Georg, Bad Aibling, Germany.

Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS) is a chronic, 
debilitating disease characterised by a wide range of symptoms that severely 
impact all aspects of life. Despite its significant prevalence, ME/CFS remains 
one of the most understudied and misunderstood conditions in modern medicine. 
ME/CFS lacks standardised diagnostic criteria owing to variations in both 
inclusion and exclusion criteria across different diagnostic guidelines, and 
furthermore, there are currently no effective treatments available. Moving 
beyond the traditional fragmented perspectives that have limited our 
understanding and management of the disease, our analysis of current information 
on ME/CFS represents a significant paradigm shift by synthesising the disease's 
multifactorial origins into a cohesive model. We discuss how ME/CFS emerges from 
an intricate web of genetic vulnerabilities and environmental triggers, notably 
viral infections, leading to a complex series of pathological responses 
including immune dysregulation, chronic inflammation, gut dysbiosis, and 
metabolic disturbances. This comprehensive model not only advances our 
understanding of ME/CFS's pathophysiology but also opens new avenues for 
research and potential therapeutic strategies. By integrating these disparate 
elements, our work emphasises the necessity of a holistic approach to 
diagnosing, researching, and treating ME/CFS, urging the scientific community to 
reconsider the disease's complexity and the multifaceted approach required for 
its study and management.

Copyright © 2024 Arron, Marsh, Kell, Khan, Jaeger and Pretorius.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1386607
PMCID: PMC11180809
PMID: 38887284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.