---
reference_id: "PMID:39529955"
title: Expert consensus on the diagnosis and treatment of solid tumors with BRAF mutations.
authors:
- Wang W
- Lian B
- Xu C
- Wang Q
- Li Z
- Zheng N
- Liu A
- Yu J
- Zhong W
- Wang Z
- Zhang Y
- Liu J
- Zhang S
- Cai X
- Liu A
- Li W
- Mao L
- Zhan P
- Liu H
- Lv T
- Miao L
- Min L
- Chen Y
- Yuan J
- Wang F
- Jiang Z
- Lin G
- Huang L
- Pu X
- Lin R
- Liu W
- Rao C
- Lv D
- Yu Z
- Li X
- Tang C
- Zhou C
- Zhang J
- Xue J
- Guo H
- Chu Q
- Meng R
- Liu X
- Wu J
- Zhang R
- Zhou J
- Zhu Z
- Li Y
- Qiu H
- Xia F
- Lu Y
- Chen X
- Feng J
- Ge R
- Dai E
- Han Y
- Pan W
- Pang F
- Huang X
- Hu M
- Hao Q
- Wang K
- Wu F
- Song B
- Xu B
- Wang L
- Zhu Y
- Lin L
- Xie Y
- Lin X
- Cai J
- Xu L
- Li J
- Jiao X
- Li K
- Wei J
- Feng H
- Wang L
- Du Y
- Yao W
- Shi X
- Niu X
- Yuan D
- Yao Y
- Huang J
- Feng Y
- Zhang Y
- Sun P
- Wang H
- Ye M
- Wang D
- Wang Z
- Hao Y
- Wang Z
- Wan B
- Lv D
- Yang S
- Kang J
- Zhang J
- Zhang C
- Li W
- Fu J
- Wu L
- Lan S
- Ou J
- Shi L
- Zhai Z
- Wang Y
- Li B
- Zhang Z
- Wang K
- Ma X
- Li Z
- Liu Z
- Yang N
- Wu L
- Wang H
- Jin G
- Wang G
- Wang J
- Shi H
- Fang M
- Fang Y
- Li Y
- Wang X
- Chen J
- Zhang Y
- Zhu X
- Shen Y
- Ma S
- Wang B
- Song Y
- Song Z
- Fang W
- Lu Y
- Si L
journal: Innovation (Camb)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.xinn.2024.100661
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expert consensus on the diagnosis and treatment of solid tumors with BRAF mutations.
**Authors:** Wang W, Lian B, Xu C, Wang Q, Li Z, Zheng N, Liu A, Yu J, Zhong W, Wang Z, Zhang Y, Liu J, Zhang S, Cai X, Liu A, Li W, Mao L, Zhan P, Liu H, Lv T, Miao L, Min L, Chen Y, Yuan J, Wang F, Jiang Z, Lin G, Huang L, Pu X, Lin R, Liu W, Rao C, Lv D, Yu Z, Li X, Tang C, Zhou C, Zhang J, Xue J, Guo H, Chu Q, Meng R, Liu X, Wu J, Zhang R, Zhou J, Zhu Z, Li Y, Qiu H, Xia F, Lu Y, Chen X, Feng J, Ge R, Dai E, Han Y, Pan W, Pang F, Huang X, Hu M, Hao Q, Wang K, Wu F, Song B, Xu B, Wang L, Zhu Y, Lin L, Xie Y, Lin X, Cai J, Xu L, Li J, Jiao X, Li K, Wei J, Feng H, Wang L, Du Y, Yao W, Shi X, Niu X, Yuan D, Yao Y, Huang J, Feng Y, Zhang Y, Sun P, Wang H, Ye M, Wang D, Wang Z, Hao Y, Wang Z, Wan B, Lv D, Yang S, Kang J, Zhang J, Zhang C, Li W, Fu J, Wu L, Lan S, Ou J, Shi L, Zhai Z, Wang Y, Li B, Zhang Z, Wang K, Ma X, Li Z, Liu Z, Yang N, Wu L, Wang H, Jin G, Wang G, Wang J, Shi H, Fang M, Fang Y, Li Y, Wang X, Chen J, Zhang Y, Zhu X, Shen Y, Ma S, Wang B, Song Y, Song Z, Fang W, Lu Y, Si L
**Journal:** Innovation (Camb) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.xinn.2024.100661](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xinn.2024.100661)

## Content

1. Innovation (Camb). 2024 Oct 18;5(6):100661. doi: 10.1016/j.xinn.2024.100661.
eCollection 2024 Nov 4.

Expert consensus on the diagnosis and treatment of solid tumors with BRAF
mutations.

Wang W(1), Lian B(2), Xu C(3)(4), Wang Q(5), Li Z(6), Zheng N(7)(8), Liu A(9),
Yu J(10), Zhong W(11), Wang Z(12), Zhang Y(13), Liu J(14), Zhang S(15), Cai
X(16), Liu A(17), Li W(18), Mao L(2), Zhan P(4), Liu H(4), Lv T(4), Miao L(19),
Min L(20), Chen Y(21), Yuan J(22), Wang F(23), Jiang Z(24), Lin G(21), Huang
L(17), Pu X(25), Lin R(21), Liu W(26), Rao C(27), Lv D(28), Yu Z(29), Li X(30),
Tang C(31), Zhou C(32), Zhang J(33), Xue J(34), Guo H(35), Chu Q(36), Meng
R(37), Liu X(38), Wu J(39), Zhang R(40), Zhou J(41), Zhu Z(42), Li Y(43), Qiu
H(36), Xia F(44), Lu Y(45), Chen X(46), Feng J(47), Ge R(48), Dai E(49), Han
Y(50), Pan W(51), Pang F(44), Huang X(44), Hu M(44), Hao Q(44), Wang K(44), Wu
F(52), Song B(53), Xu B(54), Wang L(55), Zhu Y(56), Lin L(31), Xie Y(57), Lin
X(27), Cai J(17), Xu L(58), Li J(59), Jiao X(60), Li K(61), Wei J(62), Feng
H(33), Wang L(63), Du Y(64), Yao W(65), Shi X(66), Niu X(6), Yuan D(4), Yao
Y(4), Huang J(57), Feng Y(67), Zhang Y(68), Sun P(69), Wang H(70), Ye M(4), Wang
D(4), Wang Z(4), Hao Y(1), Wang Z(71), Wan B(72), Lv D(73), Yang S(74), Kang
J(11), Zhang J(11), Zhang C(11), Li W(75), Fu J(76), Wu L(77), Lan S(78), Ou
J(79), Shi L(80), Zhai Z(56), Wang Y(81), Li B(82), Zhang Z(83), Wang K(84)(85),
Ma X(86), Li Z(87), Liu Z(70), Yang N(13), Wu L(25), Wang H(88), Jin G(89), Wang
G(90), Wang J(91), Shi H(92), Fang M(1), Fang Y(93), Li Y(94), Wang X(1), Chen
J(37), Zhang Y(1), Zhu X(71), Shen Y(95), Ma S(96), Wang B(97), Song Y(4), Song
Z(1), Fang W(98), Lu Y(99), Si L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemotherapy, Chinese Academy of Sciences University Cancer
Hospital (Zhejiang Cancer Hospital), Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310022, P.R. China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education/Beijing), Department of Melanoma and Sarcoma, Peking University Cancer
Hospital & Institute, Beijing 100142, P.R. China.
(3)Institute of Cancer and Basic Medicine (ICBM), Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310022, P.R. China.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Affiliated Jinling Hospital, Medical
School of Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210002, P.R. China.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing University
of Chinese Medicine, Jiangsu Province Hospital of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing,
Jiangsu 210029, P.R. China.
(6)Department of Shanghai Lung Cancer Center, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, P.R. China.
(7)Beijing Key Laboratory of Mental Disorders, National Clinical Research Center
for Mental Disorders & National Center for Mental Disorders, Beijing Anding
Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing 200030, China.
(8)Advanced Innovation Center for Human Brain Protection, Capital Medical
University, Beijing 200030, China.
(9)Senior Department of Pathology, the 7 Medical Center of PLA General Hospital,
Beijing 100700, P.R. China.
(10)Department of Cancer Molecular Diagnostics Core, Tianjin Medical University
Cancer Institute and Hospital, Tianjin 300060, P.R. China.
(11)Guangdong Lung Cancer Institute, Guangdong Provincial Laboratory of
Translational Medicine in Lung Cancer, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital,
Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Medicine, Guangzhou, Guangdong
510080, P.R. China.
(12)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology,
National Cancer Center/National Clinical Research Center for Cancer/Cancer
Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing 100021, P.R. China.
(13)Department of Medical Oncology, Lung Cancer and Gastrointestinal Unit, Hunan
Cancer Hospital/The Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of Medicine,
Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410013, P.R. China.
(14)Department of Thoracic Cancer, Jilin Cancer Hospital, Jilin, Changchun
130012, P.R. China.
(15)Translational Medicine Research Center, Key Laboratory of Clinical Cancer
Pharmacology and Toxicology Research of Zhejiang Province, Affiliated Hangzhou
First People's Hospital, Cancer Center, West Lake University School of Medicine,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310006, P.R. China.
(16)Department of VIP Inpatient, Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, State Key
Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for
Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510060, P.R. ChinaP.R. China.
(17)Department of Oncology, Second Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University,
Nanchang, Jiangxi 330006, P.R. China.
(18)Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease of Zhejiang Province, Department of
Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Cancer Center, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
Zhejiang 310009, P.R. China.
(19)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital, Medical
School of Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210008, P.R. China.
(20)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Clinical Medical School of Yangzhou
University, Subei People's Hospital of Jiangsu Province, Yangzhou, Jiangsu
225001, P.R. China.
(21)Department of Medical Oncology, Fujian Medical University Cancer Hospital &
Fujian Cancer Hospital, Fuzhou, Fujian 350014, P.R. China.
(22)Department of Pathology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei
430060, P.R. China.
(23)Department of Internal Medicine, Cancer Center of PLA, Qinhuai Medical Area,
Affiliated Jinling Hospital, Medical School of Nanjing University, Nanjing,
Jiangsu 210002, P.R. China.
(24)Derpartment of Integrative Oncology, Tianjin Medical University Cancer
Institute and Hospital, Tianjin 300060, P.R. China.
(25)Department of Medical Oncology, Lung Cancer and Hunan Cancer Hospital/The
Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Xiangya School of Medicine, Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan 410013, P.R. China.
(26)Department of Orthopaedic Oncology Surgery, Beijing Ji Shui Tan Hospital,
Peking University, Beijing 100035, P.R. China.
(27)Department of Radiotherapy and Chemotherapy, Hwamei Hospital, University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315010, P.R. China.
(28)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Taizhou Hospital of Wenzhou Medical
University, Taizhou, Zhejiang 317000, P.R. China.
(29)Department of Respiratory Medicine, the 900 Hospital of the Joint Logistics
Team (the Former Fuzhou General Hospital), Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou,
Fujian 350025, P.R. China.
(30)Department of Oncology, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing 100700, P.R. China.
(31)Department of Medical Oncology, Peking University International Hospital,
Beijing 102206, P.R. China.
(32)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, National Clinical Research
Center for Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health, The
First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong
510300, P.R. China.
(33)Department of Thoracic Oncology, Shanxi Academy of Medical Sciences, Shanxi
Bethune Hospital, Taiyuan, Shanxi 030032, P.R. China.
(34)Department of Oncology, Shanghai East Hospital, School of Medicine, Tongji
University, Shanghai 200123, P.R. China.
(35)Department of Medical Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, P.R. China.
(36)Department of Oncology, Tongji Hospital of Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, P.R. China.
(37)Cancer Center, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University
of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430022, P.R. China.
(38)Department of Oncology, the Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan 410013, P.R. China.
(39)Department of Medical Oncology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Medicine,
Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian 361003, P.R. China.
(40)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang, Liaoning 110042, P.R. China.
(41)Department of Medical Oncology, Sichuan Cancer Hospital & Institute, Sichuan
Cancer Center, School of Medicine, University of Electronic Science and
Technology, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, P.R. China.
(42)Department of Radiation Oncology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center,
Shanghai 200032, P.R. China.
(43)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education/Beijing), Department of Radiation Oncology, Peking University Cancer
Hospital & Institute, Beijing 100142, P.R. China.
(44)Department of Medical, Shanghai OrigiMed Co., Ltd., Shanghai 201114, P.R.
China.
(45)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology, National Clinical Research Center
for Digestive Diseases and Xijing Hospital of Digestive Diseases, Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710032, P.R. China.
(46)Department of Oncology, Jiangsu Province Hospital and Nanjing Medical
University First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, P.R. China.
(47)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong
University, Nantong, Jiangsu 226001, P.R. China.
(48)Department of General Surgery, Huadong Hospital Affiliated to Fudan
University, Shanghai 200040, P.R. China.
(49)Department of Oncology and Hematology, China-Japan Union Hospital of Jilin
University, Changchun, Jilin 13003, P.R. China.
(50)Department of Gastrointestinal Oncology, Harbin Medical University Cancer
Hospital, Harbin, Heilongjiang 1550081, P.R. China.
(51)Department of Cell Biology, College of Medicine, Jiaxing University,
Jiaxing, Zhejiang 314001, P.R. China.
(52)Department of Medical, Menarini Silicon Biosystems Spa, Shanghai 400000,
P.R. China.
(53)Department of Medical Oncology, The Affiliated Hospital of Jiaxing
University, Jiaxing, Zhejiang 314000, P.R. China.
(54)Department of Biotherapy, Cancer Institute, First Affiliated Hospital of
China Medical University, Shenyang 110001, P.R. China.
(55)Department of Oncology, Baotou Cancer Hospital, Baotou, Inner Mongolia
014000, P.R. China.
(56)Department of Thoracic Disease Diagnosis and Treatment Center, Zhejiang
Rongjun Hospital, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Jiaxing University, Jiaxing,
Zhejiang 314000, P.R. China.
(57)Department of Oncology, Lishui Municipal Central Hospital, Lishui, Zhejiang
323000, P.R. China.
(58)Department of Interventional Pulmonary Diseases, Anhui Chest Hospital,
Hefei, Anhui 230011, P.R. China.
(59)Department of Medical Oncology, Qilu Hospital, Cheeloo College of Medicine,
Shandong University, Jinnan, Shangdong 250012, P.R. China.
(60)Department of Medical Oncology, Shanghai Changzheng Hospital, Naval Medical
University, Shanghai 200070, P.R. China.
(61)Department of Oncology, Shandong Provincial Third Hospital, Cheeloo College
of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250031, P.R. China.
(62)Department of the Comprehensive Cancer Center, Affiliated Drum Tower
Hospital, Medical School of Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210008, P.R.
China.
(63)Department of Pathology, Shanxi Academy of Medical Sciences, Shanxi Bethune
Hospital, Taiyuan, Shanxi 030032, P.R. China.
(64)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, Anhui 230022, P.R. China.
(65)Department of Interventional Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510060, P.R. China.
(66)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Huzhou Hospital, Zhejiang University
School of Medicine, Huzhou, Zhejiang 313000, P.R. China.
(67)Department of Gynecologic Radiation Oncology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
University Cancer Hospital (Zhejiang Cancer Hospital), Hangzhou, Zhejiang
310022, P.R. China.
(68)Department of Oncology, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Medical College,
Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710004, P.R. China.
(69)Department of Pathology, The Second Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun,
Jilin 130041, P.R. China.
(70)Senior Department of Oncology, The 5 Medical Center of PLA General Hospital,
Beijing 100071, P.R. China.
(71)Department of Radiation Oncology, Affiliated Jinling Hospital, Medical
School of Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210002, P.R. China.
(72)Department of Respiratory Medicine, The Affiliated Jiangning Hospital of
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210002, P.R. China.
(73)Department of Clinical Oncology, The 901 Hospital of Joint Logistics Support
Force of People Liberation Army, Hefei, Anhui 230031, P.R. China.
(74)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Chuxiong Yi Autonomous Prefecture People's
Hospital, Chuxiong, Yunnan 675000, P.R. China.
(75)Department of Radiation Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou
Medical College, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325000, China.
(76)Department of Medical Oncology, Affiliated Jinhua Hospital, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Jinhua, Zhejiang 321000, P.R. China.
(77)Department of Microsurgery, Taizhou Hospital Affiliated to Wenzhou Medical
University, Taizhou, Zhejiang 317000, China.
(78)Department of Cancer Center, The First Hospital of Jilin University,
Changchun, Jilin 130021, P.R. China.
(79)Department of Oncology and Southwest Cancer Center, Southwest Hospital,
Third Military Medical University (Army Medical University), Chongqing 400038,
P.R. China.
(80)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai 200032, P.R. China.
(81)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310000, P.R. China.
(82)Department of Oncology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Guilin Medical
University, Guilin, Guangxi 541199, P.R. China.
(83)International Cooperative Laboratory of Traditional Chinese Medicine
Modernization and Innovative Drug Discovery of Chinese Ministry of Education
(MOE), Guangzhou City Key Laboratory of Precision Chemical Drug Development,
School of Pharmacy, Jinan University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510632, P.R. China.
(84)National Health Commission (NHC) Key Laboratory of Nuclear Medicine, Jiangsu
Key Laboratory of Molecular Nuclear Medicine, Jiangsu Institute of Nuclear
Medicine, Wuxi 214063, China.
(85)Department of Radiopharmaceuticals, School of Pharmacy, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210000, People's Republic of China.
(86)Department of Biotherapy, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, Cancer Center,
West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, P.R. China.
(87)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education/Beijing), Department of Pathology, Peking University Cancer Hospital &
Institute, Beijing 100142, P.R. China.
(88)Department of Internal Medicine, The Affiliated Cancer Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Henan Cancer Hospital, Zhengzhou, Henan 450000, P.R. China.
(89)Department of Bone and Soft-tissue Surgery, Chinese Academy of Sciences
University Cancer Hospital (Zhejiang Cancer Hospital), Hangzhou, Zhejiang
310022, P.R. China.
(90)Institute of Respiratory Diseases, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400037, P.R. China.
(91)Department of Pathology, Affiliated Jinling Hospital, Medical School of
Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210002, P.R. China.
(92)Frontier Science Center for Disease Molecular Network, West China Hospital,
Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, P.R. China.
(93)Department of Medical Oncology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310016, P.R. China.
(94)Department of Pathology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai
200032, P.R. China.
(95)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Affiliated Jinling Hospital, Medical School
of Nanjing University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210002, P.R. China.
(96)Department of Oncology, Key Laboratory of Clinical Cancer Pharmacology and
Toxicology Research of Zhejiang Province, Affiliated Hangzhou Cancer Hospital,
Cancer Center, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang
310006, P.R. China.
(97)Department of Breast Cancer and Urological Medical Oncology, Fudan
University Shanghai Cancer Center, Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical
College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, P.R. China.
(98)Department of Medical Oncology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, State
Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for
Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510060, P.R. China.
(99)Department of Clinical Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510630, P.R. China.

The BRAF gene is an important signaling molecule in human cells that is involved
in the regulation of cell growth, differentiation, and survival. When the BRAF
gene mutates, it can lead to abnormal activation of the signaling pathway, which
promotes cell proliferation, inhibits cell apoptosis, and ultimately contributes
to the occurrence and development of cancer. BRAF mutations are widely present
in various cancers, including malignant melanoma, thyroid cancer, colorectal
cancer, non-small cell lung cancer, and hairy cell leukemia, among others. BRAF
is an important target for the treatment of various solid tumors, and targeted
combination therapies, represented by BRAF inhibitors, have become one of the
main treatment modalities for a variety of BRAF-mutation-positive solid tumors.
Dabrafenib plus trametinib, as the first tumor-agnostic therapy, has been
approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of adult and
pediatric patients aged 6 years and older harboring a BRAF V600E mutation with
unresectable or metastatic solid tumors that have progressed following prior
treatment and who have no satisfactory alternative treatment options. This is
also the first time a BRAF/MEK inhibitor combination has been approved for use
in pediatric patients. As research into the diagnosis and treatment of BRAF
mutations advances, standardizing the detection of BRAF mutations and the
clinical application of BRAF inhibitors becomes increasingly important.
Therefore, we have established a universal and systematic strategy for
diagnosing and treating solid tumors with BRAF mutations. In this expert
consensus, we (1) summarize the epidemiology and clinical characteristics of
BRAF mutations in different solid tumors, (2) provide recommendations for the
selection of genetic testing methods and platforms, and (3) establish a
universal strategy for the diagnosis and treatment of patients with solid tumors
harboring BRAF mutations.

© 2024 The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1016/j.xinn.2024.100661
PMCID: PMC11551471
PMID: 39529955

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
