---
reference_id: "PMID:35860126"
title: "A case of McKusick-Kaufman syndrome with perinatal diagnosis: Case report and literature review."
authors:
- Ullah I
- Rauf S
- Ali S
- Khan KS
- Zahid T
- Malik J
- Afridi RU
- Asghar MS
journal: Ann Med Surg (Lond)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.amsu.2022.103926
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A case of McKusick-Kaufman syndrome with perinatal diagnosis: Case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Ullah I, Rauf S, Ali S, Khan KS, Zahid T, Malik J, Afridi RU, Asghar MS
**Journal:** Ann Med Surg (Lond) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amsu.2022.103926](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amsu.2022.103926)

## Content

1. Ann Med Surg (Lond). 2022 Jun 6;79:103926. doi: 10.1016/j.amsu.2022.103926. 
eCollection 2022 Jul.

A case of McKusick-Kaufman syndrome with perinatal diagnosis: Case report and 
literature review.

Ullah I(1), Rauf S(2), Ali S(2), Khan KS(3), Zahid T(4), Malik J(4), Afridi 
RU(1), Asghar MS(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kabir Medical College, Gandhara University, 
Peshawar, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Khyber Teaching Hospital, Peshawar, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Dow Medical College, Dow University of Health 
Sciences, Karachi, Pakistan.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Rawalpindi Institute of Cardiology, Rawalpindi, 
Pakistan.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Dow University of Health Sciences-Ojha 
Campus, Karachi, Pakistan.

INTRODUCTION: and importance: McKusick-Kaufman syndrome (MKS) is a rarely 
reported autosomal recessive syndrome characterized by hydrometrocolpos (HMC), 
polydactyly and various gastrointestinal and renal manifestations.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present a case of suspected MKS in a prenatal ultrasound 
with dilated lateral ventricles of the brain and HMC.
CLINICAL DISCUSSION: Main differential diagnosis includes Bardet-Beidel syndrome 
(BBS) which can present with HMC and polydactyly but retinal manifestations are 
a differentiating feature from MKS.
CONCLUSION: Both of the disease syndromes are diagnosed clinically after 
birth.Keywords: McKusick Syndrome, Bardet-beidel syndrome, hydrometrocolpos, 
case report.

© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amsu.2022.103926
PMCID: PMC9289321
PMID: 35860126

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
Interest.