---
reference_id: "PMID:29025800"
title: Approach to recurrent fever in childhood.
authors:
- Soon GS
- Laxer RM
journal: Can Fam Physician
year: '2017'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Approach to recurrent fever in childhood.
**Authors:** Soon GS, Laxer RM
**Journal:** Can Fam Physician (2017)

## Content

1. Can Fam Physician. 2017 Oct;63(10):756-762.

Approach to recurrent fever in childhood.

Soon GS(1), Laxer RM(2).

Author information:
(1)Rheumatologist in the Division of Rheumatology at The Hospital for Sick 
Children in Toronto, Ont, and a general pediatrician in the Department of 
Paediatrics at North York General Hospital and St Joseph's Health Centrein 
Toronto. gordon.soon@sickkids.ca.
(2)Professor in the Department of Paediatrics and the Department of Medicine at 
the University of Toronto and a staff rheumatologist in the Division of 
Rheumatology at The Hospital for Sick Children.

OBJECTIVE: To provide an approach to recurrent fever in childhood, explain when 
infections, malignancies, and immunodeficiencies can be excluded, and describe 
the features of periodic fever and other autoinflammatory syndromes.
SOURCES OF INFORMATION: PubMed was searched for relevant articles regarding the 
pathogenesis, clinical findings, diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of periodic 
fever and autoinflammatory syndromes.
MAIN MESSAGE: Fever is a common sign of illness in children and is most 
frequently due to infection. However, when acute and chronic infections have 
been excluded and when the fever pattern becomes recurrent or periodic, the 
expanding spectrum of autoinflammatory diseases, including periodic fever 
syndromes, should be considered. Familial Mediterranean fever is the most common 
inherited monogenic autoinflammatory syndrome, and early recognition and 
treatment can prevent its life-threatening complication, systemic amyloidosis. 
Periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, and adenitis syndrome is the 
most common periodic fever syndrome in childhood; however, its underlying 
genetic basis remains unknown.
CONCLUSION: Periodic fever syndromes and other autoinflammatory diseases are 
increasingly recognized in children and adults, especially as causes of 
recurrent fevers. Individually they are rare, but a thorough history and 
physical examination can lead to their early recognition, diagnosis, and 
appropriate treatment.

Copyright© the College of Family Physicians of Canada.

PMCID: PMC5638471
PMID: 29025800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]