---
reference_id: "PMID:38059543"
title: Seizures and electrophysiological features in familial cortical myoclonic tremor with epilepsy 1.
authors:
- Ding Y
- Cen Z
- Zheng Y
- Qiu X
- Ye Y
- Chen X
- Hu L
- Wang B
- Wang Z
- Yin H
- Shen C
- Ming W
- Ge Y
- Xie F
- Yang D
- Ouyang Z
- Wang H
- Wu S
- Ding M
- Wang S
- Luo W
journal: Ann Clin Transl Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/acn3.51961
keywords:
- Humans
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Tremor/genetics
- Epilepsy
- "Epilepsies, Myoclonic/genetics"
- Seizures
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Seizures and electrophysiological features in familial cortical myoclonic tremor with epilepsy 1.
**Authors:** Ding Y, Cen Z, Zheng Y, Qiu X, Ye Y, Chen X, Hu L, Wang B, Wang Z, Yin H, Shen C, Ming W, Ge Y, Xie F, Yang D, Ouyang Z, Wang H, Wu S, Ding M, Wang S, Luo W
**Journal:** Ann Clin Transl Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/acn3.51961](https://doi.org/10.1002/acn3.51961)

## Content

1. Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2024 Feb;11(2):414-423. doi: 10.1002/acn3.51961. Epub 
2023 Dec 7.

Seizures and electrophysiological features in familial cortical myoclonic tremor 
with epilepsy 1.

Ding Y(#)(1)(2), Cen Z(#)(1), Zheng Y(3), Qiu X(1), Ye Y(1)(4), Chen X(1), Hu 
L(1)(2), Wang B(1), Wang Z(2), Yin H(1), Shen C(1), Ming W(2), Ge Y(1), Xie 
F(5), Yang D(1), Ouyang Z(1), Wang H(1), Wu S(1), Ding M(1)(2), Wang S(1)(2), 
Luo W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Second Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(2)Epilepsy Center, Second Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang 
University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University First Affiliated 
Hospital, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Qingyuan County People's Hospital, Lishui, Zhejiang, 
China.
(5)Department of Neurology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVES: To investigate and characterize epileptic seizures and 
electrophysiological features of familial cortical myoclonic tremor with 
epilepsy (FCMTE) type 1 patients in a large Chinese cohort.
METHODS: We systematically evaluated 125 FCMTEtype 1 patients carrying the 
pentanucleotide (TTTCA) repeat expansion in the SAMD12 gene in China.
RESULTS: Among the 28 probands, epileptic seizures (96.4%, 27/28) were the most 
common reason for an initial clinic visit. Ninety-seven (77.6%, 97/125) patients 
had experienced seizures. The seizures onset age was 36.5 ± 9.0 years, which was 
6.9 years later than cortical tremors. The seizures were largely rare (<1/year, 
58.8%) and occasional (1-6/year, 37.1%). Prolonged prodromes were reported in 
57.7% (56/97). Thirty-one patients (24.8%, 31/125) reported photosensitivity 
history, and 79.5% (31/39) had a photoparoxysmal response. Interictal 
epileptiform discharges (IEDs) were recorded in 69.1% (56/81) of patients. 
Thirty-three patients showed generalized IEDs and 72.7% (24/33) were occipitally 
dominant, while 23 patients presented with focal IEDs with 65.2% (15/23) taking 
place over the occipital lobe. Overnight EEG of FCMTE patients displayed 
paradoxical sleep-wake fluctuation, with a higher average IED index of 
0.82 ± 0.88/min during wakefulness and a lower IED index of 0.04 ± 0.06/min 
during non-rapid eye movement sleep stages I-II.
INTERPRETATION: FCMTE type 1 has a benign course of epilepsy and distinct 
clinical and electrophysiological features. In addition to a positive family 
history and cortical myoclonus tremor, the seizure prodromes, specific seizure 
triggers, photosensitivity, distribution of IEDs, and unique fluctuations during 
sleep-wake cycle are cues for proper genetic testing and an early diagnosis of 
FCMTE.

© 2023 The Authors. Annals of Clinical and Translational Neurology published by 
Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/acn3.51961
PMCID: PMC10863925
PMID: 38059543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.