---
reference_id: "PMID:39095394"
title: Structural basis for VLDLR recognition by eastern equine encephalitis virus.
authors:
- Yang P
- Li W
- Fan X
- Pan J
- Mann CJ
- Varnum H
- Clark LE
- Clark SA
- Coscia A
- Basu H
- Smith KN
- Brusic V
- Abraham J
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-50887-9
keywords:
- "Receptors, LDL/metabolism, chemistry"
- Cryoelectron Microscopy
- "Encephalitis Virus, Eastern Equine/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- Humans
- Animals
- Semliki forest virus/metabolism
- Protein Binding
- "Receptors, Virus/metabolism, chemistry"
- "Viral Envelope Proteins/metabolism, chemistry, ultrastructure"
- "Models, Molecular"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Structural basis for VLDLR recognition by eastern equine encephalitis virus.
**Authors:** Yang P, Li W, Fan X, Pan J, Mann CJ, Varnum H, Clark LE, Clark SA, Coscia A, Basu H, Smith KN, Brusic V, Abraham J
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-024-50887-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-50887-9)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2024 Aug 2;15(1):6548. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-50887-9.

Structural basis for VLDLR recognition by eastern equine encephalitis virus.

Yang P(#)(1), Li W(#)(1), Fan X(1), Pan J(1)(2), Mann CJ(1), Varnum H(1), Clark 
LE(1), Clark SA(1), Coscia A(1), Basu H(3), Smith KN(1), Brusic V(1), Abraham 
J(4)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Blavatnik Institute, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Biomedical Research Institute and School of Life and Health Sciences, Hubei 
University of Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, China.
(3)Department of Immunology, Blavatnik Institute, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology, Blavatnik Institute, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, USA. jonathan_abraham@hms.harvard.edu.
(5)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Brigham & Women's 
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. jonathan_abraham@hms.harvard.edu.
(6)Center for Integrated Solutions in Infectious Diseases, Broad Institute of 
Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA. jonathan_abraham@hms.harvard.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Nov 14:2023.11.14.567065. doi: 10.1101/2023.11.14.567065.

Eastern equine encephalitis virus (EEEV) is the most virulent alphavirus that 
infects humans, and many survivors develop neurological sequelae, including 
paralysis and intellectual disability. Alphavirus spike proteins comprise 
trimers of heterodimers of glycoproteins E2 and E1 that mediate binding to 
cellular receptors and fusion of virus and host cell membranes during entry. We 
recently identified very-low density lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR) and 
apolipoprotein E receptor 2 (ApoER2) as cellular receptors for EEEV and a 
distantly related alphavirus, Semliki Forest virus (SFV). Here, we use 
single-particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) to determine structures of 
the EEEV and SFV spike glycoproteins bound to the VLDLR ligand-binding domain 
and found that EEEV and SFV interact with the same cellular receptor through 
divergent binding modes. Our studies suggest that the ability of LDLR-related 
proteins to interact with viral spike proteins through very small footprints 
with flexible binding modes results in a low evolutionary barrier to the 
acquisition of LDLR-related proteins as cellular receptors for diverse sets of 
viruses.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-50887-9
PMCID: PMC11297306
PMID: 39095394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.