---
reference_id: "PMID:10947946"
title: The spectrum of SLC17A5-gene mutations resulting in free sialic acid-storage diseases indicates some genotype-phenotype correlation.
authors:
- Aula N
- Salomäki P
- Timonen R
- Verheijen F
- Mancini G
- Månsson JE
- Aula P
- Peltonen L
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1086/303077
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- Alleles
- Amino Acid Substitution/genetics
- Base Sequence
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Exons/genetics
- Finland/epidemiology
- Founder Effect
- Gene Frequency/genetics
- Genetic Testing
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Introns/genetics
- "Lysosomal Storage Diseases/epidemiology, genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Membrane Transport Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- Mutation/genetics
- N-Acetylneuraminic Acid/metabolism
- Organic Anion Transporters
- Phenotype
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Protein Conformation
- "RNA, Messenger/analysis, genetics"
- Sweden/epidemiology
- Symporters
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The spectrum of SLC17A5-gene mutations resulting in free sialic acid-storage diseases indicates some genotype-phenotype correlation.
**Authors:** Aula N, Salomäki P, Timonen R, Verheijen F, Mancini G, Månsson JE, Aula P, Peltonen L
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1086/303077](https://doi.org/10.1086/303077)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2000 Oct;67(4):832-40. doi: 10.1086/303077. Epub 2000 Aug 17.

The spectrum of SLC17A5-gene mutations resulting in free sialic acid-storage 
diseases indicates some genotype-phenotype correlation.

Aula N(1), Salomäki P, Timonen R, Verheijen F, Mancini G, Månsson JE, Aula P, 
Peltonen L.

Author information:
(1)National Public Health Institute, Department of Human Molecular Genetics, 
Helsinki, Finland.

Lysosomal free sialic acid-storage diseases include the allelic disorders Salla 
disease (SD) and infantile sialic acid-storage disease (ISSD). The defective 
gene, SLC17A5, coding for the lysosomal free sialic acid transporter was 
recently isolated by positional cloning. In the present study, we have 
identified a large number of mutations in SLC17A5 in patients presenting with 
either Salla disease or the ISSD phenotype. We also report for the first time 
the exon-intron boundaries of SLC17A5. All Finnish patients with SD (n=80) had a 
missense mutation changing a highly conserved arginine to cysteine (R39C); 91% 
of them were homozygotes for this old founder mutation. The 
compound-heterozygote patients, with the founder mutation in only one allele, 
presented with a more severe phenotype than did the homozygote patients. The 
same R39C mutation was also found both in most of the Swedish patients with SD 
and in a heterozygous form in five patients from central Europe who presented 
with an unusually severe (intermediate) SD phenotype. Ten different mutations, 
including deletions, insertions, and missense and nonsense mutations, were 
identified in patients with the most severe ISSD phenotype, most of whom were 
compound heterozygotes. Our results indicate some genotype-phenotype correlation 
in free sialic acid-storage diseases, suggesting that the phenotype associated 
with the homozygote R39C mutation is milder than that associated with other 
mutations.

DOI: 10.1086/303077
PMCID: PMC1287888
PMID: 10947946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]