---
reference_id: "PMID:34780118"
title: "New insights into segmental vitiligo: A clinical and immunological comparison with nonsegmental vitiligo."
authors:
- Xu X
- Jiang M
- Zhang C
- Qiao Z
- Liu W
- Le Y
- Wu J
- Ma W
- Xiang LF
journal: Pigment Cell Melanoma Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/pcmr.13022
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New insights into segmental vitiligo: A clinical and immunological comparison with nonsegmental vitiligo.
**Authors:** Xu X, Jiang M, Zhang C, Qiao Z, Liu W, Le Y, Wu J, Ma W, Xiang LF
**Journal:** Pigment Cell Melanoma Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pcmr.13022](https://doi.org/10.1111/pcmr.13022)

## Content

1. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2022 Mar;35(2):220-228. doi: 10.1111/pcmr.13022.
Epub  2021 Nov 26.

New insights into segmental vitiligo: A clinical and immunological comparison 
with nonsegmental vitiligo.

Xu X(1), Jiang M(1), Zhang C(1), Qiao Z(1), Liu W(1), Le Y(1), Wu J(1), Ma W(1), 
Xiang LF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
China.

The overlaps between segmental vitiligo (SV) and nonsegmental vitiligo (NSV) 
suggest the underlying features of SV, which may be helpful for treating SV. In 
this study, 379 vitiligo patients were recruited and divided into SV (33.2%), 
mild-to-moderate NSV (M-NSV, affected body affected area [BSA] ≤10%, 34.0%), and 
severe NSV (S-NSV, affected BSA >10%, 32.7%) groups. Demographics and clinical 
data were collected through in-person interviews. The disease activity, 
progression, and prognosis were assessed through 6 months' follow-up. Serum 
cytokines profile and tissue-infiltrating immune cells were measured by ELISA 
assay and immunofluorescence, respectively. The SV exhibited lower rates of 
autoimmune comorbidities and recurrence than the S-NSV, but performed similar to 
the M-NSV. Moreover, the disease activity, progression, serum cytokines profile, 
and tissue-infiltrating Th/c1 cells in the active SV and M-NSV were comparable, 
but differed significantly from those of the active S-NSV. The clinical and 
immunological similarities between SV and M-NSV presented a deeper autoimmune 
understanding of SV. Additionally, a classification of active vitiligo according 
to disease extent may be more clinically meaningful than subtypes for guiding 
immunomodulatory treatment.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pcmr.13022
PMID: 34780118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]