---
reference_id: "PMID:37001946"
title: "Chronic Hepatitis B Virus: What an Internist Needs to Know: Serologic Diagnosis, Treatment Options, and Hepatitis B Virus Reactivation."
authors:
- Block PD
- Lim JK
journal: Med Clin North Am
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.mcna.2022.12.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic Hepatitis B Virus: What an Internist Needs to Know: Serologic Diagnosis, Treatment Options, and Hepatitis B Virus Reactivation.
**Authors:** Block PD, Lim JK
**Journal:** Med Clin North Am (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.mcna.2022.12.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcna.2022.12.002)

## Content

1. Med Clin North Am. 2023 May;107(3):435-447. doi: 10.1016/j.mcna.2022.12.002. 
Epub 2023 Feb 20.

Chronic Hepatitis B Virus: What an Internist Needs to Know: Serologic Diagnosis, 
Treatment Options, and Hepatitis B Virus Reactivation.

Block PD(1), Lim JK(2).

Author information:
(1)Section of Digestive Diseases, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.
(2)Section of Digestive Diseases and Yale Liver Center, Yale School of Medicine, 
333 Cedar Street, LMP 1080, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. Electronic address: 
joseph.lim@yale.edu.

Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a bloodborne infection which 
affects approximately 1.6 million persons in the U.S. and 292 million persons 
worldwide and is associated with significant morbidity and mortality due to 
cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. HBV disproportionately affects 
foreign-persons from endemic regions such as sub-Saharan Africa and the 
Asian-Pacific region. Chronic HBV is diagnosed with positive HBsAg and 
detectable HBV DNA. Patients with immunoactive disease (elevated HBV DNA and 
serum ALT) may require antiviral therapy with peg-interferon or oral 
nucleos(t)ide analogues which suppress viral replication, and are associated 
with a decreased risk for liver events.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mcna.2022.12.002
PMID: 37001946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]