---
reference_id: "PMID:487308"
title: "Electromyography and nerve conduction studies in Friedreich's ataxia and autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay (ARSACS)."
authors:
- Bouchard JP
- Barbeau A
- Bouchard R
- Bouchard RW
journal: Can J Neurol Sci
year: '1979'
doi: 10.1017/s0317167100119614
keywords:
- Action Potentials
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Ataxia/genetics, physiopathology"
- Child
- Electromyography
- Extremities
- Friedreich Ataxia/physiopathology
- Humans
- Median Nerve/physiopathology
- Muscle Contraction
- Muscle Spasticity
- Neural Conduction
- Peroneal Nerve/physiopathology
- Syndrome
- Ulnar Nerve/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Electromyography and nerve conduction studies in Friedreich's ataxia and autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay (ARSACS).
**Authors:** Bouchard JP, Barbeau A, Bouchard R, Bouchard RW
**Journal:** Can J Neurol Sci (1979)
**DOI:** [10.1017/s0317167100119614](https://doi.org/10.1017/s0317167100119614)

## Content

1. Can J Neurol Sci. 1979 May;6(2):185-9. doi: 10.1017/s0317167100119614.

Electromyography and nerve conduction studies in Friedreich's ataxia and
autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay (ARSACS).

Bouchard JP, Barbeau A, Bouchard R, Bouchard RW.

Twenty four ataxic patients were investigated with electromyography and nerve
conduction studies. They were divided in two groups according to the area they
came from, the evolution of the disease, and the clinical signs. Group I
patients from the Rimouski area displayed all the clinical and
electrophysiological signs of Friedreich's ataxia. Group II comprised patients
who presented with a new syndrome known as the autosomal recessive spastic
ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay (ARSACS). Although the clinical evolution was
better in the latter, there were more electromyographic signs of denervation and
the motor conduction velocities were slower. Both groups showed identical and
important abnormalities in sensory nerve conduction. The results of
electrophysiological studies in spastic ataxia have not been reported to our
knowledge. They underline the place of spastic ataxia as distinct from
Friedreich's ataxia, spastic paraplegia, and the known familial neuropathies.

DOI: 10.1017/s0317167100119614
PMID: 487308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
