---
reference_id: "PMID:31541769"
title: Clinical Characteristics of Cough Frequency Patterns in Patients with and without Asthma.
authors:
- Fukuhara A
- Saito J
- Birring SS
- Sato S
- Uematsu M
- Suzuki Y
- Rikimaru M
- Watanabe N
- Saito M
- Kawamata T
- Umeda T
- Togawa R
- Sato Y
- Koizumi T
- Hirai K
- Minemura H
- Nikaido T
- Kanazawa K
- Tanino Y
- Munakata M
- Shibata Y
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaip.2019.08.053
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Characteristics of Cough Frequency Patterns in Patients with and without Asthma.
**Authors:** Fukuhara A, Saito J, Birring SS, Sato S, Uematsu M, Suzuki Y, Rikimaru M, Watanabe N, Saito M, Kawamata T, Umeda T, Togawa R, Sato Y, Koizumi T, Hirai K, Minemura H, Nikaido T, Kanazawa K, Tanino Y, Munakata M, Shibata Y
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaip.2019.08.053](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaip.2019.08.053)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2020 Feb;8(2):654-661. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2019.08.053. Epub 2019 Sep 18.

Clinical Characteristics of Cough Frequency Patterns in Patients with and 
without Asthma.

Fukuhara A(1), Saito J(2), Birring SS(3), Sato S(1), Uematsu M(1), Suzuki Y(1), 
Rikimaru M(1), Watanabe N(1), Saito M(1), Kawamata T(1), Umeda T(1), Togawa 
R(1), Sato Y(1), Koizumi T(1), Hirai K(1), Minemura H(1), Nikaido T(1), Kanazawa 
K(1), Tanino Y(1), Munakata M(4), Shibata Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, School of Medicine, Fukushima Medical 
University, Fukushima, Japan.
(2)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, School of Medicine, Fukushima Medical 
University, Fukushima, Japan. Electronic address: junpei@fmu.ac.jp.
(3)Centre for Human & Applied Physiological Sciences, School of Basic & Medical 
Biosciences, Faculty of Life Sciences & Medicine, King's College London, London, 
United Kingdom.
(4)Aizu Medical Center, Fukushima Medical University, Aizu, Japan.

Comment in
    J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2020 Feb;8(2):662-663. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2019.10.033.

BACKGROUND: Cough is a frequent symptom of asthma. Cough frequency (CoFr) 
monitoring devices are now available to objectively measure cough counts and 
offer a novel endpoint to assess asthma. However, little is known about CoFr in 
asthma.
OBJECTIVE: The aims were, first, to determine whether unique features of CoFr 
exist in asthmatic and nonasthmatic patients and, secondly, to evaluate 
relationships between CoFr and pathophysiological parameters of asthma.
METHODS: In the current study, 73 asthmatic and 63 nonasthmatic patients 
suffering from persistent cough were enrolled. At study entry, the Leicester 
Cough Questionnaire (LCQ health status), cough visual analog scale (VAS), 
Leicester Cough Monitor (LCM), fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) 
measurements, and spirometry were performed. In asthmatic patients, the 
bronchial hyperresponsiveness (BHR) test was conducted if applicable. In 28 
asthmatic and 17 nonasthmatic patients, LCQ, VAS, and LCM were examined before 
and after treatment.
RESULTS: CoFr during nighttime (asleep) was significantly higher in asthmatic 
patients than in nonasthmatic patients. Twenty-four-hour CoFr significantly 
decreased after appropriate treatment and was correlated with changes in VAS and 
LCQ in all patients. The improvement in cough in asthmatic patients was greater 
during nighttime than during daytime (awake). CoFr in asthmatic patients was 
significantly correlated with BHR, but not with FeNO.
CONCLUSIONS: In asthmatic patients, nocturnal CoFr can be associated with BHR, 
was significantly higher before treatment, but improved more after treatment 
compared with nonasthmatic patients. Monitoring nocturnal CoFr may provide 
unique and valuable information on making an early prediction of therapeutic 
effects in asthma.

Copyright © 2019 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaip.2019.08.053
PMID: 31541769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]