---
reference_id: "PMID:39342163"
title: "Woodhouse-sakati syndrome with no reportable MRI findings: a case report."
authors:
- Irvine RE
- Ahmad A
journal: BMC Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12883-024-03865-z
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Alopecia/diagnostic imaging
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac"
- Basal Ganglia Diseases
- Deep Brain Stimulation/methods
- Diabetes Mellitus
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics
- Nuclear Proteins
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligase Complexes
- Hypogonadism
- Intellectual Disability
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Woodhouse-sakati syndrome with no reportable MRI findings: a case report.
**Authors:** Irvine RE, Ahmad A
**Journal:** BMC Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12883-024-03865-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12883-024-03865-z)

## Content

1. BMC Neurol. 2024 Sep 28;24(1):359. doi: 10.1186/s12883-024-03865-z.

Woodhouse-sakati syndrome with no reportable MRI findings: a case report.

Irvine RE(1), Ahmad A(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Imperial College London, Exhibition Road, South 
Kensington, London, UK. rebecca.irvine20@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)Wellington Hospital, HCA Healthcare, 27 Circus Road, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Woodhouse-Sakati Syndrome (WSS) is a rare autosomal recessive 
condition caused by biallelic pathogenic variants in the DCAF17 gene, with fewer 
than 200 cases reported in the literature. Symptoms first emerge in middle-late 
adolescence with a spectrum of hypogonadal and progressive neurological 
features.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present a case of WSS with no reportable T2-weighted, 
apparent diffusion coefficient mapping and susceptibility weighted MRI findings. 
This differs from cases reported in the current literature. Our patient 
developed abnormal movements in both legs, clumsiness of the hands, dysarthria, 
and swallowing difficulties. Moreover, she presented with alopecia manifesting 
as frontal and temporal balding, severe dystonia with painful dystonic spasms 
primarily in the left upper limb, as well as primary amenorrhea. She was not 
independently ambulatory on presentation, requiring wheelchair assistance. 
Genetic testing, the crucial test for a definitive diagnosis, was undertaken in 
Qatar and confirmed WSS. Treatment provided includes botulinum toxin injections 
and deep brain stimulation, providing better dystonia control, with progress in 
walking and strength exercises, and overall remarkable improvement. Intensive 
neurorehabilitation regimes were also deployed from admission, including 
physiotherapy, occupational therapy and speech and language therapy.
CONCLUSION: This case adds to the current literature on WSS manifestations, with 
all previously reported cases having positive MRI findings, unlike our case.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12883-024-03865-z
PMCID: PMC11438154
PMID: 39342163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.