---
reference_id: "PMID:31244780"
title: "Expanding the Clinical Spectrum of Osteogenesis Imperfecta Type V: 13 Additional Patients and Review."
authors:
- Cao YJ
- Wei Z
- Zhang H
- Zhang ZL
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2019'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2019.00375
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanding the Clinical Spectrum of Osteogenesis Imperfecta Type V: 13 Additional Patients and Review.
**Authors:** Cao YJ, Wei Z, Zhang H, Zhang ZL
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2019)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2019.00375](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2019.00375)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2019 Jun 12;10:375. doi:
10.3389/fendo.2019.00375.  eCollection 2019.

Expanding the Clinical Spectrum of Osteogenesis Imperfecta Type V: 13 Additional 
Patients and Review.

Cao YJ(1), Wei Z(1), Zhang H(1), Zhang ZL(1).

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Bone Disease and Genetic Research Unit, Department of Osteoporosis 
and Bone Diseases, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People's 
Hospital, Shanghai, China.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is an inherited connective tissue disorder 
characterized by bone fragility and is characterized by clinical and genetic 
heterogeneity. Previous studies showed that the same mutation (c.-14C> T) of the 
IFITM5 gene is responsible for autosomal dominant OI type V. However, the 
mutation has a variable expressivity. Clinical heterogeneity has been recognized 
in OI type V. In this study, we investigated 13 individuals with molecularly 
confirmed OI type V from seven Chinese families and explored the 
genotype-phenotype relationship. Increased callus formation is not observed in 
all individuals, and several novel clinical features were described: joint 
contractures (three individuals) and unexplained hip arthritis (six 
individuals). Significant clinical variability was observed even within 
families. Specific facial features were observed in six individuals from two 
families consistent with the facial features associated with OI type V reported 
so far in the literature. Interestingly, we report the process of hypertrophic 
callus formation in detail for the first time, and in five individuals with 
hyperplastic callus, increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and levels 
of C-reactive protein (C-RP) were measured, suggestive of inflammatory 
activation.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2019.00375
PMCID: PMC6581704
PMID: 31244780