---
reference_id: "PMID:29229087"
title: "Who's at risk of thunderstorm asthma? The ryegrass pollen trifecta and lessons learnt from the Melbourne thunderstorm epidemic."
authors:
- Lee J
- Kronborg C
- "O'Hehir RE"
- Hew M
journal: Respir Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2017.10.012
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Allergens/immunology
- "Asthma/epidemiology, immunology"
- Australia/epidemiology
- "Emergency Service, Hospital"
- "Environmental Exposure/statistics & numerical data"
- Epidemics
- Female
- Humans
- Lolium/immunology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Pollen/immunology
- "Rhinitis, Allergic, Seasonal/epidemiology, immunology"
- Risk Assessment
- Skin Tests
- Weather
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Who's at risk of thunderstorm asthma? The ryegrass pollen trifecta and lessons learnt from the Melbourne thunderstorm epidemic.
**Authors:** Lee J, Kronborg C, O'Hehir RE, Hew M
**Journal:** Respir Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.rmed.2017.10.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rmed.2017.10.012)

## Content

1. Respir Med. 2017 Nov;132:146-148. doi: 10.1016/j.rmed.2017.10.012. Epub 2017
Oct  18.

Who's at risk of thunderstorm asthma? The ryegrass pollen trifecta and lessons 
learnt from the Melbourne thunderstorm epidemic.

Lee J(1), Kronborg C(2), O'Hehir RE(3), Hew M(4).

Author information:
(1)Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology, The Alfred Hospital, Melbourne, 
Australia; School of Public Health & Preventive Medicine, Monash University, 
Melbourne, Australia. Electronic address: joy.lee@alfred.org.au.
(2)Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology, The Alfred Hospital, Melbourne, 
Australia.
(3)Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology, The Alfred Hospital, Melbourne, 
Australia; Allergy, Immunology & Respiratory Medicine, Central Clinical School, 
Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.
(4)Allergy, Asthma & Clinical Immunology, The Alfred Hospital, Melbourne, 
Australia; School of Public Health & Preventive Medicine, Monash University, 
Melbourne, Australia.

The Melbourne thunderstorm asthma epidemic in November 2016 was unprecedented in 
scale and impact. We systematically reviewed our hospital's patients with 
thunderstorm asthma to identify key risk factors. Of 85 adult patients assessed, 
the majority (60%) had no prior diagnosis of asthma. However, allergic rhinitis 
during the grass pollen season was almost universal (99%), as were ryegrass 
pollen sensitization (100%) and exposure to the outdoor environment during the 
thunderstorm (94%). Airborne pollen levels on the thunderstorm day were extreme. 
We conclude that ryegrass pollen sensitization, clinical allergic rhinitis, and 
acute allergen exposure constitute a risk-factor 'trifecta' for thunderstorm 
asthma.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rmed.2017.10.012
PMID: 29229087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]