---
reference_id: "PMID:39519078"
title: Diverse Roles of the LINC Complex in Cellular Function and Disease in the Nervous System.
authors:
- Kuwako KI
- Suzuki S
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms252111525
keywords:
- Humans
- Animals
- Cytoskeleton/metabolism
- Nuclear Envelope/metabolism
- "Nervous System Diseases/metabolism, genetics, pathology"
- Nervous System/metabolism
- Nuclear Matrix/metabolism
- Neurons/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diverse Roles of the LINC Complex in Cellular Function and Disease in the Nervous System.
**Authors:** Kuwako KI, Suzuki S
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms252111525](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms252111525)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Oct 26;25(21):11525. doi: 10.3390/ijms252111525.

Diverse Roles of the LINC Complex in Cellular Function and Disease in the 
Nervous System.

Kuwako KI(1), Suzuki S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neural and Muscular Physiology, School of Medicine, Shimane 
University, 89-1 Enya-cho, Izumo-shi 693-8501, Shimane, Japan.

The linker of nucleoskeleton and cytoskeleton (LINC) complex, which spans the 
nuclear envelope, physically connects nuclear components to the cytoskeleton and 
plays a pivotal role in various cellular processes, including nuclear 
positioning, cell migration, and chromosomal configuration. Studies have 
revealed that the LINC complex is essential for different aspects of the nervous 
system, particularly during development. The significance of the LINC complex in 
neural lineage cells is further corroborated by the fact that mutations in genes 
associated with the LINC complex have been implicated in several neurological 
diseases, including neurodegenerative and psychiatric disorders. In this review, 
we aimed to summarize the expanding knowledge of LINC complex-related neuronal 
functions and associated neurological diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms252111525
PMCID: PMC11545860
PMID: 39519078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.