---
reference_id: "PMID:38567177"
title: "Inborn Errors of Ketogenesis: Novel Variants, Clinical Presentation, and Follow-Up in a Series of Four Patients."
authors:
- Sait H
- Srivastava S
- Kumar S
- Varughese B
- Pandey M
- Venkatramaiah M
- Chaudhary P
- Moirangthem A
- Mandal K
- Kapoor S
journal: J Pediatr Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1055/s-0042-1749362
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inborn Errors of Ketogenesis: Novel Variants, Clinical Presentation, and Follow-Up in a Series of Four Patients.
**Authors:** Sait H, Srivastava S, Kumar S, Varughese B, Pandey M, Venkatramaiah M, Chaudhary P, Moirangthem A, Mandal K, Kapoor S
**Journal:** J Pediatr Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0042-1749362](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0042-1749362)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Genet. 2022 Jul 12;13(1):22-28. doi: 10.1055/s-0042-1749362.
eCollection 2024 Mar.

Inborn Errors of Ketogenesis: Novel Variants, Clinical Presentation, and
Follow-Up in a Series of Four Patients.

Sait H(1), Srivastava S(1), Kumar S(2), Varughese B(2), Pandey M(1),
Venkatramaiah M(3), Chaudhary P(1), Moirangthem A(1), Mandal K(1), Kapoor S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of
Medical Sciences, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(2)Division of Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, Lok Nayak
Hospital, and Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi, India.
(3)MedgenomeLabs Ltd., Bangalore, Karnataka, India.

Inborn errors of ketogenesis are rare disorders that result in acute and
fulminant decompensation during lipolytic stress, particularly in infants and
children. These include mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-CoA)
synthase (HMGCS) deficiency and HMG-CoA lyase (HMGCL) deficiency. In this
series, we describe the clinical, biochemical, and molecular profiles of four
patients along with dietary interventions and their outcomes on a long-term
follow-up. Two patients each of HMGCS and HMGCL deficiency were evaluated with
clinical history, biochemical investigations, including tandem mass spectrometry
(TMS) and urine gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GCMS). Molecular analysis
was performed by whole-exome sequencing, as well as exon array validated by
long-range polymerase chain reaction. All individuals were diagnosed with acute
metabolic decompensation in the early infancy period except one with HMGCL
deficiency who had the first presentation at 5 years of age. Central nervous
system manifestations, severe metabolic acidosis, hyperammonemia, hypoglycemia
with a normal lactate, and absence of urinary ketones were observed in all the
affected individuals. The disorder was life-threatening in three individuals and
one succumbed to the illness. TMS was nonspecific and urine GCMS revealed
dicarboxylic aciduria in HMGCS deficiency. Both the patients with HMGCL
deficiency demonstrated elevated 3 hydroxyisovaleryl carnitine levels in TMS and
metabolites of leucine degradation in urine GCMS. We identified five novel
variants that included a large deletion involving exon 2 in HMGCL gene. There
was no evidence of long-term neurological sequelae in the living individuals.
Diet with moderation of fat intake was followed in two individuals with HMGCS
deficiency. Low leucine and protein diet with moderation of fat intake was
followed in the individual with HMGCL deficiency. All affected individuals are
thriving well with no further major metabolic decompensation.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0042-1749362
PMCID: PMC10984707
PMID: 38567177

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest None declared.
