---
reference_id: "PMID:8782050"
title: "A Scottish family with Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome: follicular atrophoderma, congenital hypotrichosis, and basal cell carcinoma."
authors:
- Kidd A
- Carson L
- Gregory DW
- de Silva D
- Holmes J
- Dean JC
- Haites N
journal: J Med Genet
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.33.6.493
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- Female
- "Hair/abnormalities, ultrastructure"
- Humans
- "Hypotrichosis/complications, genetics, physiopathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasms, Basal Cell/complications"
- Pedigree
- Scotland
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Scottish family with Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome: follicular atrophoderma, congenital hypotrichosis, and basal cell carcinoma.
**Authors:** Kidd A, Carson L, Gregory DW, de Silva D, Holmes J, Dean JC, Haites N
**Journal:** J Med Genet (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.33.6.493](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.33.6.493)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 1996 Jun;33(6):493-7. doi: 10.1136/jmg.33.6.493.

A Scottish family with Bazex-Dupré-Christol syndrome: follicular atrophoderma,
congenital hypotrichosis, and basal cell carcinoma.

Kidd A(1), Carson L, Gregory DW, de Silva D, Holmes J, Dean JC, Haites N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Aberdeen Royal Hospitals, Foresterhill, UK.

Bazex-Dupre-Christol syndrome (BDCS) is an X linked dominant disorder of the
hair follicle characterised by follicular atrophoderma, multiple basal cell
carcinomas, hypotrichosis, milia, and localised hypohidrosis. Follicular
atrophoderma (FA) are follicular funnel shaped depressions, "ice pick marks",
seen most commonly on the dorsum of the hands. We describe the first known
Scottish family with this syndrome, five affected members spanning three
generations. They have hypohidrosis confined to the face, coarse hair, dry skin,
milia, and follicular atrophoderma. All the adults have a history of multiple
basal cell carcinomas. None of them has any skeletal feature suggestive of
Gorlin's syndrome. The clinical features, skin histology, and scanning electron
microscopic (SEM) examination of the hair are described and illustrated. The
features are compared with 15 previous reports of BDCS and four reports in which
this is a possible diagnosis are also reviewed. BDCS should be considered as a
differential diagnosis in patients with early onset or familial basal cell
carcinomas.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.33.6.493
PMCID: PMC1050636
PMID: 8782050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
