---
reference_id: "PMID:26142438"
title: Whole exome sequencing identifies LRP1 as a pathogenic gene in autosomal recessive keratosis pilaris atrophicans.
authors:
- Klar J
- Schuster J
- Khan TN
- Jameel M
- Mäbert K
- Forsberg L
- Baig SA
- Baig SM
- Dahl N
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102931
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Chromosome Disorders/genetics
- Consanguinity
- Darier Disease/genetics
- Exome
- Exons
- Eyebrows/abnormalities
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- Low Density Lipoprotein Receptor-Related Protein-1/genetics
- Pakistan
- Pedigree
- Point Mutation
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whole exome sequencing identifies LRP1 as a pathogenic gene in autosomal recessive keratosis pilaris atrophicans.
**Authors:** Klar J, Schuster J, Khan TN, Jameel M, Mäbert K, Forsberg L, Baig SA, Baig SM, Dahl N
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102931](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102931)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2015 Sep;52(9):599-606. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102931. Epub
2015 Jul 3.

Whole exome sequencing identifies LRP1 as a pathogenic gene in autosomal
recessive keratosis pilaris atrophicans.

Klar J(1), Schuster J(1), Khan TN(2), Jameel M(2), Mäbert K(1), Forsberg L(1),
Baig SA(3), Baig SM(2), Dahl N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Science for Life
Laboratory, Uppsala University, Biomedical Centre, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Health Biotechnology Division, National
Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering (NIBGE), Pakistan Institute
of Engineering and Applied Sciences (PIEAS), Faisalabad, Pakistan.
(3)Department of Pathology, Children's Hospital, Pakistan Institute of Medical
Sciences, (PIMS), Islamabad, Pakistan.

BACKGROUND: Keratosis pilaris atrophicans (KPA) is a group of rare
genodermatoses characterised by perifollicular keratosis and inflammation that
progresses to atrophy and scars of the facial skin. Keratosis pilaris of
extensor areas of limbs is a common associated finding. Most cases with KPA are
sporadic and no consistent inheritance pattern has been documented.
METHODS: A large consanguineous Pakistani pedigree segregating autosomal
recessive KPA of a mixed type was subject to autozygosity mapping and whole
exome sequencing. Quantification of mRNA and protein levels was performed on
fibroblasts from affected individuals. Cellular uptake of the low-density
lipoprotein (LDL) receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) ligand α2-macroglobulin
(α(2)M) was quantified using fluorescence confocal microscopy.
RESULTS: Genetic analyses identified a unique homozygous missense variant
(K1245R) in the LRP1 in all affected family members. LRP1 encodes the LRP1, a
multifunctional cell surface receptor with endocytic functions that belongs to
the LDL receptor family. The LRP1 mRNA and LRP1 protein levels in fibroblasts of
affected individuals were markedly reduced when compared with controls.
Similarly, the LRP1-mediated cellular uptake of α(2)M was reduced in patient
fibroblasts.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report on LRP1 as a pathogenic gene for autosomal
recessive KPA and keratosis pilaris. The inflammatory characteristics of the KPA
entity in our family suggest a link to the immune-regulatory functions of LRP1.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2014-102931
PMID: 26142438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
