---
reference_id: "PMID:37132144"
title: "Erythema Infectiosum: A Narrative Review."
authors:
- Leung AKC
- Lam JM
- Barankin B
- Leong KF
- Hon KL
journal: Curr Pediatr Rev
year: '2024'
doi: 10.2174/1573396320666230428104619
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Erythema Infectiosum: A Narrative Review.
**Authors:** Leung AKC, Lam JM, Barankin B, Leong KF, Hon KL
**Journal:** Curr Pediatr Rev (2024)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1573396320666230428104619](https://doi.org/10.2174/1573396320666230428104619)

## Content

1. Curr Pediatr Rev. 2024;20(4):462-471. doi: 10.2174/1573396320666230428104619.

Erythema Infectiosum: A Narrative Review.

Leung AKC(1), Lam JM(2), Barankin B(3), Leong KF(4), Hon KL(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Calgary, Alberta Children's 
Hospital, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Department of Pediatrics and Department of Dermatology and Skin Sciences, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Toronto Dermatology Centre, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(4)Pediatric Institute, Kuala Lumpur General Hospital, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, China.
(6)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Hong Kong Children's 
Hospital, Hong Kong, China.

BACKGROUND: Erythema infectiosum occurs worldwide. School-aged children are most 
often affected. Since the diagnosis is mainly clinical, physicians should be 
well-versed in the clinical manifestations of erythema infectiosum to avoid 
misdiagnosis, unnecessary investigations, and mismanagement of the disease.
OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this article is to familiarize physicians with the 
wide spectrum of clinical manifestations and complications of erythema 
infectiosum associated with parvovirus B19 infection.
METHODS: A search was conducted in July 2022 in PubMed Clinical Queries using 
the key terms "Erythema infectiosum" OR "Fifth disease" OR "Slapped cheek 
disease" OR "Parvovirus B19". The search strategy included all clinical trials, 
observational studies, and reviews published within the past 10 years. Only 
papers published in the English literature were included in this review. The 
information retrieved from the above search was used in the compilation of the 
present article.
RESULTS: Erythema infectiosum is a common exanthematous illness of childhood 
caused by parvovirus B19. Parvovirus B19 spreads mainly by respiratory tract 
secretions and, to a lesser extent, the saliva of infected individuals. Children 
between 4 and 10 years of age are most often affected. The incubation period is 
usually 4 to 14 days. Prodromal symptoms are usually mild and consist of 
lowgrade fever, headache, malaise, and myalgia. The rash typically evolves in 3 
stages. The initial stage is an erythematous rash on the cheeks, with a 
characteristic "slapped cheek" appearance. In the second stage, the rash spreads 
concurrently or quickly to the trunk, extremities, and buttocks as diffuse 
macular erythema. The rash tends to be more intense on extensor surfaces. The 
palms and soles are typically spared. Central clearing of the rash results in a 
characteristic lacy or reticulated appearance. The rash usually resolves 
spontaneously within three weeks without sequelae. The third stage is 
characterized by evanescence and recrudescence. In adults, the rash is less 
pronounced than that in children and is often atypical. Only approximately 20% 
of affected adults have an erythematous rash on the face. In adults, the rash is 
more frequently found on the legs, followed by the trunk, and arms. A 
reticulated or lacy erythema is noted in 80% of cases which helps to distinguish 
erythema infectiosum from other exanthems. Pruritus is noted in approximately 
50% of cases. The diagnosis is mainly clinical. The many manifestations of 
parvovirus B19 infection can pose a diagnostic challenge even to the best 
diagnostician. Complications include arthritis, arthralgia, and transient 
aplastic crisis. In most cases, treatment is symptomatic and supportive. When 
parvovirus B19 infection occurs in pregnant women, hydrops fetalis becomes a 
real concern.
CONCLUSION: Erythema infectiosum, the most common clinical manifestation of 
parvovirus B19 infection, is characterized by a "slapped cheek" appearance on 
the face and lacy exanthem on the trunk and extremities. Parvovirus B19 
infection is associated with a wide spectrum of clinical manifestations. 
Physicians should be aware of potential complications and conditions associated 
with parvovirus B19 infection, especially in individuals who are 
immunocompromised, chronically anemic, or pregnant.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1573396320666230428104619
PMID: 37132144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]