---
reference_id: "PMID:18268189"
title: Combined immunomodulatory therapy in autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy.
authors:
- Gibbons CH
- Vernino SA
- Freeman R
journal: Arch Neurol
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2007.60
keywords:
- Adult
- Autoantibodies/blood
- "Autoimmune Diseases of the Nervous System/drug therapy, physiopathology"
- "Autonomic Nervous System Diseases/drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Blood Pressure
- Female
- "Ganglia, Autonomic/drug effects, physiopathology"
- Heart Rate
- Humans
- "Immunosuppressive Agents/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Middle Aged
- "Mycophenolic Acid/administration & dosage, analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use"
- Plasmapheresis
- "Prednisone/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Prospective Studies
- Tilt-Table Test
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Combined immunomodulatory therapy in autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy.
**Authors:** Gibbons CH, Vernino SA, Freeman R
**Journal:** Arch Neurol (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1001/archneurol.2007.60](https://doi.org/10.1001/archneurol.2007.60)

## Content

1. Arch Neurol. 2008 Feb;65(2):213-7. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2007.60.

Combined immunomodulatory therapy in autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy.

Gibbons CH(1), Vernino SA, Freeman R.

Author information:
(1)Autonomic and Peripheral Nerve Laboratory, Department of Neurology, Beth 
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 1 Deaconess Road, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

BACKGROUND: Autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy is a disorder defined by 
antibodies to the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor of the autonomic ganglia. 
Patients present with symptoms of autonomic failure, including syncope, 
orthostatic hypotension, bowel and bladder hypomotility, pupillary dysfunction, 
and dry mouth and eyes. Symptomatic and immunomodulatory therapy has provided 
limited clinical benefit in small uncontrolled studies.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of combined immunosuppressive therapy and 
plasmapheresis in autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy.
DESIGN: Prospective case series.
SETTING: Academic medical center.
PATIENTS: Three patients with autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy who had a 
limited response to symptomatic therapy, such as midodrine, fludrocortisone, 
vasopressin, and erythropoietin. Additional treatment with plasmapheresis alone 
and intravenous immunoglobulin alone provided no additional clinical benefit. 
Patients underwent 6 months of treatment with prednisone and mycophenolate 
mofetil followed by 5 cycles of plasma exchange.
RESULTS: Immunosuppressive therapy (prednisone and mycophenolate mofetil) 
combined with plasmapheresis resulted in substantial improvements in bowel 
control, pupillary function, dry mouth, and dry eyes. Mean (SD) blood pressure 
during immunosuppressive therapy was 162/83 (16/12) mm Hg supine and 76/45 
(22/11) mm Hg standing (3 minutes). After 5 cycles of plasmapheresis, mean blood 
pressure was 132/82 (7/4) mm Hg supine and 127/81 (5/1) mm Hg standing (3 
minutes; P < .01). Mean antibody level was 7.92 nmol/L on combined 
immunosuppressive therapy alone and dropped to 0.5 nmol/L after plasmapheresis.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with autoimmune autonomic ganglionopathy, combining 
immunosuppressive medications prednisone and mycophenolate mofetil with 
plasmapheresis provides substantial and sustained clinical improvement that was 
not seen using either treatment alone. Multi-agent immunomodulatory therapies 
may be necessary to satisfactorily treat this immune-mediated disorder.

DOI: 10.1001/archneurol.2007.60
PMID: 18268189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]