---
reference_id: "PMID:12812796"
title: The endothelin receptor-B is required for the migration of neural crest-derived melanocyte and enteric neuron precursors.
authors:
- Lee HO
- Levorse JM
- Shin MK
journal: Dev Biol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/s0012-1606(03)00160-x
keywords:
- Animals
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Movement
- "Enteric Nervous System/growth & development"
- Lac Operon
- Melanocytes/physiology
- Mice
- Neural Crest/cytology
- Neurons/physiology
- "Receptor, Endothelin B"
- "Receptors, Endothelin/physiology"
- Stem Cells/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The endothelin receptor-B is required for the migration of neural crest-derived melanocyte and enteric neuron precursors.
**Authors:** Lee HO, Levorse JM, Shin MK
**Journal:** Dev Biol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0012-1606(03)00160-x](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0012-1606(03)00160-x)

## Content

1. Dev Biol. 2003 Jul 1;259(1):162-75. doi: 10.1016/s0012-1606(03)00160-x.

The endothelin receptor-B is required for the migration of neural crest-derived
melanocyte and enteric neuron precursors.

Lee HO(1), Levorse JM, Shin MK.

Author information:
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center,
Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.

Mutations in the genes encoding endothelin receptor-B (Ednrb) and its ligand
endothelin-3 (Edn3) affect the development of two neural crest-derived cell
types, melanocytes and enteric neurons. EDNRB signaling is exclusively required
between E10.5 and E12.5 during the migratory phase of melanoblast and enteric
neuroblast development. To determine the fate of Ednrb-expressing cells during
this critical period, we generated a strain of mice with the bacterial
beta-galactosidase (lacZ) gene inserted downstream of the endogenous Ednrb
promoter. The expression of the lacZ gene was detected in melanoblasts and
precursors of the enteric neuron system (ENS), as well as other neural crest
cells and nonneural crest-derived lineages. By comparing Ednrb(lacZ)/+ and
Ednrb(lacZ)/Ednrb(lacZ) embryos, we determined that the Ednrb pathway is not
required for the initial specification and dispersal of melanoblasts and ENS
precursors from the neural crest progenitors. Rather, the EDNRB-mediated
signaling is required for the terminal migration of melanoblasts and ENS
precursors, and this pathway is not required for the survival of the migratory
cells.

DOI: 10.1016/s0012-1606(03)00160-x
PMID: 12812796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
