---
reference_id: "PMID:39337637"
title: "Pathogenesis of Inflammation in Skin Disease: From Molecular Mechanisms to Pathology."
authors:
- Shirley SN
- Watson AE
- Yusuf N
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms251810152
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenesis of Inflammation in Skin Disease: From Molecular Mechanisms to Pathology.
**Authors:** Shirley SN, Watson AE, Yusuf N
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms251810152](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms251810152)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Sep 21;25(18):10152. doi: 10.3390/ijms251810152.

Pathogenesis of Inflammation in Skin Disease: From Molecular Mechanisms to 
Pathology.

Shirley SN(1), Watson AE(2), Yusuf N(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Heersink School of Medicine, University of Alabama-Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 
35233, USA.
(2)College of Medicine, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL 32306, USA.
(3)Department of Dermatology, University of Alabama-Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 
35294, USA.

Many skin diseases begin with inflammatory changes on a molecular level. To 
develop a more thorough understanding of skin pathology and to identify new 
targets for therapeutic advancements, molecular mechanisms of inflammation in 
the context of skin disease should be studied. Current research efforts to 
better understand skin disease have focused on examining the role of molecular 
processes at several stages of the inflammatory response such as the 
dysregulation of innate immunity sensors, disruption of both transcriptional and 
post-transcriptional regulation, and crosstalk between immune and neuronal 
processes (neuro-immune crosstalk). This review seeks to summarize recent 
developments in our understanding of inflammatory processes in skin disease and 
to highlight opportunities for therapeutic advancements. With a focus on 
publications within the past 5 years (2019-2024), the databases PubMed and 
EBSCOhost were used to search for peer-reviewed papers regarding inflammatory 
molecular mechanisms and skin disease. Several themes of research interest 
regarding inflammatory processes in skin disease were determined through 
extensive review and were included based on their relative representation in 
current research and their focus on therapeutic potential. Several skin diseases 
such as psoriasis, atopic dermatitis, hidradenitis suppurativa, and scleroderma 
were described in the paper to demonstrate the widespread influence of 
inflammation in skin disease.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms251810152
PMCID: PMC11431851
PMID: 39337637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.