---
reference_id: "PMID:28771489"
title: Additional value of screening for minor genes and copy number variants in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Mademont-Soler I
- Mates J
- Yotti R
- Espinosa MA
- Pérez-Serra A
- Fernandez-Avila AI
- Coll M
- Méndez I
- Iglesias A
- Del Olmo B
- Riuró H
- Cuenca S
- Allegue C
- Campuzano O
- Picó F
- Ferrer-Costa C
- Álvarez P
- Castillo S
- Garcia-Pavia P
- Gonzalez-Lopez E
- Padron-Barthe L
- Díaz de Bustamante A
- Darnaude MT
- González-Hevia JI
- Brugada J
- Fernandez-Aviles F
- Brugada R
journal: PLoS One
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0181465
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Additional value of screening for minor genes and copy number variants in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Mademont-Soler I, Mates J, Yotti R, Espinosa MA, Pérez-Serra A, Fernandez-Avila AI, Coll M, Méndez I, Iglesias A, Del Olmo B, Riuró H, Cuenca S, Allegue C, Campuzano O, Picó F, Ferrer-Costa C, Álvarez P, Castillo S, Garcia-Pavia P, Gonzalez-Lopez E, Padron-Barthe L, Díaz de Bustamante A, Darnaude MT, González-Hevia JI, Brugada J, Fernandez-Aviles F, Brugada R
**Journal:** PLoS One (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0181465](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0181465)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2017 Aug 3;12(8):e0181465. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0181465. 
eCollection 2017.

Additional value of screening for minor genes and copy number variants in 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Mademont-Soler I(1)(2), Mates J(1), Yotti R(2)(3), Espinosa MA(2)(3), 
Pérez-Serra A(1)(2), Fernandez-Avila AI(2)(3), Coll M(1)(2), Méndez I(2)(3), 
Iglesias A(1)(2), Del Olmo B(1), Riuró H(1), Cuenca S(2)(3), Allegue C(1), 
Campuzano O(1)(2)(4), Picó F(1), Ferrer-Costa C(5), Álvarez P(5), Castillo S(5), 
Garcia-Pavia P(2)(6), Gonzalez-Lopez E(2)(6), Padron-Barthe L(2)(6), Díaz de 
Bustamante A(7), Darnaude MT(7), González-Hevia JI(8), Brugada J(2)(9), 
Fernandez-Aviles F(2)(3), Brugada R(1)(2)(4)(10).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Genetics Center, University of Girona-IDIBGI, Girona, Spain.
(2)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Cardiovasculares 
(CIBERCV), Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, 
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Gregorio Marañón. Universidad Complutense, 
Madrid, Spain.
(4)Department of Medical Sciences, School of Medicine, University of Girona, 
Girona, Spain.
(5)Gendiag.exe SL, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Inherited Cardiac Diseases Unit. Department of Cardiology. Hospital 
Universitario Puerta de Hierro, Francisco de Vitoria University, Madrid, Spain.
(7)Genetics Unit, Hospital Universitario de Móstoles, Madrid, Spain.
(8)Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, Spain.
(9)Arrhythmia Unit, Hospital Clinic de Barcelona, University of Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(10)Cardiovascular Genetics Unit, Hospital Universitari Dr. Josep Trueta, 
Girona, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most prevalent inherited 
heart disease. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is the preferred genetic test, 
but the diagnostic value of screening for minor and candidate genes, and the 
role of copy number variants (CNVs) deserves further evaluation.
METHODS: Three hundred and eighty-seven consecutive unrelated patients with HCM 
were screened for genetic variants in the 5 most frequent genes (MYBPC3, MYH7, 
TNNT2, TNNI3 and TPM1) using Sanger sequencing (N = 84) or NGS (N = 303). In the 
NGS cohort we analyzed 20 additional minor or candidate genes, and applied a 
proprietary bioinformatics algorithm for detecting CNVs. Additionally, the rate 
and classification of TTN variants in HCM were compared with 427 patients 
without structural heart disease.
RESULTS: The percentage of patients with pathogenic/likely pathogenic (P/LP) 
variants in the main genes was 33.3%, without significant differences between 
the Sanger sequencing and NGS cohorts. The screening for 20 additional genes 
revealed LP variants in ACTC1, MYL2, MYL3, TNNC1, GLA and PRKAG2 in 12 patients. 
This approach resulted in more inconclusive tests (36.0% vs. 9.6%, p<0.001), 
mostly due to variants of unknown significance (VUS) in TTN. The detection rate 
of rare variants in TTN was not significantly different to that found in the 
group of patients without structural heart disease. In the NGS cohort, 4 
patients (1.3%) had pathogenic CNVs: 2 deletions in MYBPC3 and 2 deletions 
involving the complete coding region of PLN.
CONCLUSIONS: A small percentage of HCM cases without point mutations in the 5 
main genes are explained by P/LP variants in minor or candidate genes and CNVs. 
Screening for variants in TTN in HCM patients drastically increases the number 
of inconclusive tests, and shows a rate of VUS that is similar to patients 
without structural heart disease, suggesting that this gene should not be 
analyzed for clinical purposes in HCM.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0181465
PMCID: PMC5542623
PMID: 28771489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: I have read the journal's 
policy and the authors of this manuscript have the following competing 
interests: Dr. Ramon Brugada is consultant of Ferrer-inCode; and Dr. 
Ferrer-Costa, Dr. Patricia Álvarez and Dr. Sergio Castillo are employed by 
Gendiag.exe SL. This commercial affiliation does not alter our adherence to PLOS 
ONE policies on sharing data and materials. The other authors declare no 
conflicts of interest to disclose.