---
reference_id: "PMID:24677724"
title: "Chondrocyte hypertrophy in skeletal development, growth, and disease."
authors:
- Sun MM
- Beier F
journal: Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/bdrc.21062
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chondrocyte hypertrophy in skeletal development, growth, and disease.
**Authors:** Sun MM, Beier F
**Journal:** Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/bdrc.21062](https://doi.org/10.1002/bdrc.21062)

## Content

1. Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today. 2014 Mar;102(1):74-82. doi: 
10.1002/bdrc.21062.

Chondrocyte hypertrophy in skeletal development, growth, and disease.

Sun MM(1), Beier F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Western University, and Children's 
Health Research Institute, London, Ontario, Canada.

Most of our bones form through the process of endochondral ossification, which 
is tightly regulated by the activity of the cartilage growth plate. Chondrocyte 
maturation through the various stages of growth plate physiology ultimately 
results in hypertrophy. Chondrocyte hypertrophy is an essential contributor to 
longitudinal bone growth, but recent data suggest that these cells also play 
fundamental roles in signaling to other skeletal cells, thus coordinating 
endochondral ossification. On the other hand, ectopic hypertrophy of articular 
chondrocytes has been implicated in the pathogenesis of osteoarthritis. Thus, a 
better understanding of the processes that control chondrocyte hypertrophy in 
the growth plate as well as in articular cartilage is required for improved 
management of both skeletal growth disorders and osteoarthritis. This review 
summarizes recent findings on the regulation of hypertrophic chondrocyte 
differentiation, the cellular mechanisms involved in hypertrophy, and the role 
of chondrocyte hypertrophy in skeletal physiology and pathophysiology.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bdrc.21062
PMID: 24677724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]