---
reference_id: "PMID:38804311"
title: "Myelin Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein-Antibody Associated Disease: An Updated Review of the Clinical Spectrum, Pathogenetic Mechanisms and Therapeutic Management."
authors:
- Gklinos P
- Dobson R
journal: Antibodies (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/antib13020043
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myelin Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein-Antibody Associated Disease: An Updated Review of the Clinical Spectrum, Pathogenetic Mechanisms and Therapeutic Management.
**Authors:** Gklinos P, Dobson R
**Journal:** Antibodies (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/antib13020043](https://doi.org/10.3390/antib13020043)

## Content

1. Antibodies (Basel). 2024 May 17;13(2):43. doi: 10.3390/antib13020043.

Myelin Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein-Antibody Associated Disease: An Updated
Review of the Clinical Spectrum, Pathogenetic Mechanisms and Therapeutic
Management.

Gklinos P(1), Dobson R(2).

Author information:
(1)First Neurology Department, Eginition University Hospital, Medical School,
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, 11528 Athens, Greece.
(2)Centre for Preventive Neurology, Wolfson Institute of Population Health,
Queen Mary University of London, London EC1M 6BQ, UK.

Clinical syndromes associated with antibodies against myelin oligodendrocyte
glycoprotein (MOG) are now recognized as a distinct neurological disease entity,
and are gaining increasing attention. The pathogenic mechanisms underlying
MOG-antibody disease (MOGAD) remain incompletely understood. Case series,
facilitated by registries, and observational studies over the past few years
have shed increasing light on the clinical aspects and therapeutic approaches of
MOGAD. MOGAD may manifest with a variety of clinical syndromes, including acute
disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM), autoimmune encephalitis, optic neuritis
(ON) and transverse myelitis (TM). MOGAD can be either monophasic or relapsing.
This review aims to provide a comprehensive updated description of the clinical
spectrum, paraclinical features, and prognosis of MOG-antibody disease, as well
as summarize its therapeutic considerations. Randomized clinical trials,
standardized diagnostic criteria and treatment guidelines are the steps forward.

DOI: 10.3390/antib13020043
PMCID: PMC11130828
PMID: 38804311

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
