---
reference_id: "PMID:29253269"
title: Correlation of T follicular helper cells and plasmablasts with the development of organ involvement in patients with IgG4-related disease.
authors:
- Kubo S
- Nakayamada S
- Zhao J
- Yoshikawa M
- Miyazaki Y
- Nawata A
- Hirata S
- Nakano K
- Saito K
- Tanaka Y
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/kex455
keywords:
- Aged
- "Autoimmune Diseases/blood, immunology"
- B-Lymphocytes/immunology
- Case-Control Studies
- Female
- Flow Cytometry
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin Class Switching
- Immunoglobulin G/blood
- Immunophenotyping
- Lymphocyte Count
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Paraproteinemias/blood, immunology"
- Plasma Cells/immunology
- T-Lymphocyte Subsets/immunology
- "T-Lymphocytes, Helper-Inducer/immunology"
- "T-Lymphocytes, Regulatory/immunology"
- Th1 Cells/immunology
- Th17 Cells/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Correlation of T follicular helper cells and plasmablasts with the development of organ involvement in patients with IgG4-related disease.
**Authors:** Kubo S, Nakayamada S, Zhao J, Yoshikawa M, Miyazaki Y, Nawata A, Hirata S, Nakano K, Saito K, Tanaka Y
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/kex455](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/kex455)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2018 Mar 1;57(3):514-524. doi:
10.1093/rheumatology/kex455.

Correlation of T follicular helper cells and plasmablasts with the development
of organ involvement in patients with IgG4-related disease.

Kubo S(1), Nakayamada S(1), Zhao J(1), Yoshikawa M(1), Miyazaki Y(1), Nawata
A(2), Hirata S(3), Nakano K(1), Saito K(1), Tanaka Y(1).

Author information:
(1)The First Department of Internal Medicine, Hiroshima University Hospital,
Hiroshima, Japan.
(2)The Department of Pathology, University of Occupational and Environmental
Health, Hiroshima, Japan.
(3)The Department of Clinical Immunology and Rheumatology, Hiroshima University
Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the role of an abnormal immune network in the pathology of
IgG4-related disease (IgG4-RD).
METHODS: Sixteen patients diagnosed with IgG4-RD at our institution were
selected. Peripheral immunocompetent cells were immunophenotyped by multicolour
flow cytometry to assess the association between clinical manifestation and
pathological findings.
RESULTS: Compared with healthy controls, IgG4-RD patients showed comparable
proportions of Th1 and Th17 cells, but higher proportions of Treg and follicular
helper T (Tfh) cells. Further, the proportions of class-switched memory B cells
and plasmablasts were higher in patients. Among all phenotypes, in particular,
the plasmablast proportion increased from 4.2% (controls) to 16.5% (patients).
The serum IgG levels were found to be correlated with the proportions of
plasmablasts and Tfh cells, but not with those of other T cell subsets. In
patients with extraglandular symptoms, only plasmablasts, Tfh cells and memory
Treg cells were increased. Histopathological examination revealed a marked Tfh
(CD4+ Bcl6+) cell infiltration; the increase of Tfh cells in the peripheral
blood thus reflected the degree of Tfh cell infiltration into the tissue.
Although steroid therapy reduced plasmablast and Tfh cell proportions, the
memory Treg cell proportion remained unchanged.
CONCLUSION: The association found between Tfh cells and plasmablasts, linked
with biological plausibility, suggests that Tfh cells contribute to the
pathogenesis of IgG4-RD. Our results also suggested that controlling the Tfh
cell-plasmablast axis could be a novel therapeutic strategy for treating
IgG4-RD.

© The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
British Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please
email: journals.permissions@oup.com

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/kex455
PMID: 29253269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
