---
reference_id: "PMID:10329918"
title: "The flow cytometric pattern of CD34, CD15 and CD13 expression in acute myeloblastic leukemia is highly characteristic of the presence of PML-RARalpha gene rearrangements."
authors:
- Orfao A
- Chillón MC
- Bortoluci AM
- López-Berges MC
- García-Sanz R
- Gonzalez M
- Tabernero MD
- García-Marcos MA
- Rasillo AI
- Hernández-Rivas J
- San Miguel JF
journal: Haematologica
year: '1999'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Antigens, CD/blood"
- "Antigens, CD34/blood"
- CD13 Antigens/blood
- Child
- Female
- Flow Cytometry
- Gene Rearrangement
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute/genetics, immunology, physiopathology"
- Lewis X Antigen/blood
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Proteins/genetics
- "Receptors, Retinoic Acid/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The flow cytometric pattern of CD34, CD15 and CD13 expression in acute myeloblastic leukemia is highly characteristic of the presence of PML-RARalpha gene rearrangements.
**Authors:** Orfao A, Chillón MC, Bortoluci AM, López-Berges MC, García-Sanz R, Gonzalez M, Tabernero MD, García-Marcos MA, Rasillo AI, Hernández-Rivas J, San Miguel JF
**Journal:** Haematologica (1999)

## Content

1. Haematologica. 1999 May;84(5):405-12.

The flow cytometric pattern of CD34, CD15 and CD13 expression in acute
myeloblastic leukemia is highly characteristic of the presence of PML-RARalpha
gene rearrangements.

Orfao A(1), Chillón MC, Bortoluci AM, López-Berges MC, García-Sanz R, Gonzalez
M, Tabernero MD, García-Marcos MA, Rasillo AI, Hernández-Rivas J, San Miguel JF.

Author information:
(1)Servicio General de Citometría, Hospital Universitario Salamanca, Paseo de
San Vicente, 58-182, 37007 Salamanca, Spain. orfao@gugu.usal.es

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Rapid identification of AML patients carrying the
t(15;17) translocation for treatment decision-making is currently made on the
basis of morphologic screening. However, the existence of both false positives
and negatives highlights the need for more objective methods of screening AML
cases and further molecular confirmation of the t(15;17) translocation.
DESIGN AND METHODS: In the present study we analyzed a total of 111 AML cases in
order to investigate whether immunophenotyping based on the assessment of
multiple-stainings analyzed at flow cytometry could improve the sensitivity and
specificity of morphologic identification of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL)
carrying the t(15;17) translocation. FISH analysis was used as a complementary
technique for cases in which morphology and molecular biology yielded discrepant
results.
RESULTS: Concordant results between morphology and RT-PCR were found in 102/111
(91.8%) cases: 34 patients had M3/PML-RARalpha+ and 68 non-M3/PML-RARalpha-
disease. Nine cases showed discrepants results. Multivariate analysis showed
that the best combination of immunologic markers for discriminating between
M3/PML-RARalpha+ and non-M3/PML-RARalpha- cases was that of the presence of
heterogeneous expression of CD13, the existence of a single major blast cell
population, and a characteristic CD34/CD15 phenotypic pattern (p<0.02). A score
system based on these parameters was designed, and the 34 M3/PML-RARalpha+ cases
showed a score of 3 (presence of the 3 phenotypic characteristics). In contrast,
only 1 out of the 68 (1.3%) non-M3/PML-RARalpha- cases had this score, most o
these latter cases (53/68, 78%) scoring either 0 or 1. Therefore, among these
cases, immunophenotyping showed a sensitivity of 100% and a specificity of 99%
for predicting PML/RARalpha gene rearrangements. Of the 9 cases in which
morphology and molecular biology results were discrepant, four cases displayed
M3 morphology without PML/RARalpha rearrangements by RT-PCR. In only one of
these 4 cases did the immunophenotype score 3, this being the only FISH positive
case. From the remaining five discrepant cases (non-M3 morphology while positive
for PML/RARalpha) two cases had a phenotypic score of 3 and were FISH positive
while the other three were negative by FISH. Upon repeating RT-PCR studies, two
of these latter three cases became negative.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that immunophenotyping may be
of great value for quick screening of APL with PML/RARalpha rearrangements.

PMID: 10329918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
