---
reference_id: "PMID:16934683"
title: Dramatic extension of tumor latency and correction of neurobehavioral phenotype in Atm-mutant mice with a nitroxide antioxidant.
authors:
- Gueven N
- Luff J
- Peng C
- Hosokawa K
- Bottle SE
- Lavin MF
journal: Free Radic Biol Med
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2006.06.018
keywords:
- Animals
- Antioxidants/therapeutic use
- Apoptosis
- Ataxia Telangiectasia/genetics
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins
- "Behavior, Animal/drug effects"
- Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/deficiency, genetics"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Genotype
- Humans
- Indoles/therapeutic use
- "Lymphoma/genetics, prevention & control"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- Motor Activity/drug effects
- Mutation
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Precursor Cell Lymphoblastic Leukemia-Lymphoma
- "Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/deficiency, genetics"
- "Tumor Suppressor Proteins/deficiency, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dramatic extension of tumor latency and correction of neurobehavioral phenotype in Atm-mutant mice with a nitroxide antioxidant.
**Authors:** Gueven N, Luff J, Peng C, Hosokawa K, Bottle SE, Lavin MF
**Journal:** Free Radic Biol Med (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2006.06.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2006.06.018)

## Content

1. Free Radic Biol Med. 2006 Sep 15;41(6):992-1000. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2006.06.018. Epub 2006 Jul 4.

Dramatic extension of tumor latency and correction of neurobehavioral phenotype
in Atm-mutant mice with a nitroxide antioxidant.

Gueven N(1), Luff J, Peng C, Hosokawa K, Bottle SE, Lavin MF.

Author information:
(1)Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane, Qld, Australia.

Mutations in the ATM gene (mutated in ataxia telangiectasia) in both humans and
mice predispose to lymphoid tumors. A defect in this gene also causes
neurodegeneration in humans and a less severe neurological phenotype in mice.
There is some evidence that oxidative stress contributes to these defects,
suggesting that antioxidants could alleviate the phenotype. We demonstrate here
that the antioxidant 5-carboxy-1,1,3,3-tetramethylisoindolin-2-yloxyl (CTMIO)
dramatically delays the onset of thymic lymphomas in Atm(-/-) mice which is not
due to an enhancement of apoptosis by CTMIO. We also show that this compound
corrects neurobehavioral deficits in these mice and reduces oxidative damage to
Purkinje cells. The likely mechanism of action of CTMIO is due to a reduction in
oxidative stress, which is protective against both the tumor progression and the
development of neurological abnormalities. These data suggest that antioxidant
therapy has considerable potential in the management of ataxia telangiectasia
and possibly other neurodegenerative disorders where oxidative stress is
implicated.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2006.06.018
PMID: 16934683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
