---
reference_id: "PMID:40832714"
title: "Early Thrombolysis and Outcomes in Central Retinal Artery Occlusion: An Individual Participant Data Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Xie JS
- Zaslavsky K
- Chaban YV
- Lusterio A
- Kaur H
- Motekalem Y
- Zeraatkar D
- Popovic MM
- Althaus K
- Malbin B
- Nolte CH
- Scheitz JF
- Pettersen JA
- Leker RR
- Kim J
- Woo SJ
- Chen C
- Feltgen N
- Khrlobyan M
- Sangha N
- Jurado EA
- Arnold M
- Mattle H
- Heldner MR
- Nedelmann MG
- Cordonnier C
- Spitzer MS
- Poli S
- Hametner C
- Baumgartner P
- Wegener S
- Kook L
- Shahjouei S
- Dumitrascu OM
- Margolin EM
- Assessment Group for Interventional Lysis in Eye (AGILE)
journal: Stroke
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.124.049955
keywords:
- Humans
- "Retinal Artery Occlusion/drug therapy, therapy"
- Thrombolytic Therapy/methods
- Treatment Outcome
- Male
- "Fibrinolytic Agents/therapeutic use, administration & dosage"
- Female
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- Visual Acuity
- Time-to-Treatment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early Thrombolysis and Outcomes in Central Retinal Artery Occlusion: An Individual Participant Data Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Xie JS, Zaslavsky K, Chaban YV, Lusterio A, Kaur H, Motekalem Y, Zeraatkar D, Popovic MM, Althaus K, Malbin B, Nolte CH, Scheitz JF, Pettersen JA, Leker RR, Kim J, Woo SJ, Chen C, Feltgen N, Khrlobyan M, Sangha N, Jurado EA, Arnold M, Mattle H, Heldner MR, Nedelmann MG, Cordonnier C, Spitzer MS, Poli S, Hametner C, Baumgartner P, Wegener S, Kook L, Shahjouei S, Dumitrascu OM, Margolin EM, Assessment Group for Interventional Lysis in Eye (AGILE)
**Journal:** Stroke (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1161/STROKEAHA.124.049955](https://doi.org/10.1161/STROKEAHA.124.049955)

## Content

1. Stroke. 2025 Nov;56(11):3175-3186. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.124.049955. Epub
2025  Aug 20.

Early Thrombolysis and Outcomes in Central Retinal Artery Occlusion: An 
Individual Participant Data Meta-Analysis.

Xie JS(#)(1), Zaslavsky K(#)(2), Chaban YV(1), Lusterio A(1), Kaur H(1), 
Motekalem Y(1), Zeraatkar D(3), Popovic MM(1), Althaus K(4), Malbin B(5), Nolte 
CH(6), Scheitz JF(6), Pettersen JA(7)(8), Leker RR(9), Kim J(10), Woo SJ(11), 
Chen C(12), Feltgen N(13), Khrlobyan M(14), Sangha N(14), Jurado EA(15), Arnold 
M(16), Mattle H(16), Heldner MR(16), Nedelmann MG(17), Cordonnier C(18), Spitzer 
MS(19), Poli S(20), Hametner C(21), Baumgartner P(22), Wegener S(22), Kook 
L(23), Shahjouei S(24), Dumitrascu OM(25), Margolin EM(1); Assessment Group for 
Interventional Lysis in Eye (AGILE).

Collaborators: Michel P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Toronto, ON, Canada (J.S.X., Y.V.C., A.L., H.K., Y.M., M.M.P., 
E.M.M.).
(2)Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences (K.Z.), University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON, Canada 
(D.Z.).
(4)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Ulm, Germany (K.A.).
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, Kresge Eye Institute, Detroit, MI (B.M.).
(6)Department of Neurology with Experimental Neurology and Center for Stroke 
Research Berlin, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany (C.H.N., J.F.S.).
(7)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine (J.A.P.), University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(8)Division of Medical Sciences, University of Northern British Columbia, Prince 
George, Canada (J.A.P.).
(9)Department of Neurology, Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, 
Jerusalem, Israel (R.R.L.).
(10)Department of Ophthalmology, CHA Bundang Medical Center, CHA University 
School of Medicine, South Korea (J.K.).
(11)Department of Ophthalmology, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seongnam, South Korea (S.J.W.).
(12)Department of Ophthalmology, Flinders Medical Center and Flinders 
University, Adelaide, SA, Australia (C. Chen).
(13)Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital of Basel, Switzerland 
(N.F.).
(14)Department of Neurology, Southern California Permanente Medical Group, Los 
Angeles Medical Center (M.K., N.S.).
(15)Department of Neurology & Stroke Center, University Teaching & Research 
Hospital, Kantonsspital St. Gallen, Switzerland (E.A.J.).
(16)Department of Neurology, Inselspital, University Hospital and University of 
Bern, Switzerland (M.A., H.M., M.R.H.).
(17)Department of Neurology, Sana Regio Klinikum Pinneberg, Germany (M.G.N.).
(18)University Lille, Inserm, CHU Lille, U1172, Lille Neuroscience and 
Cognition, France (C. Cordonnier).
(19)Department of Ophthalmology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, 
Germany (M.S.S.).
(20)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Tübingen and Hertie Institute 
for Clinical Brain Research, University of Tübingen, Germany (S.P.).
(21)Department of Neurology, Julius-Maximilian University of Würzburg, Germany 
(C.H.).
(22)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Zurich and University of 
Zurich, Switzerland (P.B., S.W.).
(23)Institute for Statistics and Mathematics, Vienna University of Economics and 
Business, Austria (L.K.).
(24)Department of Neurology, Penn State Health Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, 
Hershey, PA (S.S.).
(25)Departments of Neurology and Ophthalmology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine 
and Science, Scottsdale, AZ (O.M.D.).
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: This individual participant data meta-analysis aimed to determine 
whether time to treatment influences the effect of intraarterial thrombolysis 
(IAT), intravenous thrombolysis, and conservative standard therapy on visual 
outcomes in nonarteritic central retinal artery occlusion.
METHODS: We searched MEDLINE, CENTRAL, and Embase up to June 2023 for studies 
reporting treatment modality and peri-treatment best-corrected visual acuity 
(BCVA) for ≥5 participants, excluding patients with nonsevere vision loss (BCVA 
<1.0 logarithm of the minimum angle of resolution [logMAR]) or treated after 24 
hours of symptom onset. The primary outcome was recovery from severe vision loss 
(final BCVA <1.0 logMAR). We used mixed-effect models and local polynomial 
regression to investigate nonlinear relationships between time to treatment and 
recovery from severe vision loss.
RESULTS: Of 4074 screened studies, individual participant data were sought from 
52, with 35 contributing individual participant data for 1038 participants. In 
total, 783 patients met inclusion criteria (age, 64.8±13.3 years; 35.5% female; 
baseline BCVA, 2.3±0.5 logMAR). For every hour decrease in time to treatment, 
thrombolysis was associated with greater improvement in BCVA (intraarterial, 
0.02 logMAR [95% CI, 0-0.04]; intravenous, 0.04 logMAR [95% CI, 0.00-0.07]) than 
conservative standard therapy (0.01 logMAR [95% CI, 0-0.02]). A nonlinear 
relationship was detected for intraarterial thrombolysis with a changepoint at 8 
hours (95% CI, 6.7-9.4). Thrombolysis was associated with increased recovery 
from severe vision loss compared with conservative standard therapy 
(intraarterial within 6 hours: odds ratio, 2.72 [95% CI, 1.02-7.28], 27.2% 
versus 12.0%; intravenous within 4.5 hours: odds ratio, 3.32 [95% CI, 
1.24-8.92], 28.8% versus 11.1%). Findings were consistent in subgroup analysis 
restricted to patients receiving recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator. 
Monte-Carlo simulations showed that a randomized controlled trial would require 
95 participants per group to achieve 80% power to detect an odds ratio of 3.0 
for recovery from severe vision loss.
CONCLUSIONS: Early intervention in nonarteritic central retinal artery occlusion 
is associated with improvement in visual recovery, with intraarterial 
thrombolysis and intravenous thrombolysis outperforming nonthrombolytic 
treatments. These findings warrant confirmation in sufficiently powered 
randomized controlled trials.

DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.124.049955
PMID: 40832714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Zaslavsky reports grants from Fighting 
Blindness Canada, Foundation Finding Blindness, and the American College of 
Medical Genetics (ACMG) Foundation for Genetic and Genomic Medicine. Dr Poli is 
the principal investigator of the investigator-initiated REVISION randomized 
trial investigating early thrombolysis in central retinal artery occlusion. The 
REVISION trial is funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and 
Research (BMBF) and Boehringer Ingelheim. He has served as a consultant for 
Alexion Pharmaceuticals Inc, AstraZeneca, Portola Pharmaceuticals, LLC, and 
Werfen US LLC. He has received speaker honoraria from Bayer Healthcare, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and Daiichi Sankyo Company. He has 
received grants/contracts from BMBF, Boehringer Ingelheim, Daiichi Sankyo 
Company, the European Commission, Helena Laboratories Corporation, and 
Innovationsausschuss beim Gemeinsamen Bundesausschuss and has received funding 
for travel from Hybernia Medical. Dr Feltgen reports compensation from Novartis, 
Bayer, Roche, AbbVie, and Apellis for consultant and speaker services. Dr 
Baumgartner reports research funds by the Gottfried and Julia Bangerter-Rhyner 
Foundation and the Swiss Academy of Medical Sciences, and funding for travel and 
conference fees from Bristol-Myers Squibb and Pfizer Alliance and Novo Nordisk. 
Dr Spitzer is the coprincipal investigator of the investigator-initiated 
REVISION randomized trial investigating early thrombolysis in central retinal 
artery occlusion. The REVISION trial is funded by the BMBF and Boehringer 
Ingelheim. He has served as a consultant for 1stQ, AbbVie, Alcon, Atheneum 
Partners, Astellas, Bayer Healthcare, DORC, Nordic Pharma, Neurogene, Ocumeda, 
Roche, and SHS. He has received speaker honoraria from AbbVie, Apellis, 
Astellas, Bayer Healthcare, Novartis, Roche, and Zeiss. He has received 
grants/contracts from BMBF, EXIST, Else-Kroener Foundation, Danger Foundation, 
Claire-Jung Foundation, Stiftung Auge, Biomarin, IDxDR, Fielmann Company, and 
TelemedC. Dr Woo reports grants from the National Research Foundation of Korea 
(NRF) grant funded by the Korean government (MSICT; RS-2023-00248480). He 
declares the following nonrelevant conflicts of interest: consulting fees from 
Samsung Bioepis, Curacle, Novelty Nobility, Pharmabcine, Sometech, Samil, 
Allergan, and Janssen; lecture fees from Bayer, Navartis, Allergan/AbbVie, 
Santen, and Samil; grants from Samsung Bioepis, Alcon, Alteogen, Curacle, Kyowa 
Kirin, Novelty Nobility, Novartis, Pharmabcine, and Roche; and owns equity of 
RetiMark and Panolos Bioscience. Dr Popovic reports grants from PSI Foundation 
and grants from Fighting Blindness Canada. He is also a consultant for Ainnova 
Tech. Dr Nolte reports compensation from Alexion, AstraZeneca, Bayer Healthcare, 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Novartis, and Pfizer for consultant and other services; 
grants from the German Center for Neurodegenerative Disease (DZNE); and grants 
from the German Center for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK). Dr Scheitz reports 
compensation from Bristol-Myers Squibb and AstraZeneca for other services and 
reports compensation from Medtronic for consultant services. Dr Leker reports 
compensation from Filterlex for consultant services and reports compensation 
from Medtronic, Janssen Biotech, Biogen, Abbott Diabetes Care, Ischema View, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, and Bayer for other services. Dr Arnold reports grants 
from the Swiss National Science Foundation and reports compensation from Amgen, 
AstraZeneca, Bayer, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Covidien, Daiichi Sankyo, Novartis, 
Sanofi, Pfizer, Novo Nordisk, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Covidien Medtronic for 
consultant services. Dr Heldner reports grants from the Swiss National Science 
Foundation; grants from SITEM Research Funds; and grants from the Swiss Heart 
Foundation. Dr Cordonnier reports compensation from the American Stroke 
Association for other services. Dr Wegener received research funds by the Swiss 
National Science Foundation, the Clinical Research Priority Program Precision 
for Stroke at Universitäts Spital Zürich, the Zürich Neuroscience Center (ZNZ), 
the Baugarten foundation, the Hartmann Müller Foundation, the Koetser 
Foundation, the Philas Foundation, and the Swiss Heart Foundation; received 
speaker honoraria from Amgen, Springer, Advisis AG, Teva Pharma, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Lundbeck, Astra Zeneca, and Forum für medizinische Fortbildung 
(FoMF); and received a consultancy fee from Bayer and Novartis via an 
institution for research. The other authors report no conflicts.