---
reference_id: "PMID:32242028"
title: Crohn's disease.
authors:
- Roda G
- Chien Ng S
- Kotze PG
- Argollo M
- Panaccione R
- Spinelli A
- Kaser A
- Peyrin-Biroulet L
- Danese S
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41572-020-0156-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Crohn's disease.
**Authors:** Roda G, Chien Ng S, Kotze PG, Argollo M, Panaccione R, Spinelli A, Kaser A, Peyrin-Biroulet L, Danese S
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41572-020-0156-2](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41572-020-0156-2)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2020 Apr 2;6(1):22. doi: 10.1038/s41572-020-0156-2.

Crohn's disease.

Roda G(1), Chien Ng S(2), Kotze PG(3), Argollo M(1), Panaccione R(4), Spinelli 
A(5)(6), Kaser A(7), Peyrin-Biroulet L(8), Danese S(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)IBD Center, Department of Gastroenterology, Humanitas Clinical and Research 
Center - IRCCS -, Rozzano, Italy.
(2)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Li Ka Shing Institute of Health 
Science, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.
(3)Colorectal Surgery Unit, Catholic University of Paraná, Curitiba, Brazil.
(4)Inflammatory Bowel Disease Unit, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 
University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(5)Humanitas Clinical and Research Center - IRCCS -, Rozzano, Italy.
(6)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Pieve Emanuele, 
Italy.
(7)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, 
University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK.
(8)Department of Gastroenterology, University Hospital of Nancy, Nancy, France.
(9)IBD Center, Department of Gastroenterology, Humanitas Clinical and Research 
Center - IRCCS -, Rozzano, Italy. sdanese@hotmail.com.
(10)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Humanitas University, Pieve Emanuele, 
Italy. sdanese@hotmail.com.

Erratum in
    Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2020 Apr 6;6(1):26. doi: 10.1038/s41572-020-0172-2.
    Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2020 May 20;6(1):42. doi: 10.1038/s41572-020-0183-z.
    Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2020 Jun 19;6(1):51. doi: 10.1038/s41572-020-0193-x.

Crohn's disease is an inflammatory bowel disease that is characterized by 
chronic inflammation of any part of the gastrointestinal tract, has a 
progressive and destructive course and is increasing in incidence worldwide. 
Several factors have been implicated in the cause of Crohn's disease, including 
a dysregulated immune system, an altered microbiota, genetic susceptibility and 
environmental factors, but the cause of the disease remains unknown. The onset 
of the disease at a young age in most cases necessitates prompt but long-term 
treatment to prevent disease flares and disease progression with intestinal 
complications. Thus, earlier, more aggressive treatment with biologic therapies 
or novel small molecules could profoundly change the natural history of the 
disease and decrease complications and the need for hospitalization and surgery. 
Although less invasive biomarkers are in development, diagnosis still relies on 
endoscopy and histological assessment of biopsy specimens. Crohn's disease is a 
complex disease, and treatment should be personalized to address the underlying 
pathogenetic mechanism. In the future, disease management might rely on severity 
scores that incorporate prognostic factors, bowel damage assessment and 
non-invasive close monitoring of disease activity to reduce the severity of 
complications.

DOI: 10.1038/s41572-020-0156-2
PMID: 32242028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]