---
reference_id: "PMID:35142721"
title: "Chronic Pancreatitis Is a Risk Factor for Pancreatic Cancer, and Incidence Increases With Duration of Disease: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis."
authors:
- Gandhi S
- de la Fuente J
- Murad MH
- Majumder S
journal: Clin Transl Gastroenterol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.14309/ctg.0000000000000463
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic Pancreatitis Is a Risk Factor for Pancreatic Cancer, and Incidence Increases With Duration of Disease: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Gandhi S, de la Fuente J, Murad MH, Majumder S
**Journal:** Clin Transl Gastroenterol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.14309/ctg.0000000000000463](https://doi.org/10.14309/ctg.0000000000000463)

## Content

1. Clin Transl Gastroenterol. 2022 Mar 28;13(3):e00463. doi: 
10.14309/ctg.0000000000000463.

Chronic Pancreatitis Is a Risk Factor for Pancreatic Cancer, and Incidence 
Increases With Duration of Disease: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.

Gandhi S(1), de la Fuente J(2), Murad MH(3), Majumder S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai Health System, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota, USA.
(3)Division of Public Health, Infectious Diseases and Occupational Medicine, 
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Observational studies have suggested an increased risk of 
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) in patients with acute and chronic 
pancreatitis. We conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis to evaluate the 
magnitude of this association and summarize the published epidemiological 
evidence.
METHODS: We searched electronic databases (MEDLINE, Embase, Web of Science, 
Cochrane, and Scopus) and reference lists until January 18, 2021. Studies 
reporting quantitative association between pancreatitis and PDAC were included 
and assessed for eligibility, data abstraction, and risk of bias. Standardized 
incidence ratios (SIRs) were pooled using the random-effects model.
RESULTS: Twenty-five cohort and case-control studies met inclusion criteria. 
Meta-analysis of 12 chronic pancreatitis (CP) studies demonstrated an increased 
risk of PDAC in patients with CP (SIR: 22.61, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 
14.42-35.44). This elevated risk persisted in subgroup analysis of studies that 
excluded patients diagnosed with PDAC within 2 years of CP diagnosis (SIR: 
21.77, 95% CI: 14.43-32.720). The risk was higher in hereditary pancreatitis 
(SIR: 63.36, 95% CI: 45.39-88.46). The cumulative incidence rates of PDAC in CP 
increased with follow-up duration. Limited evidence in acute pancreatitis 
indicates higher PDAC risk in the subset of patients eventually diagnosed with 
CP. PDAC seems to be uncommon in patients with autoimmune pancreatitis, with 8 
reported cases in 358 patients with autoimmune pancreatitis across 4 studies.
DISCUSSION: There is an increased risk of PDAC in patients with CP, and 
incidence rates increase with CP disease duration. Our results indicate that 
PDAC surveillance may be considered in individuals with long-standing CP.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on 
behalf of The American College of Gastroenterology.

DOI: 10.14309/ctg.0000000000000463
PMCID: PMC8963838
PMID: 35142721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Guarantor of the article: Shounak Majumder, MD. 
Specific author contributions: S.G.: study concept and design, acquisition of 
data, analysis and interpretation of data, and drafting of manuscript. J.d.l.F: 
study concept and design, acquisition of data, analysis and interpretation of 
data, drafting of manuscript, and critical revision of manuscript for important 
intellectual content. M.H.M.: study concept and design, analysis and 
interpretation of data, statistical analysis, and critical revision of 
manuscript for important intellectual content. S.M.: study concept and design, 
analysis and interpretation of data, drafting of manuscript, critical revision 
of manuscript for important intellectual content, and study supervision. 
Financial support: None to report. Potential competing interests: Mayo Clinic 
and Exact Sciences have an intellectual property development agreement. S.M. is 
listed as an inventor under this agreement and could share potential future 
royalties paid to Mayo Clinic. The other authors declare no conflict of 
interest. Data, analytic methods, and study materials pertinent to this 
manuscript may be made available to other researchers on reasonable request.