---
reference_id: "PMID:25688781"
title: "Effect of oral eliglustat on splenomegaly in patients with Gaucher disease type 1: the ENGAGE randomized clinical trial."
authors:
- Mistry PK
- Lukina E
- Ben Turkia H
- Amato D
- Baris H
- Dasouki M
- Ghosn M
- Mehta A
- Packman S
- Pastores G
- Petakov M
- Assouline S
- Balwani M
- Danda S
- Hadjiev E
- Ortega A
- Shankar S
- Solano MH
- Ross L
- Angell J
- Peterschmitt MJ
journal: JAMA
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1001/jama.2015.459
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of oral eliglustat on splenomegaly in patients with Gaucher disease type 1: the ENGAGE randomized clinical trial.
**Authors:** Mistry PK, Lukina E, Ben Turkia H, Amato D, Baris H, Dasouki M, Ghosn M, Mehta A, Packman S, Pastores G, Petakov M, Assouline S, Balwani M, Danda S, Hadjiev E, Ortega A, Shankar S, Solano MH, Ross L, Angell J, Peterschmitt MJ
**Journal:** JAMA (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.2015.459](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2015.459)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2015 Feb 17;313(7):695-706. doi: 10.1001/jama.2015.459.

Effect of oral eliglustat on splenomegaly in patients with Gaucher disease type 
1: the ENGAGE randomized clinical trial.

Mistry PK(1), Lukina E(2), Ben Turkia H(3), Amato D(4), Baris H(5), Dasouki 
M(6), Ghosn M(7), Mehta A(8), Packman S(9), Pastores G(10), Petakov M(11), 
Assouline S(12), Balwani M(13), Danda S(14), Hadjiev E(15), Ortega A(16), 
Shankar S(17), Solano MH(18), Ross L(19), Angell J(19), Peterschmitt MJ(19).

Author information:
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut.
(2)Hematology Research Center, Moscow, Russia.
(3)Hôpital La Rabta, Tunis, Tunisia.
(4)Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Rabin Medical Center, Petach Tikvah, and Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel 
Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(6)University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City.
(7)Hôtel-Dieu de France University Hospital, Beirut, Lebanon.
(8)The Royal Free Hospital, London, England.
(9)University of California, San Francisco, School of Medicine, San Francisco.
(10)New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York.
(11)Clinical Center of Serbia, University of Belgrade School of Medicine, 
Belgrade, Serbia.
(12)Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(13)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, New York.
(14)Christian Medical College, Vellore, India.
(15)University Hospital Alexandrovska, Sofia, Bulgaria.
(16)OCA Hospital, Monterrey, Mexico.
(17)Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia.
(18)Hospital de San Jose-Fundacion Universitaria de Ciencias de la Salud San 
Jose, Bogota, Colombia.
(19)Genzyme, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

IMPORTANCE: Gaucher disease type 1 is characterized by hepatosplenomegaly, 
anemia, thrombocytopenia, and skeletal disease. A safe, effective oral therapy 
is needed.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether eliglustat, a novel oral substrate reduction 
therapy, safely reverses clinical manifestations in untreated adults with 
Gaucher disease type 1.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Phase 3, randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial conducted at 18 sites in 12 countries from November 
2009 to July 2012 among eligible patients with splenomegaly plus 
thrombocytopenia and/or anemia. Of 72 patients screened, 40 were enrolled.
INTERVENTIONS: Patients were stratified by spleen volume and randomized 1:1 to 
receive eliglustat (50 or 100 mg twice daily; n = 20) or placebo (n = 20) for 9 
months.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: The primary efficacy end point was percentage change 
in spleen volume in multiples of normal from baseline to 9 months; secondary 
efficacy end points were change in hemoglobin level and percentage changes in 
liver volume and platelet count.
RESULTS: All patients had baseline splenomegaly and thrombocytopenia (mostly 
moderate or severe), most had mild or moderate hepatomegaly, and 20% had mild 
anemia. Least-square mean spleen volume decreased by 27.77% (95% CI, -32.57% to 
-22.97%) in the eliglustat group (from 13.89 to 10.17 multiples of normal) vs an 
increase of 2.26% (95% CI, -2.54% to 7.06%) in the placebo group (from 12.50 to 
12.84 multiples of normal) for an absolute treatment difference of -30.03% (95% 
CI, -36.82% to -23.24%; P < .001). For the secondary end points, the 
least-square mean absolute differences between groups all favored eliglustat, 
with a 1.22-g/dL increase in hemoglobin level (95% CI, 0.57-1.88 g/dL; 
P < .001), 6.64% decrease in liver volume (95% CI, -11.37% to -1.91%; P = .007), 
and 41.06% increase in platelet count (95% CI, 23.95%-58.17%; P < .001). No 
serious adverse events occurred. One patient in the eliglustat group withdrew 
(non-treatment related); 39 of the 40 patients transitioned to an open-label 
extension study.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Among previously untreated adults with Gaucher 
disease type 1, treatment with eliglustat compared with placebo for 9 months 
resulted in significant improvements in spleen volume, hemoglobin level, liver 
volume, and platelet count. The clinical significance of these findings is 
uncertain, and more definitive conclusions about clinical efficacy and utility 
will require comparison with the standard treatment of enzyme replacement 
therapy as well as longer-term follow-up.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT00891202.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2015.459
PMCID: PMC4962880
PMID: 25688781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures Principal 
investigators received no compensation for their role in the study or the 
development of this manuscript; however, their institutions as study sites 
received compensation to cover the costs of performing study assessments. Pramod 
Mistry is a principal investigator in the eliglustat ENGAGE and ENCORE trials 
and has received research grants, honoraria, and travel reimbursement from 
Genzyme. Elena Lukina is a principal investigator in the eliglustat ENGAGE, 
ENCORE and EDGE trials and has received honoraria and travel reimbursement from 
Genzyme and Shire. Hadhami Ben Turkia is a principal investigator in the 
eliglustat ENGAGE trial. She is a co-investigator in the HGT-GCB068 clinical 
trial at Shire. Dominick Amato is a principal investigator in the eliglustat 
ENGAGE and ENCORE trials and has received honoraria from Actelion, Genzyme, and 
Shire; travel reimbursements from Actelion, Genzyme, Shire, and Protalix/Pfizer; 
operating funds from Actelion, Genzyme, and Shire; and consultant advisory board 
fees from Actelion, Protalix/Pfizer and Shire. Hagit Baris is a principal 
investigator in the eliglustat ENGAGE trial and has no relevant relationships 
with industry to disclose. Majed Dasouki is a principal investigator in the 
eliglustat ENGAGE trial and has received travel reimbursement from Genzyme. 
Marwan Ghosn is a principal investigator in the eliglustat ENGAGE trial and has 
no relevant relationships with industry to disclose. Atul Mehta is a principal 
investigator in the eliglustat ENGAGE trial and has received research grants, 
honoraria and travel reimbursement from Genzyme. Seymour Packman is a principal 
investigator in the eliglustat ENGAGE and ENCORE trials and has received 
research grants and travel reimbursement from Genzyme. Gregory Pastores is a 
principal investigator in the eliglustat ENGAGE and ENCORE trials and has 
received honoraria and travel reimbursement from Genzyme. Milan Petakov is a 
principal investigator in the eliglustat ENGAGE trial and has no relevant 
relationships with industry to disclose. Sarit Assouline is a principal 
investigator in the eliglustat ENGAGE trial and has no relevant relationships 
with industry to disclose. Manisha Balwani is a principal investigator in the 
eliglustat ENGAGE and ENCORE trials and is a member of the North American 
advisory board for the International Collaborative Gaucher Group Registry. She 
has received honoraria and travel reimbursement from Genzyme. Sumita Danda is a 
principal investigator in the eliglustat ENGAGE trial and has no relevant 
relationships with industry to disclose. Evgueniy Hadjiev is a principal 
investigator in the eliglustat ENGAGE trial and has received honoraria and 
travel reimbursement from Genzyme. Andres Ortega is a principal investigator in 
the eliglustat ENGAGE trial and has no relevant relationships with industry to 
disclose. Suma P Shankar has been site primary investigator in clinical trials 
and received research support and educational grants sponsored by Genzyme, 
Shire, Protalix, Actelion and Amicus. She has also received honorarium for being 
a speaker for Genzyme and Shire. Marie-Helene Solano is a principal investigator 
in the eliglustat ENGAGE trial and has received honoraria and travel 
reimbursement from Genzyme. Jennifer Angell is an employee of Genzyme, a Sanofi 
company and has Sanofi stock options. Leorah Ross is an employee of Genzyme, a 
Sanofi company. M. Judith Peterschmitt is an employee of Genzyme, a Sanofi 
company.