---
reference_id: "PMID:38671500"
title: "Research progress in the pathogenesis of hormone-induced femoral head necrosis based on microvessels: a systematic review."
authors:
- Ma T
- Wang Y
- Ma J
- Cui H
- Feng X
- Ma X
journal: J Orthop Surg Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13018-024-04748-2
keywords:
- Humans
- "Femur Head Necrosis/chemically induced, etiology"
- Microvessels/pathology
- Glucocorticoids/adverse effects
- "Femur Head/blood supply, pathology"
- Microcirculation
- "Neovascularization, Pathologic/etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Research progress in the pathogenesis of hormone-induced femoral head necrosis based on microvessels: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Ma T, Wang Y, Ma J, Cui H, Feng X, Ma X
**Journal:** J Orthop Surg Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13018-024-04748-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13018-024-04748-2)

## Content

1. J Orthop Surg Res. 2024 Apr 26;19(1):265. doi: 10.1186/s13018-024-04748-2.

Research progress in the pathogenesis of hormone-induced femoral head necrosis 
based on microvessels: a systematic review.

Ma T(#)(1)(2)(3), Wang Y(#)(1)(2)(3), Ma J(4)(5)(6), Cui H(1)(2)(3), Feng 
X(1)(2)(3), Ma X(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Tianjin Hospital of Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300211, China.
(2)Tianjin Orthopedic Institute, Tianjin, 300050, China.
(3)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Orthopedic Biomechanics and Medical Engineering, 
Tianjin, 300050, China.
(4)Tianjin Hospital of Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300211, China. 
yjslwtg@126.com.
(5)Tianjin Orthopedic Institute, Tianjin, 300050, China. yjslwtg@126.com.
(6)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Orthopedic Biomechanics and Medical Engineering, 
Tianjin, 300050, China. yjslwtg@126.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Hormonal necrosis of the femoral head is caused by long-term use of 
glucocorticoids and other causes of abnormal bone metabolism, lipid metabolism 
imbalance and blood microcirculation disorders in the femoral head, resulting in 
bone trabecular fracture, bone tissue necrosis collapse, and hip dysfunction. It 
is the most common type of non-traumatic necrosis of the femoral head, and its 
pathogenesis is complex, while impaired blood circulation is considered to be 
the key to its occurrence. There are a large number of microvessels in the 
femoral head, among which H-type vessels play a decisive role in the 
"angiogenesis and osteogenesis coupling", and thus have an important impact on 
the occurrence and development of femoral head necrosis. Glucocorticoids can 
cause blood flow injury of the femoral head mainly through coagulation 
dysfunction, endothelial dysfunction and impaired angiogenesis. Glucocorticoids 
may inhibit the formation of H-type vessels by reducing the expression of 
HIF-1α, PDGF-BB, VGEF and other factors, thus causing damage to the 
"angiogenesis-osteogenesis coupling" and reducing the ability of necrosis 
reconstruction and repair of the femoral head. Leads to the occurrence of 
hormonal femoral head necrosis. Therefore, this paper reviewed the progress in 
the study of the mechanism of hormone-induced femoral head necrosis based on 
microvascular blood flow at home and abroad, hoping to provide new ideas for the 
study of the mechanism of femoral head necrosis and provide references for 
clinical treatment of femoral head necrosis.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13018-024-04748-2
PMCID: PMC11046814
PMID: 38671500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.