---
reference_id: "PMID:30348552"
title: "Etiologic Classification Criteria of ARCO on Femoral Head Osteonecrosis Part 1: Glucocorticoid-Associated Osteonecrosis."
authors:
- Yoon BH
- Jones LC
- Chen CH
- Cheng EY
- Cui Q
- Drescher W
- Fukushima W
- Gangji V
- Goodman SB
- Ha YC
- Hernigou P
- Hungerford M
- Iorio R
- Jo WL
- Khanduja V
- Kim H
- Kim SY
- Kim TY
- Lee HY
- Lee MS
- Lee YK
- Lee YJ
- Mont MA
- Sakai T
- Sugano N
- Takao M
- Yamamoto T
- Koo KH
journal: J Arthroplasty
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.arth.2018.09.005
keywords:
- Advisory Committees
- Consensus
- Delphi Technique
- "Femur Head Necrosis/chemically induced, classification, etiology"
- Glucocorticoids/adverse effects
- Humans
- Internationality
- Prednisolone/adverse effects
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Etiologic Classification Criteria of ARCO on Femoral Head Osteonecrosis Part 1: Glucocorticoid-Associated Osteonecrosis.
**Authors:** Yoon BH, Jones LC, Chen CH, Cheng EY, Cui Q, Drescher W, Fukushima W, Gangji V, Goodman SB, Ha YC, Hernigou P, Hungerford M, Iorio R, Jo WL, Khanduja V, Kim H, Kim SY, Kim TY, Lee HY, Lee MS, Lee YK, Lee YJ, Mont MA, Sakai T, Sugano N, Takao M, Yamamoto T, Koo KH
**Journal:** J Arthroplasty (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.arth.2018.09.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arth.2018.09.005)

## Content

1. J Arthroplasty. 2019 Jan;34(1):163-168.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.arth.2018.09.005.
Epub  2018 Sep 22.

Etiologic Classification Criteria of ARCO on Femoral Head Osteonecrosis Part 1: 
Glucocorticoid-Associated Osteonecrosis.

Yoon BH(1), Jones LC(2), Chen CH(3), Cheng EY(4), Cui Q(5), Drescher W(6), 
Fukushima W(7), Gangji V(8), Goodman SB(9), Ha YC(10), Hernigou P(11), 
Hungerford M(12), Iorio R(13), Jo WL(14), Khanduja V(15), Kim H(16), Kim SY(17), 
Kim TY(18), Lee HY(19), Lee MS(20), Lee YK(21), Lee YJ(22), Mont MA(23), Sakai 
T(7), Sugano N(7), Takao M(7), Yamamoto T(24), Koo KH(21).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Inje University College of Medicine, Seoul 
Paik Hospital, Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Center for Metabolism and Obesity 
Research, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, 
Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Minnesota Medical School, 
Minneapolis, MN.
(5)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Virginia School of Medicine, 
Charlottesville, VA.
(6)Department of Orthopedic and Trauma Surgery, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, 
Germany.
(7)Department of Orthopaedic Medical Engineering, Osaka University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka, Japan.
(8)Department of Rheumatology and Physical Medicine, Hôpital Erasme, Université 
Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.
(9)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Redwood City, CA.
(10)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Chung-Ang University College of Medicine, 
Seoul, South Korea.
(11)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Creteil, France.
(12)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Mercy Medical Center, Baltimore, MD.
(13)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, NYU Langone Medical Center, Hospital for 
Joint Diseases, New York, NY.
(14)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, College of 
Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, South Korea.
(15)Department of Trauma & Orthopaedics, Addenbrooke's Cambridge University 
Hospitals, Cambridge, UK.
(16)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, 
TX.
(17)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyungpook 
National University, Daegu, Republic of Korea.
(18)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Konkuk University Medical Center, Seoul, 
South Korea.
(19)Center for Preventive Medicine and Public Health, Seoul National University 
Bundang Hospital, Seongnam, South Korea.
(20)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, 
Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(21)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Seoul National University Bundang 
Hospital, Seongnam, South Korea.
(22)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital 
and Medical College of Seoul National University, Seongnam, South Korea.
(23)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Rubin Institute for Advanced Orthopedics, 
Center for Joint Preservation and Replacement, Sinai Hospital of Baltimore, 
Baltimore, MD.
(24)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Fukuoka University, 
Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Glucocorticoid usage, a leading cause of osteonecrosis of the 
femoral head (ONFH), and its prevalence was reported in 25%-50% of non-traumatic 
ONFH patients. Nevertheless, there have been no unified criteria to classify 
glucocorticoid-associated ONFH (GA-ONFH). In 2015, the Association Research 
Circulation Osseous addressed the issue of developing a classification scheme.
METHODS: In June 2017, a task force was set up to conduct a Delphi survey 
concerning ONFH. The task force invited 28 experts in osteonecrosis/bone 
circulation from 8 countries. Each round of the Delphi survey consists of 
questionnaires, analysis of replies, and feedback reports to the panel. After 3 
rounds of the survey, the panel reached a consensus on the classification 
criteria. The response rates were 100% (Round 1), 96% (Round 2), and 100% (Round 
3), respectively.
RESULTS: The consensus on the classification criteria of GA-ONFH included the 
following: (1) patients should have a history of glucocorticoid use >2 g of 
prednisolone or its equivalent within a 3-month period; (2) osteonecrosis should 
be diagnosed within 2 years after glucocorticoid usage, and (3) patients should 
not have other risk factor(s) besides glucocorticoids.
CONCLUSION: Association Research Circulation Osseous established classification 
criteria to standardize clinical studies concerning GA-ONFH.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arth.2018.09.005
PMID: 30348552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]