---
reference_id: "PMID:39334956"
title: "Therapeutic Approaches to Tuberous Sclerosis Complex: From Available Therapies to Promising Drug Targets."
authors:
- Conte E
- Boccanegra B
- Dinoi G
- Pusch M
- De Luca A
- Liantonio A
- Imbrici P
journal: Biomolecules
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/biom14091190
keywords:
- "Tuberous Sclerosis/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Tuberous Sclerosis Complex 1 Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- "Tuberous Sclerosis Complex 2 Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- TOR Serine-Threonine Kinases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapeutic Approaches to Tuberous Sclerosis Complex: From Available Therapies to Promising Drug Targets.
**Authors:** Conte E, Boccanegra B, Dinoi G, Pusch M, De Luca A, Liantonio A, Imbrici P
**Journal:** Biomolecules (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biom14091190](https://doi.org/10.3390/biom14091190)

## Content

1. Biomolecules. 2024 Sep 21;14(9):1190. doi: 10.3390/biom14091190.

Therapeutic Approaches to Tuberous Sclerosis Complex: From Available Therapies
to Promising Drug Targets.

Conte E(1), Boccanegra B(1), Dinoi G(1), Pusch M(2), De Luca A(1), Liantonio
A(1), Imbrici P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy-Drug Sciences, University of Bari "Aldo Moro", 70125
Bari, Italy.
(2)Institute of Biophysics, National Research Council, 16149 Genova, Italy.

Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is a rare multisystem disorder caused by
heterozygous loss-of-function pathogenic variants in the tumour suppressor genes
TSC1 and TSC2 encoding the tuberin and hamartin proteins, respectively. Both
TSC1 and TSC2 inhibit the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) complexes
pathway, which is crucial for cell proliferation, growth, and differentiation,
and is stimulated by various energy sources and hormonal signaling pathways.
Pathogenic variants in TSC1 and TSC2 lead to mTORC1 hyperactivation, producing
benign tumours in multiple organs, including the brain and kidneys, and
drug-resistant epilepsy, a typical sign of TSC. Brain tumours, sudden unexpected
death from epilepsy, and respiratory conditions are the three leading causes of
morbidity and mortality. Even though several therapeutic options are available
for the treatment of TSC, there is further need for a better understanding of
the pathophysiological basis of the neurologic and other manifestations seen in
TSC, and for novel therapeutic approaches. This review provides an overview of
the main current therapies for TSC and discusses recent studies highlighting the
repurposing of approved drugs and the emerging role of novel targets for future
drug design.

DOI: 10.3390/biom14091190
PMCID: PMC11429992
PMID: 39334956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
