---
reference_id: "PMID:39742220"
title: "Diabetes Mellitus and Cardiovascular Disease: Exploring Epidemiology, Pathophysiology, and Treatment Strategies."
authors:
- Siam NH
- Snigdha NN
- Tabasumma N
- Parvin I
journal: Rev Cardiovasc Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.31083/j.rcm2512436
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diabetes Mellitus and Cardiovascular Disease: Exploring Epidemiology, Pathophysiology, and Treatment Strategies.
**Authors:** Siam NH, Snigdha NN, Tabasumma N, Parvin I
**Journal:** Rev Cardiovasc Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.31083/j.rcm2512436](https://doi.org/10.31083/j.rcm2512436)

## Content

1. Rev Cardiovasc Med. 2024 Dec 11;25(12):436. doi: 10.31083/j.rcm2512436. 
eCollection 2024 Dec.

Diabetes Mellitus and Cardiovascular Disease: Exploring Epidemiology, 
Pathophysiology, and Treatment Strategies.

Siam NH(1), Snigdha NN(1), Tabasumma N(1), Parvin I(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, School of Pharmacy and Public Health, Independent 
University, Bangladesh (IUB), 1229 Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(2)Department of Biomedical Science, School of Health and Life Sciences, 
Teesside University, TS1 3BX Middlesbrough, UK.

Diabetes mellitus (DM) affects 537 million people as of 2021, and is projected 
to rise to 783 million by 2045. This positions DM as the ninth leading cause of 
death globally. Among DM patients, cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the primary 
cause of morbidity and mortality. Notably, the prevalence rates of CVD is 
alarmingly high among diabetic individuals, particularly in North America and 
the Caribbean (46.0%), and Southeast Asia (42.5%). The predominant form of CVD 
among diabetic patients is coronary artery disease (CAD), accounting for 29.4% 
of cases. The pathophysiology of DM is complex, involving insulin resistance, 
β-cell dysfunction, and associated cardiovascular complications including 
diabetic cardiomyopathy (DCM) and cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy (CAN). 
These conditions exacerbate CVD risks underscoring the importance of managing 
key risk factors including hypertension, dyslipidemia, obesity, and genetic 
predisposition. Understanding the genetic networks and molecular processes that 
link diabetes and cardiovascular disease can lead to new diagnostics and 
therapeutic interventions. Imeglimin, a novel mitochondrial bioenergetic 
enhancer, represents a promising medication for diabetes with the potential to 
address both insulin resistance and secretion difficulties. Effective diabetes 
management through oral hypoglycemic agents (OHAs) can protect the 
cardiovascular system. Additionally, certain antihypertensive medications can 
significantly reduce the risk of diabetes-related CVD. Additionally, lifestyle 
changes, including diet and exercise are vital in managing diabesity and 
reducing CVD risks. These interventions, along with emerging therapeutic agents 
and ongoing clinical trials, offer hope for improved patient outcomes and 
long-term DM remission. This study highlights the urgent need for management 
strategies to address the overlapping epidemics of DM and CVD. By elucidating 
the underlying mechanisms and risk factors, this study aims to guide future 
perspectives and enhance understanding of the pathogenesis of CVD complications 
in patients with DM, thereby guiding more effective treatment strategies.

Copyright: © 2024 The Author(s). Published by IMR Press.

DOI: 10.31083/j.rcm2512436
PMCID: PMC11683709
PMID: 39742220

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.