---
reference_id: "PMID:32644370"
title: Poliomyelitis.
authors:
- Wolbert JG
- Rajnik M
- Swinkels HM
- Higginbotham K
year: '2026'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Poliomyelitis.
**Authors:** Wolbert JG, Rajnik M, Swinkels HM, Higginbotham K

## Content

1. Poliomyelitis.

Wolbert JG(1), Rajnik M(2), Swinkels HM(3), Higginbotham K(4).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2026 
Jan–.
2024 Oct 6.

Author information:
(1)PBCGME
(2)Uniformed Service University of the Health Sciences
(3)University of British Columbia
(4)St. Lucie Medical

Poliomyelitis, or polio, is an infection transmitted via the fecal-oral and 
oral-oral routes by the poliovirus. Today, polio primarily affects 
children younger than 5 in countries with poor water, sanitation, and hygiene 
infrastructure. While extremely rare outside these areas, polio presents a risk 
to populations with low vaccination rates, including in industrialized nations. 
The 2014 declaration deeming the global spread of polioviruses a public health 
emergency of international concern under the International Health Regulations 
remains in place.[WHO. Vaccine Position] Previously one of the most feared 
diseases in the world, polio caused widespread morbidity and mortality in 
children during multiple epidemics between the 1900s and 1960s. The incidence of 
polio began to decline following the development of the injectable polio vaccine 
(IPV) and oral polio vaccine (OPV). Intensified worldwide vaccination efforts 
starting in the 1980s by the World Health Organization (WHO) and partners under 
the Global Polio Eradication Initiative (GPEI) have almost completely eradicated 
the disease. Vaccination protocols worldwide now recommend administering at 
least 3 doses of IPV (IPV-only schedule) or at least 3 doses of bivalent OPV 
plus at least 2 doses of IPV (combined OPV-IPV schedule). The latter 
is recommended in countries where poliovirus incidence rates remain unchanged or 
are at risk of increasing. See StatPearls' companion article "Polio Vaccine" 
for more information on polio vaccinations. Healthcare professionals 
must maintain a high index of suspicion to diagnose acute poliomyelitis in 
patients who present with new-onset paralysis following a viral prodrome and are 
living in an endemic region or under-vaccinated population. The presentation of 
polio is highly variable, ranging from asymptomatic to a transient flu-like 
viral illness to paralysis, quadriplegia, and even respiratory failure and 
death. Many polio survivors experience a poor quality of life. Alternate 
diagnoses must be considered as polio is rare, and other more common diseases 
and conditions can present similarly. In particular, acute flaccid myelitis 
(AFM) presents with a polio-like syndrome. This condition is caused by epidemic 
enteroviral infections, most commonly enterovirus D68. As no antiviral treatment 
for acute poliomyelitis exists, prevention is critical. Paralytic deficits are 
often permanent, resulting in chronic pain, deformities, weakness, and eventual 
osteoporosis and fragility fracture. Between 25% and 40% of the estimated 12 to 
20 million polio survivors worldwide will also develop postpolio syndrome 
(PPS). A diagnosis of PPS requires new-onset, progressive muscle weakness or 
fatiguability, mental fatigue, or pain in a patient diagnosed with 
poliomyelitis up to 40 years prior. PPS is not contagious and is rarely 
life-threatening, but it often affects patients' independence and quality of 
life. While the near eradication of polio represents a tremendous achievement 
for global public health, multiple challenges and delays remain. Vaccine-derived 
polioviruses (VDPVs) revert or recombine to wild-type neurovirulence and 
transmissibility, causing outbreaks and distrust in vaccination programs. 
Poliovirus typically escapes early detection; most infections are asymptomatic, 
and the characteristic paralysis occurs in a small minority of those it 
infects.[CDC. Polio_HCP] Delays in detecting circulating wild poliovirus (WPV) 
and VDPVs pose a significant risk to eradication efforts. Political unrest or 
indecision and declining or competing interests threaten efforts to eradicate 
the disease. Recent polio cases and the discovery of poliovirus in wastewater in 
industrialized nations emphasize that, until completely eradicated, polio 
remains a global risk.[GPEI. Polio Eradication] All suspected cases of 
poliomyelitis in the United States should be immediately reported to the United 
States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Clinicians should 
suspect polio in patients with acute-onset flaccid paralysis, decreased or 
absent tendon reflexes, and without sensory or cognitive deficits. Contact the 
CDC Emergency Operations Center within 4 hours of the suspected diagnosis to 
ensure appropriate diagnostic testing, surveillance, and public health follow-up 
at 770-488-7100.[CDC. Polio_Clinical]

Copyright © 2026, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 32644370

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Jonathan Wolbert declares no 
relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Michael 
Rajnik declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: Helena Swinkels declares no relevant financial relationships with 
ineligible companies. Disclosure: Karla Higginbotham declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies.