---
reference_id: "PMID:20301488"
title: Li-Fraumeni Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Schneider K
- Zelley K
- Nichols KE
- Schwartz Levine A
- Garber J
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Li-Fraumeni Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Schneider K, Zelley K, Nichols KE, Schwartz Levine A, Garber J

## Content

1. Li-Fraumeni Syndrome.

Schneider K(1), Zelley K(2), Nichols KE(3), Schwartz Levine A(1), Garber J(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
1999 Jan 19 [updated 2025 May 1].

Author information:
(1)Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts
(2)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
(3)St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a cancer predisposition
syndrome associated with high risks for a broad spectrum of cancers including
early-onset cancers. Five cancer types account for the majority of LFS tumors:
adrenocortical carcinomas, breast cancer, central nervous system tumors,
osteosarcomas, and soft-tissue sarcomas. Other cancers associated with LFS
include leukemia, colorectal cancer, stomach cancer, lung cancer, melanoma,
pediatric head and neck cancers, pancreatic cancer, and prostate cancer. Cancer
survivors are at increased risk for developing additional primary cancers and
treatment-related secondary cancers. The lifetime risks of cancer for women and
men with classic LFS are 90% and 70%, respectively, and 50% of cancers occur
prior to age 40 years.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The clinical diagnosis of LFS can be established in a proband
who meets clinical diagnostic criteria, or the molecular diagnosis is
established in a proband with a germline pathogenic variant in TP53 identified
by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Bilateral mastectomy rather than
lumpectomy is often recommended for LFS-related breast cancer to reduce the risk
of a second primary breast cancer and to avoid radiation therapy. Radiation
therapy should be avoided if possible with treatment of other cancers, to reduce
the risk of secondary malignancies. Conventional cytotoxic chemotherapy may also
pose an increased secondary cancer risk; however, treatment efficacy should be
prioritized above concerns about late effects. Otherwise, standard oncologic
management is recommended. Prevention of primary manifestations: Risk-reducing
bilateral mastectomy to reduce the risk for breast cancer is an option for women
with LFS; colonoscopy may be considered as surveillance as well as primary
prevention of colorectal cancer; dermatologic surveillance can be used to detect
and remove premalignant lesions. Surveillance: Comprehensive physical
examination and ultrasound of abdomen and pelvis every three to four months from
birth to age 18 years; comprehensive physical examination every six months in
those older than age 18 years; annual whole-body MRI; females should have a
clinical breast examination every six to 12 months beginning at age 20-25 years,
annual breast MRI starting between age 20-30 years, and annual mammogram
alternating with breast MRI from age 30 to 75 years; annual brain MRI; upper
endoscopy and colonoscopy every two to five years beginning at age 25 years;
annual dermatologic exam beginning at age 18 years; annual ultrasound of the
abdomen and pelvis beginning at age 18 years; consider additional screening for
lung, pancreatic, prostate, and thyroid cancer depending on family history and
additional risk factors; assess social work and genetic counseling needs at each
visit. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Minimize exposure to diagnostic and
therapeutic radiation; avoid known carcinogens including unprotected sun
exposure, tobacco use, occupational exposures, and excessive alcohol use.
Evaluation of relatives at risk: If a molecular diagnosis of LFS has been
established in the proband, offer TP53 molecular genetic testing to all
first-degree relatives (including children) and other relatives in order to
identify individuals with LFS who would benefit from increased cancer
monitoring, with attention to symptoms or signs of cancer and early intervention
when a cancer or precancer is identified. If a clinical diagnosis of LFS has
been established in the proband but the proband does not have an identified TP53
pathogenic variant, all at-risk family members should be counseled regarding
their potential increased risks for LFS-related cancers and options for
surveillance and risk reduction.
GENETIC COUNSELING: LFS is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Most
individuals diagnosed with LFS inherited a TP53 pathogenic variant from a
parent. Some individuals diagnosed with LFS have the disorder as the result of a
de novo germline pathogenic variant. The frequency of de novo pathogenic
variants is estimated at between 7% and 20%. Each child of an individual with a
molecular diagnosis of LFS has a 50% risk of inheriting the TP53 pathogenic
variant; each child of an individual with a clinical diagnosis of LFS (in whom a
TP53 pathogenic variant has not been identified) is presumed to have an
increased risk for LFS. If a TP53 pathogenic variant has been identified in an
affected family member, predictive testing for at-risk family members and
prenatal/preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301488
