---
reference_id: "PMID:28387435"
title: Collagen V haploinsufficiency in a murine model of classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is associated with deficient structural and mechanical healing in tendons.
authors:
- Johnston JM
- Connizzo BK
- Shetye SS
- Robinson KA
- Huegel J
- Rodriguez AB
- Sun M
- Adams SM
- Birk DE
- Soslowsky LJ
journal: J Orthop Res
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/jor.23571
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Collagen V haploinsufficiency in a murine model of classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome is associated with deficient structural and mechanical healing in tendons.
**Authors:** Johnston JM, Connizzo BK, Shetye SS, Robinson KA, Huegel J, Rodriguez AB, Sun M, Adams SM, Birk DE, Soslowsky LJ
**Journal:** J Orthop Res (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jor.23571](https://doi.org/10.1002/jor.23571)

## Content

1. J Orthop Res. 2017 Dec;35(12):2707-2715. doi: 10.1002/jor.23571. Epub 2017 Apr
 24.

Collagen V haploinsufficiency in a murine model of classic Ehlers-Danlos 
syndrome is associated with deficient structural and mechanical healing in 
tendons.

Johnston JM(1)(2), Connizzo BK(2), Shetye SS(2), Robinson KA(2), Huegel J(2), 
Rodriguez AB(2), Sun M(3), Adams SM(3), Birk DE(3), Soslowsky LJ(2).

Author information:
(1)University Laboratory Animal Resources, Department of Pathobiology, School of 
Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(2)McKay Orthopaedic Research Laboratory, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(3)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology, Morsani College of 
Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida.

Classic Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) patients suffer from connective tissue 
hyperelasticity, joint instability, skin hyperextensibility, tissue fragility, 
and poor wound healing due to heterozygous mutations in COL5a1 or COL5a2 genes. 
This study investigated the roles of collagen V in establishing structure and 
function in uninjured patellar tendons as well as in the injury response using a 
Col5a1+/- mouse, a model for classic EDS. These analyses were done comparing 
tendons from a classic EDS model (Col5a1+/- ) with wild-type controls. Tendons 
were subjected to mechanical testing, histological, and fibril analysis before 
injury as well as 3 and 6 weeks after injury. We found that Col5a1+/- tendons 
demonstrated diminished recovery of mechanical competency after injury as 
compared to normal wild-type tendons, which recovered their pre-injury values by 
6 weeks post injury. Additionally, the Col5a1+/- tendons demonstrated altered 
fibril morphology and diameter distributions compared to the wild-type tendons. 
This study indicates that collagen V plays an important role in regulating 
collagen fibrillogenesis and the associated recovery of mechanical integrity in 
tendons after injury. In addition, the dysregulation with decreased collagen V 
expression in EDS is associated with a diminished injury response. The results 
presented herein have the potential to direct future targeted therapeutics for 
classic EDS patients. © 2017 Orthopaedic Research Society. Published by Wiley 
Periodicals, Inc. J Orthop Res 35:2707-2715, 2017.

© 2017 Orthopaedic Research Society. Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jor.23571
PMCID: PMC5632109
PMID: 28387435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]