---
reference_id: "PMID:31315108"
title: Fluctuating Sensorineural Hearing Loss.
authors:
- Liu H
- Zhou K
- Zhang X
- Peng KA
journal: Audiol Neurootol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1159/000500658
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fluctuating Sensorineural Hearing Loss.
**Authors:** Liu H, Zhou K, Zhang X, Peng KA
**Journal:** Audiol Neurootol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000500658](https://doi.org/10.1159/000500658)

## Content

1. Audiol Neurootol. 2019;24(3):109-116. doi: 10.1159/000500658. Epub 2019 Jul
17.

Fluctuating Sensorineural Hearing Loss.

Liu H(1), Zhou K(2), Zhang X(2), Peng KA(3).

Author information:
(1)First Hospital of Shijiazhuang City, Shijiazhuang City, China, 
sjzsdyyylh@163.com.
(2)First Hospital of Shijiazhuang City, Shijiazhuang City, China.
(3)House Clinic and House Ear Institute, Los Angeles, California, USA.

BACKGROUND: Several otologic conditions can present with fluctuating 
sensorineural hearing loss, including Ménière's disease, autoimmune inner ear 
disease, and enlarged vestibular aqueduct. Although these 3 etiologies vary 
greatly, distinguishing between these conditions at initial presentation can be 
challenging. Furthermore, initial treatment of these conditions is often 
similar. In this review, we discuss historical and current perspectives on 
diagnosis and treatment of these conditions.
SUMMARY: A literature search was performed regarding fluctuating hearing loss, 
and current treatment of these etiologies of fluctuating hearing loss was 
summarized. Immediate measures at the onset of acute hearing loss include 
corticosteroid therapy, while preventative and chronic therapies, which can 
limit disease severity and frequency, vary based on the specific condition 
treated. Key Messages: Fluctuating hearing loss can represent a range of 
pathologies, but the precise etiology may not be clear at initial presentation. 
Timely treatment and long-term follow-up, along with appropriate diagnostics, 
are necessary to optimize long-term hearing.

© 2019 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000500658
PMID: 31315108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]