---
reference_id: PMID:20507631
title: Inherited epidermolysis bullosa.
authors:
- Fine JD
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-5-12
keywords:
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa/diagnosis, epidemiology, genetics, surgery"
- Humans
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inherited epidermolysis bullosa.
**Authors:** Fine JD
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-5-12](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-5-12)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2010 May 28;5:12. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-5-12.

Inherited epidermolysis bullosa.

Fine JD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (Dermatology, Vanderbilt University School of 
Medicine, Head, National Epidermolysis Bullosa Registry Nashville, TN, USA. 
Jo-David.Fine@vanderbilt.edu

Inherited epidermolysis bullosa (EB) encompasses a number of disorders 
characterized by recurrent blister formation as the result of structural 
fragility within the skin and selected other tissues. All types and subtypes of 
EB are rare; the overall incidence and prevalence of the disease within the 
United States is approximately 19 per one million live births and 8 per one 
million population, respectively. Clinical manifestations range widely, from 
localized blistering of the hands and feet to generalized blistering of the skin 
and oral cavity, and injury to many internal organs. Each EB subtype is known to 
arise from mutations within the genes encoding for several different proteins, 
each of which is intimately involved in the maintenance of keratinocyte 
structural stability or adhesion of the keratinocyte to the underlying dermis. 
EB is best diagnosed and subclassified by the collective findings obtained via 
detailed personal and family history, in concert with the results of 
immunofluorescence antigenic mapping, transmission electron microscopy, and in 
some cases, by DNA analysis. Optimal patient management requires a 
multidisciplinary approach, and revolves around the protection of susceptible 
tissues against trauma, use of sophisticated wound care dressings, aggressive 
nutritional support, and early medical or surgical interventions to correct 
whenever possible the extracutaneous complications. Prognosis varies 
considerably and is based on both EB subtype and the overall health of the 
patient.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-5-12
PMCID: PMC2892432
PMID: 20507631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]