---
reference_id: "PMID:33360697"
title: Exposure to copper induces mitochondria-mediated apoptosis by inhibiting mitophagy and the PINK1/parkin pathway in chicken (Gallus gallus) livers.
authors:
- Yang F
- Liao J
- Yu W
- Qiao N
- Guo J
- Han Q
- Li Y
- Hu L
- Pan J
- Tang Z
journal: J Hazard Mater
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.124888
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exposure to copper induces mitochondria-mediated apoptosis by inhibiting mitophagy and the PINK1/parkin pathway in chicken (Gallus gallus) livers.
**Authors:** Yang F, Liao J, Yu W, Qiao N, Guo J, Han Q, Li Y, Hu L, Pan J, Tang Z
**Journal:** J Hazard Mater (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.124888](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.124888)

## Content

1. J Hazard Mater. 2021 Apr 15;408:124888. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.124888.
Epub  2020 Dec 19.

Exposure to copper induces mitochondria-mediated apoptosis by inhibiting 
mitophagy and the PINK1/parkin pathway in chicken (Gallus gallus) livers.

Yang F(1), Liao J(2), Yu W(2), Qiao N(2), Guo J(2), Han Q(2), Li Y(2), Hu L(2), 
Pan J(2), Tang Z(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural University, 
Guangzhou 510642, Guangdong, PR China; Jiangxi Provincial Key Laboratory for 
Animal Health, Institute of Animal Population Health, College of Animal Science 
and Technology, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang 330045, Jiangxi, PR 
China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural University, 
Guangzhou 510642, Guangdong, PR China.
(3)College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural University, 
Guangzhou 510642, Guangdong, PR China. Electronic address: tangzx@scau.edu.cn.

Copper (Cu), a transition metal with essential cellular functions, exerts toxic 
effects when present in excess by inducing oxidative stress. However, the 
Cu-induced crosstalk between mitophagy and apoptosis and the underlying 
mechanisms are unknown. Here, the mechanism of Cu-induced hepatotoxicity 
mediated by mitophagy and apoptosis was explored in vivo and in vitro. In in 
vivo experiments, chickens were fed a diet with various levels of Cu (11, 110, 
220, and 330 mg/kg) for 7 weeks, which led to ultrastructural damage, mitophagy, 
and apoptosis in liver tissue. In vitro experiments on primary chicken 
hepatocytes showed that Cu treatment for 24 h increased the numbers of 
mitophagosomes and upregulated PINK1, parkin, and p62 mRNA levels and parkin and 
p62 protein levels, inducing mitophagy. Moreover, treatment with 3- 
methyladenine (3-MA) aggravated Cu-induced S-phase arrest in cell cycle; 
increased the apoptotic rate; increased p53, Bak1, Bax, Cyt C, and 
Caspase3/cleaved-caspase3 mRNA and protein levels; and decreased Bcl2 mRNA and 
protein levels. However, rapamycin (Rapa) had the opposite effects on the above 
factors. In general, the results reveal that Cu exposure can cause mitophagy 
through the PINK1/Parkin pathway in chicken livers, and that mitophagy might 
attenuate Cu-induced mitochondrial apoptosis.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.124888
PMID: 33360697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]