---
reference_id: "PMID:2124776"
title: "Isovaleric acidemia: report of one case."
authors:
- Hou JW
- Wang TR
journal: Zhonghua Min Guo Xiao Er Ke Yi Xue Hui Za Zhi
year: '1990'
keywords:
- Acute Disease
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/complications, metabolism"
- Brain Diseases/complications
- "Child, Preschool"
- Diabetic Ketoacidosis/blood
- Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry
- Humans
- Male
- Pancytopenia/complications
- Valerates/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Isovaleric acidemia: report of one case.
**Authors:** Hou JW, Wang TR
**Journal:** Zhonghua Min Guo Xiao Er Ke Yi Xue Hui Za Zhi (1990)

## Content

1. Zhonghua Min Guo Xiao Er Ke Yi Xue Hui Za Zhi. 1990 Jul-Aug;31(4):262-5.

Isovaleric acidemia: report of one case.

Hou JW(1), Wang TR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, R.O.C.

A case of isovaleric acidemia appearing as diabetic ketoacidosis with acute
encephalopathy and pancytopenia was reported. A three-year-old male patient,
with mild psychomotor retardation, had recurrent bouts of acute encephalopathy
and pancytopenia after episodes of upper respiratory infection. At admission, he
had vomiting associated with dehydration, acidosis, ketonuria, coma and a
pungent, rather unpleasant odor. Laboratory features included hyperglycemia,
hyperammonemia, hyperamylasemia, hypocalcemia, neutropenia, thrombocytopenia and
subsequent anemia. Urine organic acid profiles showed profuse amount of
3-beta-hydroxyisovaleric acid (295 mg/ml) and isovalerylglycine (616 mg/ml) by
gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. Levels of amino acids in the serum and
urine were normal. The patient received treatment with rehydration and insulin,
with rapid improvement. After the acute illness, blood glucose levels returned
to normal. The patient was doing well on a low-protein diet in recent 3 months.

PMID: 2124776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
