---
reference_id: "PMID:38803843"
title: "Treatment outcomes of cochlear implantation in pediatric patients with Cockayne syndrome type I: a case series."
authors:
- Kostova M
- Banerjee A
journal: J Surg Case Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/jscr/rjae346
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment outcomes of cochlear implantation in pediatric patients with Cockayne syndrome type I: a case series.
**Authors:** Kostova M, Banerjee A
**Journal:** J Surg Case Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jscr/rjae346](https://doi.org/10.1093/jscr/rjae346)

## Content

1. J Surg Case Rep. 2024 May 26;2024(5):rjae346. doi: 10.1093/jscr/rjae346. 
eCollection 2024 May.

Treatment outcomes of cochlear implantation in pediatric patients with Cockayne 
syndrome type I: a case series.

Kostova M(1), Banerjee A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, The James Cook University Hospital, 
Middlesbrough, TS4 3BW, United Kingdom.

This retrospective case series evaluates treatment outcomes post-cochlear 
implantation in pediatric patients diagnosed with Cockayne syndrome (CS) and 
bilateral sensorineural hearing loss. Two female pediatric patients with CS type 
I underwent either bilateral or unilateral cochlear implantation. Visual 
reinforcement audiometry (VRA) and postoperative cochlear implant tolerance were 
the main outcome measures. Patient 1 demonstrated notable improvements in VRA 
results and school performance following bilateral implantation. Patient 2 
experienced enhanced quality of life and environmental awareness post-unilateral 
implantation, despite a lack of objective VRA results due to developmental 
delay. The study underscores the benefits of cochlear implantation in CS 
patients, especially in patients who are post-lingual or with better cognitive 
function.

Published by Oxford University Press and JSCR Publishing Ltd. © The Author(s) 
2024.

DOI: 10.1093/jscr/rjae346
PMCID: PMC11129825
PMID: 38803843