---
reference_id: "PMID:40475174"
title: Kniest Dysplasia without Ocular and Auditory Abnormalities in a Boy of 12 Months.
authors:
- Kolkıran A
- Daşar T
- Kablan A
- Şimşek-Kiper PÖ
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1159/000541135
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kniest Dysplasia without Ocular and Auditory Abnormalities in a Boy of 12 Months.
**Authors:** Kolkıran A, Daşar T, Kablan A, Şimşek-Kiper PÖ
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000541135](https://doi.org/10.1159/000541135)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2025 May;16(3):247-251. doi: 10.1159/000541135. Epub 2024 Sep
19.

Kniest Dysplasia without Ocular and Auditory Abnormalities in a Boy of 12 
Months.

Kolkıran A(1), Daşar T(2), Kablan A(3), Şimşek-Kiper PÖ(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Etlik City Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Bilkent City Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Etlik City Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(4)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, 
Ankara, Turkey.

INTRODUCTION: Kniest dysplasia is a rare skeletal disorder, characterized by 
mild dysmorphic features, cleft palate, short stature, short limbs, prominent 
joints, restricted joint mobility, hearing impairment, and ocular manifestations 
such as high-degree myopia, retinal detachment, and cataract. Typical 
radiological findings include platyspondyly, coronal clefts, and dumbbell-shaped 
long tubular bones.
CASE PRESENTATION: Herein, we report on an 8-month-old boy who was referred to 
the pediatric genetic department due to narrow thorax and short extremities. He 
had mild dysmorphic features, cleft palate, narrow thorax, short extremities, 
and short stature. On radiographies, platyspondyly, hemivertebra, and 
dumbbell-shaped long tubular bones were detected. Clinical and radiological 
findings were consistent with Kniest dysplasia. Clinical exome sequencing was 
performed and revealed a heterozygous, pathogenic c.905C>T (p.Ala302Val) variant 
in the COL2A1 gene, confirming the initial clinical diagnosis.
DISCUSSION: Kniest dysplasia is a very rare skeletal dysplasia, and an accurate 
clinical diagnosis is important to provide the best possible follow-up.

© 2024 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000541135
PMCID: PMC12136564
PMID: 40475174

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.