---
reference_id: "PMID:39744282"
title: "Dupuytren's Contracture: A Review of the Literature."
authors:
- Khaliq F
- Orji C
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.74945
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dupuytren's Contracture: A Review of the Literature.
**Authors:** Khaliq F, Orji C
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.74945](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.74945)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 Dec 2;16(12):e74945. doi: 10.7759/cureus.74945. eCollection 2024 
Dec.

Dupuytren's Contracture: A Review of the Literature.

Khaliq F(1), Orji C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Trauma and Orthopedics, Aintree University Hospital, Liverpool, 
GBR.
(2)Department of Orthopedics, Liverpool University Hospitals National Health 
Service (NHS) Foundation Trust, Liverpool, GBR.

Dupuytren's contracture is a chronic condition that affects the palmar fascia, 
leading to progressive flexion of the fingers, particularly the ring and little 
fingers. This article provides an in-depth review of the current understanding 
of the condition and its management. Commonly seen in older men of Northern 
European descent, Dupuytren's can significantly impair hand function as 
contractures develop. The underlying mechanisms involve complex cellular 
processes, particularly the role of transforming growth factor-beta in promoting 
fibroblast activity and collagen buildup. Treatment strategies depend on the 
severity of the condition; nonsurgical options like collagenase injections and 
needle aponeurotomy are effective for early stages but often have high 
recurrence rates. For more advanced cases, surgical options such as limited and 
radical fasciectomy are considered, aiming to restore finger extension while 
addressing potential complications. Challenges in management include high 
recurrence rates and variability in disease progression, emphasizing the need 
for standardized assessment protocols and innovative therapeutic approaches. 
This review underscores the importance of early diagnosis and intervention to 
preserve hand function and enhance quality of life. It calls for ongoing 
research into targeted therapies to reduce recurrence rates.

Copyright © 2024, Khaliq et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.74945
PMCID: PMC11693408
PMID: 39744282

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the 
ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: 
Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no financial support was 
received from any organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships: 
All authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present 
or within the previous three years with any organizations that might have an 
interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All authors have declared 
that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have 
influenced the submitted work.