---
reference_id: "PMID:15288007"
title: "Inflammatory bowel disease: the role of environmental factors."
authors:
- Danese S
- Sans M
- Fiocchi C
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2004.03.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inflammatory bowel disease: the role of environmental factors.
**Authors:** Danese S, Sans M, Fiocchi C
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2004.03.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2004.03.002)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2004 Jul;3(5):394-400. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2004.03.002.

Inflammatory bowel disease: the role of environmental factors.

Danese S(1), Sans M, Fiocchi C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, University Hospitals of Cleveland, Case Western 
Reserve University School of Medicine, (BRB 425), 10900 Euclid Avenue, 
Cleveland, OH 44106-4952, USA.

Environmental factors are essential components of the pathogenesis of 
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and primarily responsible for its growing 
incidence around the globe. Epidemiological, clinical and experimental evidence 
support an association between IBD and a large number of seemingly unrelated 
environmental factors, which include smoking, diet, drugs, geographical and 
social status, stress, microbial agents, intestinal permeability and 
appendectomy. Data supporting the involvement of each of these factors in 
predisposing to, triggering, or modulating the course or outcome of IBD vary 
from strong to tenuous. Smoking and the enteric bacterial flora are the ones for 
which the most solid evidence is currently available. Smoking increases the risk 
of Crohn's disease (CD) and worsens its clinical course, but has a protective 
effect in ulcerative colitis (UC). Presence of enteric bacteria is indispensable 
to develop gut inflammation in most animal models of IBD, and modulation of the 
quantity or quality of the flora can be beneficial in patients with IBD. 
Surprisingly, evidence for a major role of the diet in inducing or modifying IBD 
is limited, while that for nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs is more 
convincing than for oral contraceptives. Northern geographic location, and a 
high social, economical, educational or occupational status increase the risk of 
IBD, an observation fitting the hygiene hypothesis for allergic and autoimmune 
diseases. Stress is also associated with IBD, but more as a modifier than an 
inducing factor, and its contribution is more obvious in IBD animal models than 
human IBD. Finally, an increased intestinal permeability may increase the risk 
for developing CD, whereas an appendectomy lowers the risk of developing UC.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2004.03.002
PMID: 15288007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]