---
reference_id: "PMID:23193612"
title: SRCAP-Related Floating-Harbor Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Nowaczyk MJM
- Nikkel SM
- White SM
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SRCAP-Related Floating-Harbor Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Nowaczyk MJM, Nikkel SM, White SM

## Content

1. SRCAP-Related Floating-Harbor Syndrome.

Nowaczyk MJM(1), Nikkel SM(2), White SM(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2012 Nov 29 [updated 2025 Apr 10].

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, BC Women's and Children's Hospital, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
(3)Victorian Clinical Genetics Service, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, 
Royal Children's Hospital, Victoria, Australia

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: SRCAP-related Floating-Harbor syndrome (SRCAP-FHS) is 
characterized by typical craniofacial features; low birth weight, normal head 
circumference, and short stature; bone age delay that normalizes between ages 
six and 12 years; skeletal anomalies (brachydactyly, broad fingertips, 
clinodactyly, short thumbs, prominent joints, and clavicular abnormalities); 
severe receptive and expressive language impairment; hypernasality and 
high-pitched voice; and intellectual disability that is typically mild to 
moderate. Difficulties with temperament and behavior, present in many children, 
tend to improve in adulthood. Other features can include hyperopia and/or 
strabismus, conductive hearing loss, seizures, gastroesophageal reflux, renal 
anomalies (e.g., hydronephrosis / renal pelviectasis, cysts, and/or agenesis), 
and genital anomalies (e.g., hypospadias and/or undescended testes).
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis is established in a proband with suggestive 
findings and a heterozygous SRCAP pathogenic variant identified by molecular 
genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Referral to an endocrinologist for 
consideration of human growth hormone (HGH) therapy; however, data on use of HGH 
in SRCAP-FHS are limited. Early intervention programs, special education, and 
vocational training to address developmental disabilities; communication 
rehabilitation with sign language or alternative means of communication; 
behavior management by a behavioral specialist / psychologist with consideration 
of medication as needed. Standard treatment for refractive errors, strabismus, 
hearing loss, seizures, gastroesophageal reflux, constipation, kidney and 
genitourinary anomalies, orthopedic, dental, and cardiac issues; family and 
social work support. Surveillance: Close monitoring of growth, especially in the 
first year of life. Bone age and evaluation for signs of early puberty as 
needed, especially in those on HGH. Monitor developmental progress and 
educational needs at each visit. Assess for seizures, gastroesophageal reflux, 
constipation, and manifestations of celiac disease at each visit. Annual 
behavioral assessment, ophthalmologic evaluation, audiology evaluation, blood 
pressure measurement, and assessment of kidney function. Monitor kidney 
anomalies per nephrologist. Kidney ultrasound to assess for cysts in teenage and 
adult years with follow up as needed. Orthopedic assessment for kyphoscoliosis 
and clinical manifestations of Perthes disease as needed. Dental evaluation 
every six months.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SRCAP-FHS is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. The 
majority of affected individuals have a de novo pathogenic variant. Each child 
of an individual with SRCAP-FHS has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic 
variant. Prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible for families 
in which the pathogenic variant has been identified.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 23193612