---
reference_id: "PMID:37957581"
title: "Imaging investigation of cervicocranial artery dissection by using high resolution magnetic resonance VWI and MRA: qualitative and quantitative analysis at different stages."
authors:
- Ma W
- Zhou K
- Lan B
- Chen K
- Li W
- Jiang G
journal: BMC Med Imaging
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12880-023-01133-z
keywords:
- Humans
- Magnetic Resonance Angiography/methods
- Retrospective Studies
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Aortic Dissection/diagnostic imaging
- Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
- Hematoma
- Arteries
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Imaging investigation of cervicocranial artery dissection by using high resolution magnetic resonance VWI and MRA: qualitative and quantitative analysis at different stages.
**Authors:** Ma W, Zhou K, Lan B, Chen K, Li W, Jiang G
**Journal:** BMC Med Imaging (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12880-023-01133-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12880-023-01133-z)

## Content

1. BMC Med Imaging. 2023 Nov 13;23(1):184. doi: 10.1186/s12880-023-01133-z.

Imaging investigation of cervicocranial artery dissection by using high 
resolution magnetic resonance VWI and MRA: qualitative and quantitative analysis 
at different stages.

Ma W(1)(2)(3), Zhou K(1), Lan B(3), Chen K(3), Li W(2), Jiang G(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)The Second School of Clinical Medicine, Southern Medical University, NO.1023 
North Road of Shatai, Baiyun District, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(2)Department of Medical Imaging, Guangdong Second Provincial General Hospital, 
NO.1 Road of Shiliugang, Haizhu District, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(3)Department of Radiology, Huizhou Central People's Hospital, NO.41 North Road 
of Eling, Huicheng District, Huizhou, Guangdong, China.
(4)The Second School of Clinical Medicine, Southern Medical University, NO.1023 
North Road of Shatai, Baiyun District, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. 
greenrosevickey@126.com.
(5)Department of Medical Imaging, Guangdong Second Provincial General Hospital, 
NO.1 Road of Shiliugang, Haizhu District, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. 
greenrosevickey@126.com.

BACKGROUND: To explore the value of magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) and 
high resolution magnetic resonance vessel wall imaging (HRMR-VWI) in 
cervicocranial artery dissection (CCAD) for the disease diagnosis, course 
staging and treatment. On the basis of qualitative evaluation, this study also 
extract the changes of different stages in vessel wall in different vessel 
segments to identify imaging indicators for the quantitative evaluation of CCAD.
METHODS: We retrospectively enrolled 34 patients with CCAD (38branches) with 
conventional MRA and HRMR-VWI examinations. Two radiologists independently 
analyzed imaging features of vessel wall and lumen in the different stages, and 
the typical sign detection of artery dissection were compared between MRA and 
HRMR-VWI. Then the parameters of vessel wall was quantitatively evaluated by the 
post-processing software (Vesselmass, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
The Netherlands.
RESULTS: HRMR-VWI revealed typical sign detection of artery dissection in all 
patients in the acute and subacute stage. Among them, the intimal flap/double 
lumen sign ditection were more common than the MRA, there was significant 
difference (P = 0.012). MRA revealed typical sign detection of artery dissection 
in more than half the patients, and the detection was no significant difference 
at the chronic stage between MRA and HRMR-VWI (P = 1.000/1.000/0.761). In the 
acute and subacute stage, the typical sign detection of intramural hematoma and 
Grade II enhancement revealed by HR-MRI was higher than the observations in the 
chronic stage (P = 0.000/0.000/0.016), while there was no significant difference 
by MRA (P = 0.902). The values of wall thickness, relative signal intensity of 
vessel wall enhancement, relative signal intensity of intramural hematoma (IMH), 
and percentage of stenosis in CCAD decreased from acute to subacute and then to 
chronic stages. Each quantitative parameter in patients with CCAD in the early 
stages (i.e., acute and subacute stages) was significantly different from that 
in patients with CCAD in the recovered group at chronic stage (P < 0.05). Wall 
thickness and relative signal intensity of vessel wall enhancement in patients 
with CCAD in the early stages were not significantly different from those in 
patients with CCAD in the incompletely recovered group at chronic stage (P > 
0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: As the only noninvasive imaging technology, HRMR-VWI displays the 
structure of the vessel wall in vivo, showing not only excellent performance in 
the early diagnosis of CCAD, but also describing the changes of different stages 
in the qualitative and quantitative characteristics of vessel wall. It also 
helps to guide the diseasediagnosis, course staging and treatment of CCAD. 
Although the diagnostic efficacy of MRA was not as good as HRMR-VWI, it should 
be the first choice of method for routine examination in evaluating CCAD, 
especially at the chronic stage of CCAD.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12880-023-01133-z
PMCID: PMC10644659
PMID: 37957581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Guihua Jiang, Bowen lan, Weiqiong Ma, Kangyin 
Chen, Wuming Li and Kexin Zhou declare that they have no competing interests.