---
reference_id: "PMID:38234081"
title: Rapid recovery in a child with febrile ulceronecrotic Mucha-Habermann disease following intravenous immunoglobulin administration.
authors:
- Somasundaram A
- Gupta A
- Sathishkumar D
- Mathew L
- George A
- Thomas M
journal: Pediatr Dermatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/pde.15516
keywords:
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulins, Intravenous/therapeutic use"
- Pityriasis Lichenoides/drug therapy
- "Child, Preschool"
- Male
- Immunologic Factors/therapeutic use
- "Fever/etiology, drug therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rapid recovery in a child with febrile ulceronecrotic Mucha-Habermann disease following intravenous immunoglobulin administration.
**Authors:** Somasundaram A, Gupta A, Sathishkumar D, Mathew L, George A, Thomas M
**Journal:** Pediatr Dermatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pde.15516](https://doi.org/10.1111/pde.15516)

## Content

1. Pediatr Dermatol. 2024 May-Jun;41(3):518-522. doi: 10.1111/pde.15516. Epub
2024  Jan 17.

Rapid recovery in a child with febrile ulceronecrotic Mucha-Habermann disease
following intravenous immunoglobulin administration.

Somasundaram A(1), Gupta A(1), Sathishkumar D(1), Mathew L(1), George A(1),
Thomas M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Venereology & Leprosy, Christian Medical College
and Hospital, Vellore, India.
(2)Department of Pathology, Christian Medical College and Hospital, Vellore,
India.

Febrile ulceronecrotic Mucha-Habermann disease (FUMHD), a lymphocyte-mediated
inflammatory skin disorder, is considered a severe variant of pityriasis
lichenoides et varioliformis acuta that can lead to a fatal outcome if not
managed in a timely fashion. Children with FUMHD can have systemic complications
involving various organs. The scarcity of reported cases and the absence of
well-designed studies or randomized clinical trials to evaluate different
therapeutic modalities pose a major challenge in treating this potentially
life-threatening disorder. We report a five-year-old child with FUMHD and
seizures treated unsuccessfully with a combination of systemic steroids,
methotrexate, dapsone, and oral erythromycin, who improved rapidly and achieved
disease control with just a single infusion of low-dose intravenous
immunoglobulin.

© 2024 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/pde.15516
PMID: 38234081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
