---
reference_id: "PMID:28962928"
title: The mechanism of cone cell death in Retinitis Pigmentosa.
authors:
- Campochiaro PA
- Mir TA
journal: Prog Retin Eye Res
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2017.08.004
keywords:
- Cell Death/physiology
- Cell Survival/physiology
- Free Radicals/metabolism
- Humans
- Oxidative Stress/physiology
- Oxygen/metabolism
- "Retinal Cone Photoreceptor Cells/metabolism, physiology"
- Retinitis Pigmentosa/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The mechanism of cone cell death in Retinitis Pigmentosa.
**Authors:** Campochiaro PA, Mir TA
**Journal:** Prog Retin Eye Res (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.preteyeres.2017.08.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.preteyeres.2017.08.004)

## Content

1. Prog Retin Eye Res. 2018 Jan;62:24-37. doi: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2017.08.004. 
Epub 2017 Sep 27.

The mechanism of cone cell death in Retinitis Pigmentosa.

Campochiaro PA(1), Mir TA(2).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Ophthalmology and Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States. Electronic address: 
pcampo@jhmi.edu.
(2)Departments of Ophthalmology and Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States.

Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP) is a group of diseases in which one of a large number 
of mutations causes death of rod photoreceptors. After rods die, cone 
photoreceptors slowly degenerate in a characteristic pattern. The mechanism of 
rod cell death varies depending upon the gene that is mutated and the rate that 
rods degenerate is an important prognostic feature, because cones do not begin 
to degenerate until almost all rods have been eliminated. Rod cell death causes 
night blindness, but visual disability and blindness result from cone 
degeneration and therefore it is critical to determine the mechanisms by which 
it occurs. The death of rods reduces oxygen consumption resulting in high tissue 
levels of oxygen in the outer retina. The excess oxygen stimulates superoxide 
radical production by mismatches in the electron transport chain in mitochondria 
and by stimulation of NADPH oxidase activity in cytoplasm. The high levels of 
superoxide radicals overwhelm the antioxidant defense system and generate more 
reactive species including peroxynitrite which is extremely damaging and 
difficult to detoxify. This results in progressive oxidative damage in cones 
which contributes to cone cell death and loss of function because drugs or gene 
transfer that reduce oxidative stress promote cone survival and maintenance of 
function. Compared with aqueous humor samples from control patients, those from 
patients with RP show significant elevation of carbonyl content on proteins 
indicating oxidative damage and a reduction in the ratio of reduced to oxidized 
glutathione indicating depletion of a major component of the antioxidant defense 
system from ongoing oxidative stress. The first step in clinical trials will be 
to identify doses of therapeutic agents that reverse these biomarkers of disease 
to assist in design of much longer trials with functional and anatomic 
endpoints.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2017.08.004
PMID: 28962928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]