---
reference_id: "PMID:35547535"
title: "Arteriovenous Cerebral High Flow Shunts in Children: From Genotype to Phenotype."
authors:
- Tas B
- Starnoni D
- Smajda S
- Vivanti AJ
- Adamsbaum C
- Eyries M
- Melki J
- Tawk M
- Ozanne A
- Revencu N
- Soubrier F
- Siala S
- Vikkula M
- Deiva K
- Saliou G
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2022.871565
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arteriovenous Cerebral High Flow Shunts in Children: From Genotype to Phenotype.
**Authors:** Tas B, Starnoni D, Smajda S, Vivanti AJ, Adamsbaum C, Eyries M, Melki J, Tawk M, Ozanne A, Revencu N, Soubrier F, Siala S, Vikkula M, Deiva K, Saliou G
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2022.871565](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2022.871565)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2022 Apr 25;10:871565. doi: 10.3389/fped.2022.871565.
eCollection  2022.

Arteriovenous Cerebral High Flow Shunts in Children: From Genotype to Phenotype.

Tas B(1), Starnoni D(2)(3), Smajda S(4), Vivanti AJ(5), Adamsbaum C(6)(7), 
Eyries M(8), Melki J(5), Tawk M(5), Ozanne A(9), Revencu N(4), Soubrier F(8), 
Siala S(6), Vikkula M(4), Deiva K(10), Saliou G(1)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Diagnostic Radiology and Interventional Radiology, Lausanne 
University Hospital (CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, 
Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.
(4)de Duve Institute, Université Catholique de Louvain, Human Molecular 
Genetics, Brussels, Belgium.
(5)INSERM U1195 Petites Molécules de Neuroprotection, Neurogénération et 
Remyélinisation, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France.
(6)Service de Radiologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital Bicêtre, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, 
France.
(7)Laboratoire Traitement et Communication de l'Information, TELECOM ParisTech, 
Paris, France.
(8)Department of Genetics, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(9)Department of Neuroradiology, Bicêtre Hospital, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France.
(10)Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Bicêtre, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(11)University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

OBJECTIVE: To study the genotypes and phenotypes of cerebral arteriovenous 
fistulas that drain or do not drain through the vein of Galen, and true vein of 
Galen aneurysmal malformations, in order to determine whether genotyping could 
help improve classification of these malformations and their management.
METHODS: We carried out a retrospective review of genetic and phenotypic data in 
databases of four centers. All children with cerebral arteriovenous fistula or 
vein of Galen aneurysmal malformations aged below 18 years at onset were 
included. We recorded the nature of the genetic variant or absence of variant, 
age at onset, type of malformation, symptoms at onset (hemorrhage, neurological 
deficit, hydrocephalus, incidental, and heart failure), type of venous drainage 
and the long-term outcome.
RESULTS: One hundred and fifteen children were included. Autosomal dominant 
variants were identified in 39% of patients. The most frequent variant affected 
was the RASA1 gene (25%) followed by EPHB4 (8%) and the HHT-associated genes 
(5%). HHT gene variants were only observed in pial arteriovenous fistula not 
draining into the vein of Galen; on the contrary, EPHB4 variants were only seen 
in genuine vein of Galen aneurysmal malformation. RASA1 variants were identified 
in all types of shunts.
CONCLUSIONS: EPHB4 variants seem specific to the vein of Galen aneurysmal 
malformation, RASA1 variants are associated with either pial arteriovenous 
fistulas or with genuine VGAM and HHT gene variants seem specific to pial 
arteriovenous fistulas. The genetic data helps to classify these malformations 
and to guide treatment toward lowest risk of post-operative cerebral 
ischemic-hemorrhagic complications.

Copyright © 2022 Tas, Starnoni, Smajda, Vivanti, Adamsbaum, Eyries, Melki, Tawk, 
Ozanne, Revencu, Soubrier, Siala, Vikkula, Deiva and Saliou.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2022.871565
PMCID: PMC9081809
PMID: 35547535

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.