---
reference_id: "PMID:15508099"
title: Chemoprevention of hepatocellular carcinoma in aflatoxin endemic areas.
authors:
- Kensler TW
- Egner PA
- Wang JB
- Zhu YR
- Zhang BC
- Lu PX
- Chen JG
- Qian GS
- Kuang SY
- Jackson PE
- Gange SJ
- Jacobson LP
- Muñoz A
- Groopman JD
journal: Gastroenterology
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2004.09.046
keywords:
- Aflatoxins/adverse effects
- Anticarcinogenic Agents/therapeutic use
- Antimutagenic Agents/therapeutic use
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/etiology, prevention & control"
- Chemoprevention
- Diet
- Food Contamination
- Humans
- "Liver Neoplasms/etiology, prevention & control"
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chemoprevention of hepatocellular carcinoma in aflatoxin endemic areas.
**Authors:** Kensler TW, Egner PA, Wang JB, Zhu YR, Zhang BC, Lu PX, Chen JG, Qian GS, Kuang SY, Jackson PE, Gange SJ, Jacobson LP, Muñoz A, Groopman JD
**Journal:** Gastroenterology (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.gastro.2004.09.046](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.gastro.2004.09.046)

## Content

1. Gastroenterology. 2004 Nov;127(5 Suppl 1):S310-8. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2004.09.046.

Chemoprevention of hepatocellular carcinoma in aflatoxin endemic areas.

Kensler TW(1), Egner PA, Wang JB, Zhu YR, Zhang BC, Lu PX, Chen JG, Qian GS,
Kuang SY, Jackson PE, Gange SJ, Jacobson LP, Muñoz A, Groopman JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School
of Public Health, 615 N. Wolfe Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.
tkensler@jhsph.edu

Hepatocellular carcinoma is one of the most common cancers worldwide. Infection
with hepatitis B virus and exposure to aflatoxins in the diet act
synergistically to amplify risk. From a public health perspective, hepatitis
virus vaccination programs and efforts to both reduce aflatoxin exposures and to
attenuate the toxicological consequences of unavoidable exposures should have
major impacts on the global incidence of this disease. Experimentally,
aflatoxin-induced hepatocarcinogenesis can be inhibited by over a score of
different chemopreventive agents with multiple mechanisms of action. One agent,
oltipraz, is a potent inducer of phase 2 enzymes involved in the detoxication of
carcinogens including aflatoxin. A second agent, chlorophyllin, impedes the
bioavailability of carcinogens by forming molecular complexes and enhances their
elimination in the fecal stream. This review highlights the findings of recent
randomized clinical trials with oltipraz and chlorophyllin conducted in
individuals exposed to dietary aflatoxins and at high risk for development of
liver cancer. Both chemopreventive agents modulated levels of aflatoxin
biomarkers in the study participants in manners consonant with protection.
Although pharmacological approaches establish proof of principle and help
identify key molecular targets for interventions, food-based approaches that
also use these molecular targets may be the most practical for widespread
application in high-risk populations.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2004.09.046
PMID: 15508099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
