---
reference_id: "PMID:27493202"
title: "RPGR, a prenylated retinal ciliopathy protein, is targeted to cilia in a prenylation- and PDE6D-dependent manner."
authors:
- Dutta N
- Seo S
journal: Biol Open
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1242/bio.020461
content_type: abstract_only
---

# RPGR, a prenylated retinal ciliopathy protein, is targeted to cilia in a prenylation- and PDE6D-dependent manner.
**Authors:** Dutta N, Seo S
**Journal:** Biol Open (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1242/bio.020461](https://doi.org/10.1242/bio.020461)

## Content

1. Biol Open. 2016 Sep 15;5(9):1283-9. doi: 10.1242/bio.020461.

RPGR, a prenylated retinal ciliopathy protein, is targeted to cilia in a 
prenylation- and PDE6D-dependent manner.

Dutta N(1), Seo S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Iowa College 
of Medicine, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Iowa College 
of Medicine, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA seongjin-seo@uiowa.edu.

RPGR (retinitis pigmentosa GTPase regulator) is a ciliary protein associated 
with several forms of inherited retinal degenerative diseases. PDE6D is a 
ubiquitously expressed prenyl-binding protein and involved in ciliary targeting 
of prenylated proteins. The current working model for the RPGR function depicts 
that RPGR acts as a scaffold protein to recruit cargo-loaded PDE6D to primary 
cilia. Here, we present evidence demonstrating an alternative relationship 
between RPGR and PDE6D, in which RPGR is a cargo of PDE6D for ciliary targeting. 
We found that the constitutive isoform of RPGR, which is prenylated, requires 
prenylation for its ciliary localization. We also found that there are at least 
two independent ciliary targeting signals in RPGR: one within the N-terminal 
region that contains the RCC1-like domain and the other near the prenylation 
site at the C-terminus. Ablation of PDE6D blocked ciliary targeting of RPGR. Our 
study indicates that prenylated RPGR is one of the cargos of PDE6D for ciliary 
trafficking and provides insight into the mechanisms by which RPGR is targeted 
to cilia.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/bio.020461
PMCID: PMC5051646
PMID: 27493202

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing or financial 
interests.