---
reference_id: "PMID:24777739"
title: A novel ZRS mutation leads to preaxial polydactyly type 2 in a heterozygous form and Werner mesomelic syndrome in a homozygous form.
authors:
- VanderMeer JE
- Lozano R
- Sun M
- Xue Y
- Daentl D
- Jabs EW
- Wilcox WR
- Ahituv N
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/humu.22581
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Female
- Gene Dosage
- Genotype
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Heterozygote
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mexico
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Polydactyly/genetics, pathology"
- Thumb/abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel ZRS mutation leads to preaxial polydactyly type 2 in a heterozygous form and Werner mesomelic syndrome in a homozygous form.
**Authors:** VanderMeer JE, Lozano R, Sun M, Xue Y, Daentl D, Jabs EW, Wilcox WR, Ahituv N
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.22581](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.22581)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2014 Aug;35(8):945-8. doi: 10.1002/humu.22581. Epub 2014 Jun 3.

A novel ZRS mutation leads to preaxial polydactyly type 2 in a heterozygous form 
and Werner mesomelic syndrome in a homozygous form.

VanderMeer JE(1), Lozano R, Sun M, Xue Y, Daentl D, Jabs EW, Wilcox WR, Ahituv 
N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of 
California San Francisco, San Francisco, California; Institute for Human 
Genetics, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California.

Point mutations in the zone of polarizing activity regulatory sequence (ZRS) are 
known to cause human limb malformations. Although most mutations cause preaxial 
polydactyly (PPD), triphalangeal thumb (TPT) or both, a mutation in position 404 
of the ZRS causes more severe Werner mesomelic syndrome (WMS) for which 
malformations include the distal arm or leg bones in addition to the hands 
and/or feet. Of more than 15 reported families with ZRS mutations, only one 
homozygous individual has been reported, with no change in phenotype compared 
with heterozygotes. Here, we describe a novel point mutation in the ZRS, 402C>T 
(AC007097.4:g.105548C>T), that is transmitted through two Mexican families with 
one homozygous individual. The homozygous phenotype for this mutation, WMS, is 
more severe than the numerous heterozygous individuals genotyped from both 
families who have TPT and PPD. A mouse transgenic enhancer assay shows that this 
mutation causes an expansion of the enhancer's expression domain in the 
developing mouse limb, confirming its pathogenicity. Combined, our results 
identify a novel ZRS mutation in the Mexican population, 402C>T, and suggest 
that a dosage effect exists for this ZRS mutation.

© 2014 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22581
PMCID: PMC4110103
PMID: 24777739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure statement: The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.