---
reference_id: "PMID:8651648"
title: "MELAS- and Kearns-Sayre-type co-mutation [corrected] with myopathy and autoimmune polyendocrinopathy."
authors:
- Ohno K
- Yamamoto M
- Engel AG
- Harper CM
- Roberts LR
- Tan GH
- Fatourechi V
journal: Ann Neurol
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1002/ana.410390612
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MELAS- and Kearns-Sayre-type co-mutation [corrected] with myopathy and autoimmune polyendocrinopathy.
**Authors:** Ohno K, Yamamoto M, Engel AG, Harper CM, Roberts LR, Tan GH, Fatourechi V
**Journal:** Ann Neurol (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ana.410390612](https://doi.org/10.1002/ana.410390612)

## Content

1. Ann Neurol. 1996 Jun;39(6):761-6. doi: 10.1002/ana.410390612.

MELAS- and Kearns-Sayre-type co-mutation [corrected] with myopathy and 
autoimmune polyendocrinopathy.

Ohno K(1), Yamamoto M, Engel AG, Harper CM, Roberts LR, Tan GH, Fatourechi V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Muscle Research Laboratory, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Erratum in
    Ann Neurol 1996 Sep;40(3):480.

A 35-year-old woman with features of Kearns-Sayre syndrome consisting of 
progressive ptosis, ophthalmoparesis, mitochondrial myopathy, and pigmentary 
retinopathy also had autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 11 (Addison's 
disease, autoimmune insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, Hashimoto's 
thyroiditis, and primary ovarian failure). There was no history of similarly 
affected relatives. Analysis of muscle mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) revealed a 
2,532-bp deletion of the type seen in Kearns-Sayre syndrome as well as a 
heteroplasmic A3243G mutation in the tRNA-Leu(UUR) gene of the type seen in 
mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, and strokelike episodes 
(MELAS). The patient's blood and her mother's blood harbored the A3243G mutation 
but not the deletion, and the maternal grandmother's blood had neither mutation. 
In muscle, the species of mtDNA harboring the deletion was exclusively 
associated with the species harboring the A3243G mutation, suggesting that the 
point mutation predisposed to the large-scale deletion. The mtDNA species with 
both mutations accounted for 88% of total muscle mtDNA. Other and as yet 
unrecognized point mutations in mtDNA might also be associated with, and 
possible causally related to, large-scale mtDNA deletions.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410390612
PMID: 8651648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]