---
reference_id: "PMID:38914866"
title: Transcriptomic analysis of intestine following administration of a transglutaminase 2 inhibitor to prevent gluten-induced intestinal damage in celiac disease.
authors:
- Dotsenko V
- Tewes B
- Hils M
- Pasternack R
- Isola J
- Taavela J
- Popp A
- Sarin J
- Huhtala H
- Hiltunen P
- Zimmermann T
- Mohrbacher R
- Greinwald R
- Lundin KEA
- Schuppan D
- Mäki M
- Viiri K
- CEC-3 Investigators
journal: Nat Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41590-024-01867-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcriptomic analysis of intestine following administration of a transglutaminase 2 inhibitor to prevent gluten-induced intestinal damage in celiac disease.
**Authors:** Dotsenko V, Tewes B, Hils M, Pasternack R, Isola J, Taavela J, Popp A, Sarin J, Huhtala H, Hiltunen P, Zimmermann T, Mohrbacher R, Greinwald R, Lundin KEA, Schuppan D, Mäki M, Viiri K, CEC-3 Investigators
**Journal:** Nat Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41590-024-01867-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-024-01867-0)

## Content

1. Nat Immunol. 2024 Jul;25(7):1218-1230. doi: 10.1038/s41590-024-01867-0. Epub 
2024 Jun 24.

Transcriptomic analysis of intestine following administration of a 
transglutaminase 2 inhibitor to prevent gluten-induced intestinal damage in 
celiac disease.

Dotsenko V(1), Tewes B(2), Hils M(3), Pasternack R(3), Isola J(4)(5), Taavela 
J(1)(6), Popp A(1)(7), Sarin J(5), Huhtala H(8), Hiltunen P(9), Zimmermann T(2), 
Mohrbacher R(2), Greinwald R(2), Lundin KEA(10)(11), Schuppan D(12)(13), Mäki 
M(1), Viiri K(14); CEC-3 Investigators.

Collaborators: Kull K, Koskenpato J, Scheinin M, Lähdeaho ML, Schumann M, Zopf 
Y, Stallmach A, Lohse AW, Fusco S, Langhorst J, Török HP, Byrnes V, Kupcinskas 
J, Hovde Ø, Jahnsen J, Biedermann L, Zeitz J.

Author information:
(1)Celiac Disease Research Center, Faculty of Medicine and Health Technology, 
Tampere University and Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.
(2)Dr. Falk Pharma GmbH, Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Zedira GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany.
(4)Faculty of Medicine and Health Technology, Tampere University, Tampere, 
Finland.
(5)Jilab Inc, Tampere, Finland.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology and Alimentary Tract Surgery, Tampere 
University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.
(7)University of Medicine and Pharmacy 'Carol Davila' and National Institute for 
Mother and Child Health, Bucharest, Romania.
(8)Unit of Health Sciences, Faculty of Social Sciences, Tampere University, 
Tampere, Finland.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.
(10)Norwegian Coeliac Disease Research Centre, Institute of Clinical Medicine, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(11)Department of Gastroenterology, Oslo University Hospital Rikshospitalet, 
Oslo, Norway.
(12)Institute of Translational Immunology and Celiac Center, Medical Center, 
Johannes-Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany.
(13)Division of Gastroenterology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(14)Celiac Disease Research Center, Faculty of Medicine and Health Technology, 
Tampere University and Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland. 
keijo.viiri@tuni.fi.

Transglutaminase 2 (TG2) plays a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of celiac 
disease (CeD) by deamidating dietary gluten peptides, which facilitates 
antigenic presentation and a strong anti-gluten T cell response. Here, we 
elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying the efficacy of the TG2 inhibitor 
ZED1227 by performing transcriptional analysis of duodenal biopsies from 
individuals with CeD on a long-term gluten-free diet before and after a 6-week 
gluten challenge combined with 100 mg per day ZED1227 or placebo. At the 
transcriptome level, orally administered ZED1227 effectively prevented 
gluten-induced intestinal damage and inflammation, providing molecular-level 
evidence that TG2 inhibition is an effective strategy for treating CeD. ZED1227 
treatment preserved transcriptome signatures associated with mucosal morphology, 
inflammation, cell differentiation and nutrient absorption to the level of the 
gluten-free diet group. Nearly half of the gluten-induced gene expression 
changes in CeD were associated with the epithelial interferon-γ response. 
Moreover, data suggest that deamidated gluten-induced adaptive immunity is a 
sufficient step to set the stage for CeD pathogenesis. Our results, with the 
limited sample size, also suggest that individuals with CeD might benefit from 
an HLA-DQ2/HLA-DQ8 stratification based on gene doses to maximally eliminate the 
interferon-γ-induced mucosal damage triggered by gluten.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41590-024-01867-0
PMCID: PMC11224021
PMID: 38914866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: V.D. and K.V. received funding from Dr. Falk 
Pharma to Tampere University to conduct the study. B.T., T.Z., R.M. and R.G. are 
employees of Dr. Falk Pharma. The data presented here are the subject of patent 
applications EP24173619.8 and EP24173615.6 filed by Dr. Falk Pharma, and B.T., 
T.Z., R.M., R.G., V.D. and K.V. are inventors on these applications. M.H. and 
R.P. are employees of Zedira. A.P. is a consultant for JiLab Oy. J.T. is a 
consultant for Jilab Oy and Dr. Falk Pharma. K.E.A.L. is a consultant for Amyra, 
Bioniz Pharmaceuticals, Chugai Pharmaceutical, Dr. Falk Pharma, Itrexon 
Actobios, TOPAS Therapeutics and Takeda California. D.S. is the data and safety 
monitor for Boehringer Ingelheim (Phil.) and is a consultant for the Dr. Falk 
Pharma, Takeda, Immunic, Sanofi and TOPAS Therapeutics. J.I. is the owner of 
Jilab Oy. M.M. is the founder, owner and Chair of the Board of Maki HealthTech 
(MHT). MHT receives Management/Advisory Affiliation fees from Dr. Falk Pharma 
and other funding not related to the research from Topas Therapeutics, Calypso 
Biotech, Vaccitech, ImmunogenX, Equillium and Immunic. MHT holds patents (patent 
number 7361480 (United States) and European Patent Office Number 1390753) 
licensed to Labsystems Diagnostics from where MHT receives royalties via Tampere 
University Hospital. All other authors declare no competing interests.