---
reference_id: "PMID:24962467"
title: Quantitation of human parvovirus B19 DNA in erythema infectiosum and aplastic crisis.
authors:
- Ishikawa A
- Yoto Y
- Tsugawa T
- Tsutsumi H
journal: J Med Virol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1002/jmv.23930
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Quantitation of human parvovirus B19 DNA in erythema infectiosum and aplastic crisis.
**Authors:** Ishikawa A, Yoto Y, Tsugawa T, Tsutsumi H
**Journal:** J Med Virol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmv.23930](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.23930)

## Content

1. J Med Virol. 2014 Dec;86(12):2102-6. doi: 10.1002/jmv.23930. Epub 2014 Jun 24.

Quantitation of human parvovirus B19 DNA in erythema infectiosum and aplastic 
crisis.

Ishikawa A(1), Yoto Y, Tsugawa T, Tsutsumi H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine, 
Sapporo, Japan.

Several publications concerning the methods of real-time PCR for human 
parvovirus B19 (B19V) have appeared and some case reports mention B19V DNA 
loads. However, no large-scale study quantitating levels of B19V DNA in common 
or representative B19V manifestations such as erythema infectiosum and aplastic 
crisis has been performed. Consequently, using the TaqMan PCR assay, the B19V 
load in a large sample of subjects with erythema infectiosum or aplastic crisis 
was quantitated. Sixty-five subjects in the acute phase of erythema infectiosum 
were involved, and in addition 22 serum samples from seven subjects with 
B19V-associated aplastic crisis complicating chronic hemolytic anemia were also 
analyzed. In the acute phase of erythema infectiosum the median B19V DNA load in 
the serum samples from the acute phase of erythema infectiosum was 7.63 × 10(5) 
 genomes/ml, (range from 4.48 × 10(3) to 8.31 × 10(6)  genomes/ml). The serum 
B19V DNA load during the acute phase of aplastic crisis complicating chronic 
hemolytic anemia was extremely high, that is 10(10) -10(13)  genomes/ml, and 
decreased gradually to around 10(5) genomes/ml over 1-2 months. Although all 
subjects followed an almost uniform and typical clinical course of erythema 
infectiosum, there was a large individual variation of B19V DNA loads, that is 
differences of over 1,000 times. Extremely high B19V loads were observed in 
subjects with aplastic crisis. This study is the first large scale report of 
studies of the B19V DNA loads in subjects with erythema infectiosum and aplastic 
crisis, the most common and significant clinical manifestations by B19V 
infections.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.23930
PMID: 24962467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]