---
reference_id: "PMID:35899466"
title: Detergent exposure induces epithelial barrier dysfunction and eosinophilic inflammation in the esophagus.
authors:
- Doyle AD
- Masuda MY
- Pyon GC
- Luo H
- Putikova A
- LeSuer WE
- Flashner S
- Rank MA
- Nakagawa H
- Kita H
- Wright BL
journal: Allergy
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/all.15457
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- Detergents/adverse effects
- Eosinophilic Esophagitis
- Epithelial Cells/metabolism
- Hyperplasia/pathology
- Inflammation/metabolism
- Interleukin-33/metabolism
- Dextrans
- "Fluorescein-5-isothiocyanate/analogs & derivatives"
- Enteritis
- Eosinophilia
- Gastritis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Detergent exposure induces epithelial barrier dysfunction and eosinophilic inflammation in the esophagus.
**Authors:** Doyle AD, Masuda MY, Pyon GC, Luo H, Putikova A, LeSuer WE, Flashner S, Rank MA, Nakagawa H, Kita H, Wright BL
**Journal:** Allergy (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/all.15457](https://doi.org/10.1111/all.15457)

## Content

1. Allergy. 2023 Jan;78(1):192-201. doi: 10.1111/all.15457. Epub 2022 Aug 8.

Detergent exposure induces epithelial barrier dysfunction and eosinophilic 
inflammation in the esophagus.

Doyle AD(1), Masuda MY(1), Pyon GC(1), Luo H(1), Putikova A(1), LeSuer WE(1), 
Flashner S(2), Rank MA(1)(3), Nakagawa H(2), Kita H(1), Wright BL(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergy, Asthma, and Clinical Immunology, Mayo Clinic Arizona, 
Scottsdale, Arizona, USA.
(2)Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbia University Irving 
Medical Center, New York, New York, USA.
(3)Division of Pulmonology, Section of Allergy and Immunology, Phoenix 
Children's Hospital, Phoenix, Arizona, USA.

Comment in
    Allergy. 2023 Jun;78(6):1422-1424. doi: 10.1111/all.15646.

BACKGROUND: Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) is a chronic allergic disease 
associated with type 2 inflammation and epithelial barrier dysfunction. The 
etiology is unknown, however, genetic heritability studies suggest environmental 
factors play a key role in pathogenesis. Detergents, such as sodium dodecyl 
sulfate (SDS), are common ingredients in household products such as dish soap 
and toothpaste. We hypothesized detergent exposure decreases epithelial barrier 
function and induces esophageal inflammation.
METHODS: Immortalized esophageal epithelial cells (EPC2) were cultured in 
air-liquid interface (ALI) and exposed to SDS. Barrier function/activity was 
assessed by transepithelial electrical resistance (TEER), FITC-dextran flux, and 
RT-PCR. Additionally, SDS-treated mouse esophageal organoids were evaluated for 
morphology. To investigate the effects of SDS in vivo, mice were treated with 
0.5% SDS in drinking water for 14 days. Esophagi were assessed by gross 
morphology, histopathology, protein expression, and bulk RNA sequencing.
RESULTS: When EPC2 cells were exposed to SDS (5 μg/ml) for 96 h, TEER decreased 
(p = 0.03), and FITC-dextran flux increased (p = 0.0002). mRNA expression of 
IL-33 increased 4.5-fold (p = 0.02) at 6 h and DSG1 decreased (p < 0.0001) by 
72 h. Disrupted epithelial integrity was noted in SDS-treated esophageal 
organoids. When mice were exposed to SDS, they showed increased esophageal 
width, chemokine, and metalloprotease levels. Mice treated with SDS also showed 
increased IL-33 protein expression, basal zone hyperplasia, CD4+ cell 
infiltration, and esophageal eosinophilia. RNA sequencing revealed upregulation 
of immune response pathway genes.
CONCLUSION: Exposure to SDS decreases esophageal barrier integrity, stimulates 
IL-33 production, and promotes epithelial hyperplasia and tissue eosinophilia. 
Detergents may be a key environmental trigger in EoE pathogenesis.

© 2022 European Academy of Allergy and Clinical Immunology and John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/all.15457
PMCID: PMC9797443
PMID: 35899466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: The author have no 
conflicts of interest to report.