---
reference_id: "PMID:15269315"
title: "Methylprednisolone, valacyclovir, or the combination for vestibular neuritis."
authors:
- Strupp M
- Zingler VC
- Arbusow V
- Niklas D
- Maag KP
- Dieterich M
- Bense S
- Theil D
- Jahn K
- Brandt T
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa033280
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Methylprednisolone, valacyclovir, or the combination for vestibular neuritis.
**Authors:** Strupp M, Zingler VC, Arbusow V, Niklas D, Maag KP, Dieterich M, Bense S, Theil D, Jahn K, Brandt T
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa033280](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa033280)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2004 Jul 22;351(4):354-61. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa033280.

Methylprednisolone, valacyclovir, or the combination for vestibular neuritis.

Strupp M(1), Zingler VC, Arbusow V, Niklas D, Maag KP, Dieterich M, Bense S, 
Theil D, Jahn K, Brandt T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Munich, Munich, Germany. 
mstrupp@nefo.med.uni-muenchen.de

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2004 Jul 22;351(4):322-3. doi: 10.1056/NEJMp048127.
    N Engl J Med. 2004 Nov 25;351(22):2344-5; author reply 2344-5. doi: 
10.1056/NEJM200411253512222.
    N Engl J Med. 2004 Nov 25;351(22):2344-5; author reply 2344-5.
    N Engl J Med. 2004 Nov 25;351(22):2344-5; author reply 2344-5.

BACKGROUND: Vestibular neuritis is the second most common cause of peripheral 
vestibular vertigo. Its assumed cause is a reactivation of herpes simplex virus 
type 1 infection. Therefore, corticosteroids, antiviral agents, or a combination 
of the two might improve the outcome in patients with vestibular neuritis.
METHODS: We performed a prospective, randomized, double-blind, two-by-two 
factorial trial in which patients with acute vestibular neuritis were randomly 
assigned to treatment with placebo, methylprednisolone, valacyclovir, or 
methylprednisolone plus valacyclovir. Vestibular function was determined by 
caloric irrigation, with the use of the vestibular paresis formula (to measure 
the extent of unilateral caloric paresis) within 3 days after the onset of 
symptoms and 12 months afterward.
RESULTS: Of a total of 141 patients who underwent randomization, 38 received 
placebo, 35 methylprednisolone, 33 valacyclovir, and 35 methylprednisolone plus 
valacyclovir. At the onset of symptoms there was no difference among the groups 
in the severity of vestibular paresis. The mean (+/-SD) improvement in 
peripheral vestibular function at the 12-month follow-up was 39.6+/-28.1 
percentage points in the placebo group, 62.4+/-16.9 percentage points in the 
methylprednisolone group, 36.0+/-26.7 percentage points in the valacyclovir 
group, and 59.2+/-24.1 percentage points in the 
methylprednisolone-plus-valacyclovir group. Analysis of variance showed a 
significant effect of methylprednisolone (P<0.001) but not of valacyclovir 
(P=0.43). The combination of methylprednisolone and valacyclovir was not 
superior to corticosteroid monotherapy.
CONCLUSIONS: Methylprednisolone significantly improves the recovery of 
peripheral vestibular function in patients with vestibular neuritis, whereas 
valacyclovir does not.

Copyright 2004 Massachusetts Medical Society

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa033280
PMID: 15269315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]