---
reference_id: "PMID:38716347"
title: "Malignant glioma in L-2-Hydroxyglutaric Aciduria: thorough molecular characterization of a case and literature review."
authors:
- Cordier F
- Wesseling P
- Tops BBJ
- Kester L
- French PJ
- van den Bent M
- Hinz F
- Aronica E
- Slot KM
- Abbink F
- van der Knaap MS
- Kranendonk MEG
journal: Free Neuropathol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.17879/freeneuropathology-2024-5377
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Malignant glioma in L-2-Hydroxyglutaric Aciduria: thorough molecular characterization of a case and literature review.
**Authors:** Cordier F, Wesseling P, Tops BBJ, Kester L, French PJ, van den Bent M, Hinz F, Aronica E, Slot KM, Abbink F, van der Knaap MS, Kranendonk MEG
**Journal:** Free Neuropathol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.17879/freeneuropathology-2024-5377](https://doi.org/10.17879/freeneuropathology-2024-5377)

## Content

1. Free Neuropathol. 2024 May 3;5:11. doi: 10.17879/freeneuropathology-2024-5377.
 eCollection 2024 Jan.

Malignant glioma in L-2-Hydroxyglutaric Aciduria: thorough molecular 
characterization of a case and literature review.

Cordier F(1)(2), Wesseling P(1)(3), Tops BBJ(1), Kester L(1), French PJ(4), van 
den Bent M(4), Hinz F(5)(6), Aronica E(3), Slot KM(7), Abbink F(8), van der 
Knaap MS(9)(10)(11), Kranendonk MEG(1).

Author information:
(1)Princess Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Pathology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent University, Ghent, 
Belgium.
(3)Department of Pathology, Amsterdam University Medical Centers (UMC), 
University of Amsterdam (EA) and Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam (PW), Amsterdam 
Neuroscience, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Neurology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Neuropathology, Institute of Pathology, Heidelberg University 
Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(6)Clinical Cooperation Unit Neuropathology, German Consortium for Translational 
Cancer Research (DKTK), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, 
Germany.
(7)Department of Neurosurgery, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam 
University Medical Centers, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(9)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam 
University Medical Centers, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(10)Amsterdam Neuroscience, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(11)Department of Integrative Neurophysiology, Center for Neurogenomics and 
Cognitive Research, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria (L-2-HGA) is a rare neurometabolic disorder 
characterized by accumulation of L2-hydroxyglutarate (L-2-HG) due to mutations 
in the L2HGDH gene. L-2-HGA patients have a significantly increased lifetime 
risk of central nervous system (CNS) tumors. Here, we present a 16-year-old girl 
with L-2-HGA who developed a tumor in the right cerebral hemisphere, which was 
discovered after left-sided neurological deficits of the patient. 
Histologically, the tumor had a high-grade diffuse glioma phenotype. DNA 
sequencing revealed the inactivating homozygous germline L2HGDH mutation as well 
as inactivating mutations in TP53, BCOR and NF1. Genome-wide DNA-methylation 
analysis was unable to classify the tumor with high confidence. More detailed 
analysis revealed that this tumor clustered amongst IDH-wildtype gliomas by 
methylation profiling and did not show the glioma CpG island methylator 
phenotype (G-CIMP) in contrast to IDH-mutant diffuse gliomas with accumulated 
levels of D-2-HG, the stereoisomer of L-2-HD. These findings were against all 
our expectations given the inhibitory potential of 2-HG on DNA-demethylation 
enzymes. Our final integrated histomolecular diagnosis of the tumor was diffuse 
pediatric-type high-grade glioma, H3-wildtype and IDH-wildtype. Due to rapid 
tumor progression the patient died nine months after initial diagnosis. In this 
manuscript, we provide extensive molecular characterization of the tumor as well 
as a literature review focusing on oncogenetic considerations of 
L-2-HGA-associated CNS tumors.

DOI: 10.17879/freeneuropathology-2024-5377
PMCID: PMC11075094
PMID: 38716347

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.