---
reference_id: "PMID:23173984"
title: "Arsenic, asbestos and radon: emerging players in lung tumorigenesis."
authors:
- Hubaux R
- Becker-Santos DD
- Enfield KS
- Lam S
- Lam WL
- Martinez VD
journal: Environ Health
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1186/1476-069X-11-89
keywords:
- Arsenic/toxicity
- Asbestos/toxicity
- "Carcinogens, Environmental/toxicity"
- "Environmental Exposure/adverse effects, prevention & control"
- Humans
- Lung Neoplasms/chemically induced
- Radon
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arsenic, asbestos and radon: emerging players in lung tumorigenesis.
**Authors:** Hubaux R, Becker-Santos DD, Enfield KS, Lam S, Lam WL, Martinez VD
**Journal:** Environ Health (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1476-069X-11-89](https://doi.org/10.1186/1476-069X-11-89)

## Content

1. Environ Health. 2012 Nov 22;11:89. doi: 10.1186/1476-069X-11-89.

Arsenic, asbestos and radon: emerging players in lung tumorigenesis.

Hubaux R(1), Becker-Santos DD, Enfield KS, Lam S, Lam WL, Martinez VD.

Author information:
(1)British Columbia Cancer Research Centre, Vancouver, BC, V5Z 1L3, Canada.
rhubaux@bccrc.ca

The cause of lung cancer is generally attributed to tobacco smoking. However
lung cancer in never smokers accounts for 10 to 25% of all lung cancer cases.
Arsenic, asbestos and radon are three prominent non-tobacco carcinogens strongly
associated with lung cancer. Exposure to these agents can lead to genetic and
epigenetic alterations in tumor genomes, impacting genes and pathways involved
in lung cancer development. Moreover, these agents not only exhibit unique
mechanisms in causing genomic alterations, but also exert deleterious effects
through common mechanisms, such as oxidative stress, commonly associated with
carcinogenesis. This article provides a comprehensive review of arsenic,
asbestos, and radon induced molecular mechanisms responsible for the generation
of genetic and epigenetic alterations in lung cancer. A better understanding of
the mode of action of these carcinogens will facilitate the prevention and
management of lung cancer related to such environmental hazards.

DOI: 10.1186/1476-069X-11-89
PMCID: PMC3534001
PMID: 23173984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
