---
reference_id: "PMID:17667967"
title: "Clinical and molecular genetics of patients with the Carney-Stratakis syndrome and germline mutations of the genes coding for the succinate dehydrogenase subunits SDHB, SDHC, and SDHD."
authors:
- Pasini B
- McWhinney SR
- Bei T
- Matyakhina L
- Stergiopoulos S
- Muchow M
- Boikos SA
- Ferrando B
- Pacak K
- Assie G
- Baudin E
- Chompret A
- Ellison JW
- Briere JJ
- Rustin P
- Gimenez-Roqueplo AP
- Eng C
- Carney JA
- Stratakis CA
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201904
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Alleles
- Antineoplastic Agents/therapeutic use
- Base Sequence
- Benzamides
- Child
- DNA Primers/genetics
- "DNA, Neoplasm/genetics"
- Female
- "Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors/drug therapy, enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Imatinib Mesylate
- Iron-Sulfur Proteins/genetics
- Loss of Heterozygosity
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- "Neoplastic Syndromes, Hereditary/drug therapy, enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- "Paraganglioma/drug therapy, enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- Piperazines/therapeutic use
- Pyrimidines/therapeutic use
- Succinate Dehydrogenase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and molecular genetics of patients with the Carney-Stratakis syndrome and germline mutations of the genes coding for the succinate dehydrogenase subunits SDHB, SDHC, and SDHD.
**Authors:** Pasini B, McWhinney SR, Bei T, Matyakhina L, Stergiopoulos S, Muchow M, Boikos SA, Ferrando B, Pacak K, Assie G, Baudin E, Chompret A, Ellison JW, Briere JJ, Rustin P, Gimenez-Roqueplo AP, Eng C, Carney JA, Stratakis CA
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201904](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201904)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2008 Jan;16(1):79-88. doi: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201904. Epub 2007
 Aug 1.

Clinical and molecular genetics of patients with the Carney-Stratakis syndrome 
and germline mutations of the genes coding for the succinate dehydrogenase 
subunits SDHB, SDHC, and SDHD.

Pasini B(1), McWhinney SR, Bei T, Matyakhina L, Stergiopoulos S, Muchow M, 
Boikos SA, Ferrando B, Pacak K, Assie G, Baudin E, Chompret A, Ellison JW, 
Briere JJ, Rustin P, Gimenez-Roqueplo AP, Eng C, Carney JA, Stratakis CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Biology and Biochemistry, University of Torino, 
Turin, Italy.

Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) may be caused by germline mutations of 
the KIT and platelet-derived growth factor receptor-alpha (PDGFRA) genes and 
treated by Imatinib mesylate (STI571) or other protein tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors. However, not all GISTs harbor these genetic defects and several do 
not respond to STI571 suggesting that other molecular mechanisms may be 
implicated in GIST pathogenesis. In a subset of patients with GISTs, the lesions 
are associated with paragangliomas; the condition is familial and transmitted as 
an autosomal-dominant trait. We investigated 11 patients with the dyad of 
'paraganglioma and gastric stromal sarcoma'; in eight (from seven unrelated 
families), the GISTs were caused by germline mutations of the genes encoding 
subunits B, C, or D (the SDHB, SDHC and SDHD genes, respectively). In this 
report, we present the molecular effects of these mutations on these genes and 
the clinical information on the patients. We conclude that succinate 
dehydrogenase deficiency may be the cause of a subgroup of GISTs and this offers 
a therapeutic target for GISTs that may not respond to STI571 and its analogs.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.ejhg.5201904
PMID: 17667967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]