---
reference_id: "PMID:39558265"
title: "Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever among healthcare workers in Iran 2000-2023, a report of National Reference Laboratory."
authors:
- Fazlalipour M
- Jalali T
- Hewson R
- Pouriayevali MH
- Salehi-Vaziri M
journal: BMC Infect Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12879-024-10199-1
keywords:
- "Hemorrhagic Fever, Crimean/transmission, epidemiology"
- Humans
- Iran/epidemiology
- "Health Personnel/statistics & numerical data"
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- Male
- "Hemorrhagic Fever Virus, Crimean-Congo/isolation & purification"
- Female
- Occupational Exposure
- Young Adult
- "Antibodies, Viral/blood"
- Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
- Immunoglobulin M/blood
- Animals
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever among healthcare workers in Iran 2000-2023, a report of National Reference Laboratory.
**Authors:** Fazlalipour M, Jalali T, Hewson R, Pouriayevali MH, Salehi-Vaziri M
**Journal:** BMC Infect Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12879-024-10199-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12879-024-10199-1)

## Content

1. BMC Infect Dis. 2024 Nov 18;24(1):1312. doi: 10.1186/s12879-024-10199-1.

Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever among healthcare workers in Iran 2000-2023, a 
report of National Reference Laboratory.

Fazlalipour M(1), Jalali T(1), Hewson R(2), Pouriayevali MH(1), Salehi-Vaziri 
M(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Arboviruses and Viral Hemorrhagic Fevers (National Reference 
Laboratory), Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, 1316943551, Iran.
(2)Infectious & Tropical Diseases, Depts. Immunology & Infection/Pathogen 
Microbiology, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(3)Department of Arboviruses and Viral Hemorrhagic Fevers (National Reference 
Laboratory), Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, 1316943551, Iran. 
mostafavaziri1985@gmail.com.
(4)Research Centre for Emerging and Reemerging Infectious Disease, Pasteur 
Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran. mostafavaziri1985@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever (CCHF) is a lethal acute viral 
zoonosis with a case fatality rate of 5-50%. Due to the potential of human-to 
human transmission of the disease, healthcare workers (HCWs) are at risk of 
occupational exposure to CCHF virus. Little is known about CCHF virus route of 
transmission and risks in Iranian HCWs. Therefore this study was designed to 
identify the routes of exposure to the CCHF virus among Iranian HCWs.
METHODS: From Oct 2000 to Feb 2023, 96 CCHF suspected healthcare workers 
referred to national reference laboratory were tested for CCHF virus infection 
by the use of RT-PCR and IgM Capture Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay 
(MAC-ELISA) and exposure history of cases were investigated to determine the 
CCHF virus routes of transmission in nosocomial settings.
RESULTS: Twelve CCHF confirmed cases were identified including seven nurses and 
five physicians, with the median age of 32.5 years (range 23-53 years) and the 
median incubation period of 6.8 days (range from 1 to 22 days). None of the 
cases reported a history of tick bite or close contact with tissues or animal 
blood. The cases were from Razavi Khorasan (seven cases), Sistan and Baluchistan 
(two cases), Isfahan (one case), South Khorasan (one case) and Fars (one case). 
Percutaneous exposure (needle stick) (three cases), mucosal exposure (blood 
splash in to face) (three cases) and skin contact with blood (three cases) 
constituted the most prevalent routes of transmission. Since 2013, no CCHF cases 
have been identified among Iranian HCWs.
CONCLUSIONS: In healthcare settings, physicians and nurses are at risk of 
nosocomial CCHF virus infection. The routes of transmission mainly include 
direct exposures via needle-stick, mucosal or direct contact with the skin to 
infected blood. Continuous education and implementation of infection prevention 
and control measures are key factors to minimize the incidence of healthcare 
related CCHF.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-024-10199-1
PMCID: PMC11571530
PMID: 39558265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Ethics approval and consent to 
participate All the protocols of the present study were ethically approved by 
ethical committee of Pasteur Institute of Iran (approval code: 
IR.PII.REC.1402.039) and the need for informed consent to participate was waived 
by ethical committee of Pasteur Institute of Iran. Consent for publication Not 
applicable. Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.