---
reference_id: "PMID:19428338"
title: Interleukin-17A inhibits adipocyte differentiation in human mesenchymal stem cells and regulates pro-inflammatory responses in adipocytes.
authors:
- Shin JH
- Shin DW
- Noh M
journal: Biochem Pharmacol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2009.03.008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interleukin-17A inhibits adipocyte differentiation in human mesenchymal stem cells and regulates pro-inflammatory responses in adipocytes.
**Authors:** Shin JH, Shin DW, Noh M
**Journal:** Biochem Pharmacol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bcp.2009.03.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bcp.2009.03.008)

## Content

1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2009 Jun 15;77(12):1835-44. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2009.03.008.
 Epub 2009 Mar 19.

Interleukin-17A inhibits adipocyte differentiation in human mesenchymal stem 
cells and regulates pro-inflammatory responses in adipocytes.

Shin JH(1), Shin DW, Noh M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Bio/Brain Engineering, and Mechanical Engineering, 
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.

The immune system is closely linked to human metabolic diseases. Serum levels of 
IL-6 increase with obesity and insulin resistance. Not only does IL-6 decrease 
the insulin sensitivity of human cells such as adipocytes, but it also regulates 
the lineage commitment of naïve T cells into interleukin (IL)-17A-producing 
CD4(+) T (Th17) cells. Although IL-17A exerts a variety of effects on somatic 
tissues, its functional role in human adipocytes has not been identified. In 
this work, we show that IL-17A inhibits adipocyte differentiation in human bone 
marrow mesenchymal stem cells (hBM-MSCs), while promoting lipolysis of 
differentiated adipocytes. We find that IL-17A increases both mRNA and protein 
secretion of IL-6 and IL-8 during adipocyte differentiation in hBM-MSCs. IL-17A 
up-regulates cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 gene expression and thereby increases the 
level of prostaglandin (PG) E(2) in differentiated adipocyes. The suppression of 
anti-adipogenic PGE(2) by COX inhibitors such as aspirin and NS-398 partially 
blocked the effect of IL-17A on adipocyte differentiation in hBM-MSCs. 
Therefore, IL-17A exhibits its inhibitory effect in part via the COX-2 induction 
in differentiated adipocytes. In addition, treatment with anti-IL-17A antibody 
neutralizes IL-17A-mediated effects on adipocyte differentiation and function. 
These results suggest that IL-17A plays a regulatory role in both the metabolic 
and inflammatory processes of human adipocytes, similar to other 
pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1, IFNgamma, and TNFalpha.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2009.03.008
PMID: 19428338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]