---
reference_id: "PMID:36661122"
title: NRAP reduction rescues sarcomere defects in nebulin-related nemaline myopathy.
authors:
- Casey JG
- Kim ES
- Joseph R
- Li F
- Granzier H
- Gupta VA
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddad011
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NRAP reduction rescues sarcomere defects in nebulin-related nemaline myopathy.
**Authors:** Casey JG, Kim ES, Joseph R, Li F, Granzier H, Gupta VA
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddad011](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddad011)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2023 May 5;32(10):1711-1721. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddad011.

NRAP reduction rescues sarcomere defects in nebulin-related nemaline myopathy.

Casey JG(1), Kim ES(1), Joseph R(1), Li F(2), Granzier H(2), Gupta VA(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
AZ 85724, USA.

Nemaline myopathy (NM) is a rare neuromuscular disorder associated with 
congenital or childhood-onset of skeletal muscle weakness and hypotonia, which 
results in limited motor function. NM is a genetic disorder and mutations in 12 
genes are known to contribute to autosomal dominant or recessive forms of the 
disease. Recessive mutations in nebulin (NEB) are the most common cause of NM 
affecting about 50% of patients. Because of the large size of the NEB gene and 
lack of mutational hot spots, developing therapies that can benefit a wide group 
of patients is challenging. Although there are several promising therapies under 
investigation, there is no cure for NM. Therefore, targeting disease modifiers 
that can stabilize or improve skeletal muscle function may represent alternative 
therapeutic strategies. Our studies have identified Nrap upregulation in nebulin 
deficiency that contributes to structural and functional deficits in NM. We show 
that genetic ablation of nrap in nebulin deficiency restored sarcomeric 
disorganization, reduced protein aggregates and improved skeletal muscle 
function in zebrafish. Our findings suggest that Nrap is a disease modifier that 
affects skeletal muscle structure and function in NM; thus, therapeutic 
targeting of Nrap in nebulin-related NM and related diseases may be beneficial 
for patients.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddad011
PMCID: PMC10162428
PMID: 36661122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]