---
reference_id: "PMID:27612856"
title: Mesothelial cells interact with tumor cells for the formation of ovarian cancer multicellular spheroids in peritoneal effusions.
authors:
- Matte I
- Legault CM
- Garde-Granger P
- Laplante C
- Bessette P
- Rancourt C
- Piché A
journal: Clin Exp Metastasis
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s10585-016-9821-y
keywords:
- "Ascites/genetics, pathology"
- Ascitic Fluid/pathology
- "CA-125 Antigen/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Cadherins/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Carcinoma/genetics, pathology"
- "Carcinoma, Ovarian Epithelial"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Epithelium/metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Humans
- "Integrin beta1/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Membrane Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Neoplasms, Glandular and Epithelial/genetics, pathology"
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- "Peritoneal Neoplasms/genetics, pathology, secondary"
- "Spheroids, Cellular/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mesothelial cells interact with tumor cells for the formation of ovarian cancer multicellular spheroids in peritoneal effusions.
**Authors:** Matte I, Legault CM, Garde-Granger P, Laplante C, Bessette P, Rancourt C, Piché A
**Journal:** Clin Exp Metastasis (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10585-016-9821-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10585-016-9821-y)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Metastasis. 2016 Dec;33(8):839-852. doi: 10.1007/s10585-016-9821-y. 
Epub 2016 Sep 9.

Mesothelial cells interact with tumor cells for the formation of ovarian cancer 
multicellular spheroids in peritoneal effusions.

Matte I(1), Legault CM(1), Garde-Granger P(2), Laplante C(2), Bessette P(3), 
Rancourt C(1), Piché A(4).

Author information:
(1)Département de Microbiologie et Infectiologie, Université de Sherbrooke, 
3001, 12ième Avenue Nord, Sherbrooke, QC, J1H 5N4, Canada.
(2)Département de Pathologie, Université de Sherbrooke, 3001, 12ième Avenue 
Nord, Sherbrooke, QC, J1H 5N4, Canada.
(3)Département de Chirurgie, Service d'Obstétrique-Gynécologie, Faculté de 
Médecine, Université de Sherbrooke, 3001, 12ième Avenue Nord, Sherbrooke, QC, 
J1H 5N4, Canada.
(4)Département de Microbiologie et Infectiologie, Université de Sherbrooke, 
3001, 12ième Avenue Nord, Sherbrooke, QC, J1H 5N4, Canada. 
alain.piche@usherbrooke.ca.

Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) dissemination is primarily mediated by the 
shedding of tumor cells from the primary site into ascites where they form 
multicellular spheroids that rapidly lead to peritoneal carcinomatosis. While 
the clinical importance and fundamental role of multicellular spheroids in EOC 
is increasingly appreciated, the mechanisms that regulate their formation and 
dictate their cellular composition remain poorly characterized. To investigate 
these important questions, we characterized spheroids isolated from ascites of 
women with EOC. We found that in these spheroids, a core of mesothelial cells 
was encased in a shell of tumor cells. Analysis further revealed that EOC 
spheroids are dynamic structures of proliferating, non-proliferating and hypoxic 
regions. To recapitulate these in vivo findings, we developed a 
three-dimensional co-culture model of primary EOC and mesothelial cells. Our 
analysis indicated that, compared to the OVCAR3 cell line, primary EOC cells 
isolated from ascites as well as mesothelial cells formed compact spheroids. 
Analysis of heterotypic spheroid microarchitecture revealed a structure that 
grossly resembles the structure of spheroids isolated from ascites. Cells that 
formed compact spheroids had elevated expression of β1 integrin and low 
expression of E-cadherin. Addition of β1 integrin blocking antibody or 
siRNA-mediated downregulation of β1 integrin resulted in reduced tightness of 
the spheroids. Interestingly, the loss of MUC16 and E-cadherin expression 
resulted in the formation of more compact spheroids. Therefore, our findings 
support the heterotypic nature of spheroids from malignant EOC ascites. In 
addition, our data describe an unusual link between E-cadherin expression and 
less compact spheroids. Our data also emphasize the role of MUC16 and β1 
integrin in EOC spheroid formation.

DOI: 10.1007/s10585-016-9821-y
PMID: 27612856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]