---
reference_id: "PMID:11280737"
title: Increased oxidative stress in ataxia telangiectasia evidenced by alterations in redox state of brains from Atm-deficient mice.
authors:
- Kamsler A
- Daily D
- Hochman A
- Stern N
- Shiloh Y
- Rotman G
- Barzilai A
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2001'
keywords:
- Animals
- Antioxidants/metabolism
- "Ataxia Telangiectasia/enzymology, metabolism"
- Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated Proteins
- Catalase/metabolism
- Cell Cycle Proteins
- "Cerebellum/enzymology, metabolism"
- Cysteine/metabolism
- DNA-Binding Proteins
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Glutathione/metabolism
- Lipid Peroxidation
- Mice
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/metabolism
- Oxidation-Reduction
- Oxidative Stress/physiology
- "Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/deficiency, genetics"
- Reactive Oxygen Species/metabolism
- Superoxide Dismutase/metabolism
- "Telencephalon/enzymology, metabolism"
- Thioredoxins/metabolism
- Tumor Suppressor Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Increased oxidative stress in ataxia telangiectasia evidenced by alterations in redox state of brains from Atm-deficient mice.
**Authors:** Kamsler A, Daily D, Hochman A, Stern N, Shiloh Y, Rotman G, Barzilai A
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2001)

## Content

1. Cancer Res. 2001 Mar 1;61(5):1849-54.

Increased oxidative stress in ataxia telangiectasia evidenced by alterations in
redox state of brains from Atm-deficient mice.

Kamsler A(1), Daily D, Hochman A, Stern N, Shiloh Y, Rotman G, Barzilai A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiochemistry, George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel
Aviv University, Israel.

Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a genetic disorder caused by mutational
inactivation of the ATM gene. A-T patients display a pleiotropic phenotype and
suffer primarily from progressive ataxia caused by degeneration of cerebellar
Purkinje and granule neurons. Disruption of the mouse Atm locus creates a murine
model of A-T that exhibits most of the clinical features of the human disease.
We previously hypothesized that some aspects of A-T, such as the preferential
loss of certain neurons, could result from a continuous state of increased
oxidative stress (G. Rotman and Y. Shiloh, Cancer Surv., 29: 285-304, 1997; G.
Rotman and Y. Shiloh, BioEssays, 19: 911-917, 1997). The present work tests this
hypothesis by analyzing markers of redox state in brains of Atm-deficient mice.
We found alterations in the levels of thiol-containing compounds in Atm (-/-)
brains, as well as significant changes in the activities of thioredoxin,
catalase, and manganese superoxide dismutase in Atm (-/-) cerebella. These
changes are indicative of increased levels of reactive oxygen species, which are
seen primarily in the cerebellum of Atm-deficient mice. Our findings support the
hypothesis that the absence of functional ATM results in oxidative stress, which
may be an important cause of the degeneration of cerebellar neurons in A-T.

PMID: 11280737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
