---
reference_id: "PMID:29692344"
title: Red pulp macrophages in the human spleen are a distinct cell population with a unique expression of Fc-γ receptors.
authors:
- Nagelkerke SQ
- Bruggeman CW
- den Haan JMM
- Mul EPJ
- van den Berg TK
- van Bruggen R
- Kuijpers TW
journal: Blood Adv
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2017015008
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Red pulp macrophages in the human spleen are a distinct cell population with a unique expression of Fc-γ receptors.
**Authors:** Nagelkerke SQ, Bruggeman CW, den Haan JMM, Mul EPJ, van den Berg TK, van Bruggen R, Kuijpers TW
**Journal:** Blood Adv (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1182/bloodadvances.2017015008](https://doi.org/10.1182/bloodadvances.2017015008)

## Content

1. Blood Adv. 2018 Apr 24;2(8):941-953. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2017015008.

Red pulp macrophages in the human spleen are a distinct cell population with a 
unique expression of Fc-γ receptors.

Nagelkerke SQ(1)(2), Bruggeman CW(1)(2), den Haan JMM(3), Mul EPJ(2)(4), van den 
Berg TK(1)(2), van Bruggen R(1)(2), Kuijpers TW(1)(2)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Blood Cell Research, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Landsteiner Laboratory, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Molecular Cell Biology and Immunology, VU University Medical 
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Central Facility Research, Sanquin Research, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands; and.
(5)Department of Pediatric Hematology, Immunology & Infectious Disease, Emma 
Children's Hospital at the Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Tissue-resident macrophages in the spleen play a major role in the clearance of 
immunoglobulin G (IgG)-opsonized blood cells, as occurs in immune 
thrombocytopenia (ITP) and autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA). Blood cells are 
phagocytosed via the Fc-γ receptors (FcγRs), but little is known about the FcγR 
expression on splenic red pulp macrophages in humans, with only a few previous 
studies that showed conflicting results. We developed a novel method to 
specifically isolate red pulp macrophages from 82 human spleens. Surface 
expression of various receptors and phagocytic capacity was analyzed by flow 
cytometry and immunofluorescence of tissue sections. Red pulp macrophages were 
distinct from splenic monocytes and blood monocyte-derived macrophages on 
various surface markers. Human red pulp macrophages predominantly expressed the 
low-affinity receptors FcγRIIa and FcγRIIIa. In contrast to blood 
monocyte-derived macrophages, red pulp macrophages did not express the 
inhibitory FcγRIIb. Red pulp macrophages expressed very low levels of the 
high-affinity receptor FcγRI. Messenger RNA transcript analysis confirmed this 
expression pattern. Unexpectedly and despite these differences in FcγR 
expression, phagocytosis of IgG-opsonized blood cells by red pulp macrophages 
was dependent on the same FcγRs as phagocytosis by blood monocyte-derived 
macrophages, especially in regarding the response to IV immunoglobulin. 
Concluding, we show the distinct nature of splenic red pulp macrophages in human 
subjects. Knowledge on the FcγR expression and usage of these cells is important 
for understanding and improving treatment strategies for autoimmune diseases 
such as ITP and AIHA.

© 2018 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2017015008
PMCID: PMC5916003
PMID: 29692344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: The authors 
declare no competing financial interest.