---
reference_id: "PMID:34781934"
title: "Efficacy of various core decompression techniques versus non-operative treatment for osteonecrosis of the femoral head: a systemic review and network meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials."
authors:
- Liu Q
- Guo W
- Li R
- Lee JH
journal: BMC Musculoskelet Disord
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1186/s12891-021-04808-2
keywords:
- "Decompression, Surgical"
- Femur Head/surgery
- "Femur Head Necrosis/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- Humans
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of various core decompression techniques versus non-operative treatment for osteonecrosis of the femoral head: a systemic review and network meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.
**Authors:** Liu Q, Guo W, Li R, Lee JH
**Journal:** BMC Musculoskelet Disord (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12891-021-04808-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12891-021-04808-2)

## Content

1. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2021 Nov 15;22(1):948. doi: 
10.1186/s12891-021-04808-2.

Efficacy of various core decompression techniques versus non-operative treatment 
for osteonecrosis of the femoral head: a systemic review and network 
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.

Liu Q(1), Guo W(2), Li R(2), Lee JH(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Seoul National University, College of 
Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Department of Hand Surgery, The Second Hospital of Jilin University, 
Changchun, Jilin Province, China.
(3)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Seoul National University, College of 
Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. spinelee@snu.ac.kr.
(4)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Seoul Metropolitan Government - Seoul 
National University Boramae Medical Center, 20 Boramaero 5-gil, Dongjak-gu, 
Seoul, 07061, South Korea. spinelee@snu.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Various Joint-preserving therapy (JPT) methods have been performed 
and tried in recent decades, but their results and efficacy were inconsistent 
and controversial. The purpose of this study is to evaluate its effectiveness 
and whether there are statistical differences in treatment between different 
interventions based on published RCT studies.
METHODS: Following the PRISMA-NMA checklist, Medline, EMBASE, Web of Science, 
and Cochrane Library databases were searched and collected related RCT studies. 
The sources were searched from inception up to October 30, 2020. The primary 
outcomes including the rate of radiographic progression and conversion to THA 
and the secondary outcome -Harris Hip Scores (HHS) were extracted and compared 
in a Network meta-analysis.
RESULTS: Seventeen RCT studies involving 784 patients (918 hips) with seven 
interventions including CD (core decompression), CD + BG (bone graft), CD + TI 
(tantalum rod implantation), CD + CT (Cell therapy), CD + BG + CT, VBG 
(vascularized bone graft), and nonsurgical or conservative treatment for ONFH 
were evaluated. In the radiographic progression results, CD + CT showed a 
relatively better result than CD, CD + BG and non-surgical treatment, the 
surface under the cumulative ranking curve (SUCRA) plot displayed that CD + CT 
(96.4%) was the best, followed by CD (64.1%).In conversion to THA results, there 
were no significant differences between the JPT methods and non-surgical 
treatment. In HHS, there was also no significant difference, other than CD + BG 
showed a statistical difference than non-surgical treatment only in terms of 
Cis, but the SUCRA was highest in non-surgical treatment (80.5%) followed by 
CD + CT (72.8%).
CONCLUSIONS: This Net-work meta-analysis demonstrated that there was no 
statistical difference in the outcome of radiographic progression and conversion 
to THA, also in HHS, other than CD + CT showed a relatively superior result in 
radiographic progression than nonsurgical treatment, namely, it's maybe an 
effective method for delaying disease progression or reducing disease 
development based on current evidence.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12891-021-04808-2
PMCID: PMC8594076
PMID: 34781934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.