---
reference_id: "PMID:22608255"
title: "Autoimmune arthritis: the interface between the immune system and joints."
authors:
- Komatsu N
- Takayanagi H
journal: Adv Immunol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-394299-9.00002-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmune arthritis: the interface between the immune system and joints.
**Authors:** Komatsu N, Takayanagi H
**Journal:** Adv Immunol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/B978-0-12-394299-9.00002-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-394299-9.00002-3)

## Content

1. Adv Immunol. 2012;115:45-71. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-394299-9.00002-3.

Autoimmune arthritis: the interface between the immune system and joints.

Komatsu N(1), Takayanagi H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Signaling, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease, characterized by chronic 
inflammation and synovial hyperplasia in the joints that ultimately lead to 
cartilage and bone destruction. A wealth of research has shown that CD4(+) T 
cells, especially IL-17 producing helper T (Th17) cells, play an important role 
in RA development. However, it still remains to be clarified how the systemic 
immune response results in the local joint disorders. Studies on animal models 
of RA have shed light on the importance of the interaction between immune cells 
and joint-specific mesenchymal cells. In particular, joint-specific mesenchymal 
cells contribute to the Th17-mediated augmentation of the inflammatory phase in 
RA by promoting the migration of Th17 cells to the inflammatory joint and then 
homeostatic proliferation with increase in IL-17 production. In addition, recent 
progress in osteoimmunology has provided new insights into the pathogenesis of 
the bone destruction phase in RA. Of note, Th17 cells have been shown to enhance 
the differentiation of osteoclasts via joint-specific mesenchymal cells. Thus, 
the interaction of CD4(+) T cells and nonhematopoietic mesenchymal cells in 
joints plays a key role in RA pathogenesis during both the inflammatory and bone 
destruction phases. Focusing on this interaction will lead to a better 
understanding of the mechanism by which the systemic immune response results in 
local joint disorders and also helps provide a molecular basis for novel 
therapeutic strategies.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-394299-9.00002-3
PMID: 22608255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]