---
reference_id: "PMID:11376511"
title: Pathophysiology and treatment of airway mucociliary clearance. A moving tale.
authors:
- Cole P
journal: Minerva Anestesiol
year: '2001'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology and treatment of airway mucociliary clearance. A moving tale.
**Authors:** Cole P
**Journal:** Minerva Anestesiol (2001)

## Content

1. Minerva Anestesiol. 2001 Apr;67(4):206-9.

Pathophysiology and treatment of airway mucociliary clearance. A moving tale.

Cole P(1).

Author information:
(1)Royal Brompton Hospital, Sydney Street, London SW3 6NP, UK.

Airway hygiene depends largely on mucociliary clearance (MCC) which in turn 
depends upon the movement of viscoelastic mucus along the airway by the beating 
of the ciliary appendages of airway epithelial cells. Failure to keep the 
airways sterile by MCC results in a host inflammatory response to the persistent 
microorganisms which, if it becomes chronic, causes damage to the airway wall 
and upregulation of mucus production manifest clinically as bronchiectasis, 
sinusitis and otitis. There are three principal disorders of MCC. Firstly, 
primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD), a rare genetic deficiency of the 
ultrastructural apparatus required to propel the cilium, in which nasal nitric 
oxide is very low due to a deficiency of inducible nitric oxide synthase. 
Secondly, secondary ciliary dyskinesia due principally to microbial 
toxin-induced dysfunction of the energy pathways required for ciliary beating. 
Thirdly, abnormalities in the physicochemical properties of mucus, including 
reduced salt content/osmolality which results in it being unsuitable in quality 
for cilia to move it. Methods of rectifying this defect promise to restore MCC 
to normal and interfere in the vicious circle of inflammatory lung damage.

PMID: 11376511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]