---
reference_id: "PMID:34027810"
title: "Platelets in dengue infection: more than a numbers game."
authors:
- Quirino-Teixeira AC
- Andrade FB
- Pinheiro MBM
- Rozini SV
- Hottz ED
journal: Platelets
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/09537104.2021.1921722
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Platelets in dengue infection: more than a numbers game.
**Authors:** Quirino-Teixeira AC, Andrade FB, Pinheiro MBM, Rozini SV, Hottz ED
**Journal:** Platelets (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/09537104.2021.1921722](https://doi.org/10.1080/09537104.2021.1921722)

## Content

1. Platelets. 2022 Feb 17;33(2):176-183. doi: 10.1080/09537104.2021.1921722. Epub
 2021 May 24.

Platelets in dengue infection: more than a numbers game.

Quirino-Teixeira AC(1), Andrade FB(1), Pinheiro MBM(1), Rozini SV(1), Hottz 
ED(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Immunothrombosis, Department of Biochemistry, Institute of 
Biological Sciences, Federal University of Juiz De Fora, Juiz De Fora, Brazil.

Dengue virus (DENV) infection is responsible for the development of dengue 
illness, which can be either asymptomatic, present mild manifestations or evolve 
to severe dengue. Thrombocytopenia is an important characteristic during DENV 
infection, being observed both in mild and severe dengue, although the lowest 
platelet counts are encountered during severe cases. This review gathers 
information regarding several mechanisms that have been related to alterations 
in platelet number and function, leading to thrombocytopenia but also 
platelet-mediated immune and inflammatory response. On this regard, we highlight 
that the decrease in platelet counts may be due to bone marrow suppression or 
consumption of platelets at the periphery. We discuss the infection of 
hematopoietic progenitors and stromal cells as mechanisms involved in bone 
marrow suppression. Concerning peripheral consumption of platelets, we addressed 
the direct infection of platelets by DENV, adhesion of platelets to leukocytes 
and vascular endothelium and platelet clearance mediated by anti-platelet 
antibodies. We also focused on platelet involvement on the dengue immunity and 
pathogenesis through translation and secretion of viral and host factors and 
through platelet-leukocyte aggregates formation. Hence, the present review 
highlights important findings related to platelet activation and 
thrombocytopenia during dengue infection, and also exhibits different mechanisms 
associated with decreased platelet counts.Graphical abstract:Schematic 
mechanistic representation of platelet-mediated immune responses and 
thrombocytopenia during dengue infection. (A) DENV-infected platelets secrete 
cytokines and chemokines and also adhere to activated vascular endothelium. 
Platelets aggregate with leukocytes, inducing the secretion of NETs and 
inflammatory mediators by neutrophils and monocytes, respectively. (B) DENV 
directly infects stromal cells and hematopoietic precursors, including 
megakaryocytes, which compromises megakaryopoiesis. Both central and peripheric 
mechanisms contribute to DENV-associated thrombocytopenia.

DOI: 10.1080/09537104.2021.1921722
PMID: 34027810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]