---
reference_id: "PMID:39348083"
title: "Peripartum cardiomyopathy: a comprehensive and contemporary review."
authors:
- Sigauke FR
- Ntsinjana H
- Tsabedze N
journal: Heart Fail Rev
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s10741-024-10435-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peripartum cardiomyopathy: a comprehensive and contemporary review.
**Authors:** Sigauke FR, Ntsinjana H, Tsabedze N
**Journal:** Heart Fail Rev (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10741-024-10435-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10741-024-10435-5)

## Content

1. Heart Fail Rev. 2024 Nov;29(6):1261-1278. doi: 10.1007/s10741-024-10435-5.
Epub  2024 Sep 30.

Peripartum cardiomyopathy: a comprehensive and contemporary review.

Sigauke FR(1), Ntsinjana H(2), Tsabedze N(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, School of Clinical 
Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, 
Johannesburg, 2193, South Africa. frsigauke@yahoo.co.uk.
(2)Cardiology Unit, Nelson Mandela Children's Hospital, 6 Jubilee Road, 
Johannesburg, 2193, South Africa.
(3)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, School of Clinical 
Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of the Witwatersrand, 
Johannesburg, 2193, South Africa.

Cardiovascular disease is a major non-communicable disease globally, with 
increasing prevalence, posing a significant public health challenge. It is the 
leading non-obstetric cause of perinatal morbidity and mortality, with a 
substantial number of cardiac fatalities occurring in individuals without any 
known pre-existing cardiovascular disease. Peripartum cardiomyopathy is a type 
of de novo heart failure that occurs in pregnant women in the late stages of 
pregnancy or following delivery. Despite extensive research, diagnosing and 
managing peripartum cardiomyopathy remains challenging, resulting in significant 
morbidity and mortality. Recent advancements and novel approaches have been made 
to better understand and manage peripartum cardiomyopathy, including molecular 
and non-molecular biomarkers, genetic predisposition and risk prediction, 
targeted therapies, multidisciplinary care, and improved patient education. This 
narrative review provides a comprehensive overview and new perspectives on 
peripartum cardiomyopathy, covering its epidemiology, updated pathophysiological 
mechanisms, diagnosis, management, and future research directions for healthcare 
professionals, researchers, and clinicians.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10741-024-10435-5
PMCID: PMC11455798
PMID: 39348083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.