---
reference_id: "PMID:26310206"
title: Assessing the Potential Role of Pigs in the Epidemiology of Ebola Virus in Uganda.
authors:
- Atherstone C
- Smith E
- Ochungo P
- Roesel K
- Grace D
journal: Transbound Emerg Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/tbed.12394
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Assessing the Potential Role of Pigs in the Epidemiology of Ebola Virus in Uganda.
**Authors:** Atherstone C, Smith E, Ochungo P, Roesel K, Grace D
**Journal:** Transbound Emerg Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/tbed.12394](https://doi.org/10.1111/tbed.12394)

## Content

1. Transbound Emerg Dis. 2017 Apr;64(2):333-343. doi: 10.1111/tbed.12394. Epub
2015  Aug 27.

Assessing the Potential Role of Pigs in the Epidemiology of Ebola Virus in 
Uganda.

Atherstone C(1), Smith E(1), Ochungo P(2), Roesel K(1), Grace D(2).

Author information:
(1)International Livestock Research Institute, Kampala, Uganda.
(2)International Livestock Research Institute, Nairobi, Kenya.

Uganda has experienced 4 Ebola outbreaks since the discovery of the virus. 
Recent epidemiological work has shown pigs are hosts for Ebola viruses. Due to 
their high reproduction rates, rapid weight gain, potential to provide quick 
financial returns and rising demand for pork, pig production in Uganda has 
undergone massive expansion. The combination of pork sector growth supported by 
development programmes and Ebola virus risk prompted a foresight exercise using 
desk, interview and spatial methods. The study found that the lack of 
serological evidence for specific reservoir species, the number of human index 
cases unable to account for their source of infection, domestic pig habitat 
overlap with potential Ebola virus zoonotic host environments, reported 
interactions at the human-pig-wildlife interface that could support 
transmission, fever in pigs as a commonly reported problem by pig farmers and 
temporal correlation of outbreaks with peak pork consumption periods warrants 
further research into potential zoonotic transmission in Uganda from pigs.

© 2015 The Authors. Transboundary and Emerging Diseases Published by Blackwell 
Verlag GmbH.

DOI: 10.1111/tbed.12394
PMID: 26310206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]