---
reference_id: "PMID:20301627"
title: Alkaptonuria.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Introne WJ
- Perry M
- Chen M
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Alkaptonuria.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Introne WJ, Perry M, Chen M

## Content

1. Alkaptonuria.

Introne WJ(1), Perry M(2), Chen M(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2003 May 9 [updated 2021 Jun 10].

Author information:
(1)Staff Clinician, Office of the Clinical Director, National Human Genome
Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
(2)Staff Clinician, Rehabilitation Medicine, Clinical Center, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
(3)Staff Clinician, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Alkaptonuria is caused by deficiency of homogentisate
1,2-dioxygenase, an enzyme that converts homogentisic acid (HGA) to
maleylacetoacetic acid in the tyrosine degradation pathway. The three major
features of alkaptonuria are dark urine or urine that turns dark on standing,
ochronosis (bluish-black pigmentation in connective tissue), and arthritis of
the spine and larger joints. Ochronosis generally occurs after age 30 years;
arthritis often begins in the third decade. Other manifestations can include
pigment in the sclera, ear cartilage, and skin of the hands; aortic or mitral
valve calcification or regurgitation and occasionally aortic dilatation; renal
stones; prostate stones; and hypothyroidism.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The biochemical diagnosis of alkaptonuria in a proband is
based on the detection of a significant amount of HGA in the urine (usually 1 to
8 grams per day). The molecular diagnosis (needed to provide genetic counseling
to family members) is based on identification of biallelic pathogenic variants
in HGD.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Symptomatic management of joint pain is
tailored to the individual; physical and occupational therapy help promote
optimal muscle strength and flexibility; knee, hip, and shoulder replacements
are options when needed; surgical intervention for prostate stones and renal
stones as needed; aortic stenosis may necessitate valve replacement; thyroid
hormone replacement. Treatment with nitisinone, which has been shown to slow the
progression of symptoms, is approved for use in treatment of alkaptonuria in
Europe but not the United States. Surveillance: In individuals older than age 40
years, echocardiography to detect aortic dilatation, aortic or mitral valve
calcification, and stenosis. In individuals with suggestive symptoms, consider
CT imaging to detect coronary artery calcification. Assess thyroid function at
the time of initial diagnosis, and monitor every 1-2 years thereafter.
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Physical stress to the spine and large joints
(including heavy manual labor or high-impact sports) to try to reduce
progression of severe arthritis. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is
appropriate to evaluate apparently asymptomatic older and younger sibs of an
affected individual in order to identify as early as possible those who would
benefit from preventive measures to help preserve overall joint mobility and
function.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Alkaptonuria is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner.
If both parents are known to be heterozygous for an HGD pathogenic variant, each
sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected,
a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of being
unaffected and not a carrier. When both HGD pathogenic variants in the family
are known, carrier testing for at-risk relatives and prenatal/preimplantation
genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301627
