---
reference_id: PMID:36525984
title: "Adolescent acne vulgaris: current and emerging treatments."
authors:
- Layton AM
- Ravenscroft J
journal: Lancet Child Adolesc Health
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/S2352-4642(22)00314-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adolescent acne vulgaris: current and emerging treatments.
**Authors:** Layton AM, Ravenscroft J
**Journal:** Lancet Child Adolesc Health (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2352-4642(22)00314-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2352-4642(22)00314-5)

## Content

1. Lancet Child Adolesc Health. 2023 Feb;7(2):136-144. doi: 
10.1016/S2352-4642(22)00314-5. Epub 2022 Dec 13.

Adolescent acne vulgaris: current and emerging treatments.

Layton AM(1), Ravenscroft J(2).

Author information:
(1)Skin Research Centre, Hull York Medical School, University of York, York, UK; 
Harrogate and District NHS Foundation Trust, Harrogate, UK. Electronic address: 
alison.layton1@nhs.net.
(2)Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, Nottingham, UK; Centre of Evidence 
Based Dermatology, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.

Acne vulgaris is one of the commonest inflammatory skin diseases seen worldwide, 
affecting all ethnicities and races, with a peak prevalence between age 15 years 
and 20 years. The burden of this condition, and the resulting clinical and 
psychological sequelae, is substantial. The visual appearance of acne and its 
sequelae, including scarring and pigment changes, frequently results in 
psychological and social morbidity because of concerns about appearance. As 
understanding of the pathophysiology has evolved, approaches to achieving the 
optimal outcomes with effective treatment regimens continue to emerge. In the 
past few years, several novel therapeutics have been developed, including new 
agents aimed at reducing antimicrobial resistance and products with specific 
actions targeting retinoid receptors and androgen receptors. This Review 
considers the management approaches of an adolescent with acne vulgaris and 
reviews treatment options from the evidence base and international expert 
opinion. Approaches to selecting current treatments and novel and emerging 
treatment regimens are discussed.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2352-4642(22)00314-5
PMID: 36525984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests AML declares grant 
funding awarded to her organisation to deliver National Institute for Health and 
Care Research portfolio studies, including a Health Technology Assessment grant, 
a British Skin Foundation grant, and Medical Research Council grant. AML 
received royalties from Wiley for writing a chapter of Acne Fast Facts Series; 
honoraria for acting as a consultant or attending advisory boards from Galderma 
Pharma, LEO Pharma, La Roche-Posay, Novartis, and Origimm Biotechnology; and 
honoraria for unrestricted presentations in educational events and in national 
and international meetings from Beiersdorf, Galderma Pharma, LEO Pharma, La 
Roche-Posay, L'Oréal, and Viatris. AML is a member of the British Association of 
Dermatologists Retinoid Working Group. JR received a small grant award from the 
UK Dermatology Clinical Trials Network in 2022. JR is an executive committee 
member of the British Society for Paediatric and Adolescent Dermatology and a 
member of the British Association of Dermatologists Retinoid Working Group. The 
authors have no direct competing interests in the writing of this Review and no 
funding has supported this work.