---
reference_id: "PMID:39054328"
title: Transient peripheral blood transcriptomic response to ketamine treatment in children with ADNP syndrome.
authors:
- Buxbaum Grice AS
- Sloofman L
- Levy T
- Walker H
- Ganesh G
- Rodriguez de Los Santos M
- Amini P
- Buxbaum JD
- Kolevzon A
- Kostic A
- Breen MS
journal: Transl Psychiatry
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41398-024-03005-8
keywords:
- "Ketamine/pharmacology, administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Humans
- Male
- Transcriptome/drug effects
- Child
- Female
- "Autism Spectrum Disorder/drug therapy, genetics, blood"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- "Intellectual Disability/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Developmental Disabilities/genetics, drug therapy"
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Adolescent
- Homeodomain Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transient peripheral blood transcriptomic response to ketamine treatment in children with ADNP syndrome.
**Authors:** Buxbaum Grice AS, Sloofman L, Levy T, Walker H, Ganesh G, Rodriguez de Los Santos M, Amini P, Buxbaum JD, Kolevzon A, Kostic A, Breen MS
**Journal:** Transl Psychiatry (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41398-024-03005-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41398-024-03005-8)

## Content

1. Transl Psychiatry. 2024 Jul 25;14(1):307. doi: 10.1038/s41398-024-03005-8.

Transient peripheral blood transcriptomic response to ketamine treatment in 
children with ADNP syndrome.

Buxbaum Grice AS(1)(2)(3), Sloofman L(1)(2)(3), Levy T(1)(2), Walker H(1)(2), 
Ganesh G(1)(2)(3), Rodriguez de Los Santos M(1)(2)(3), Amini P(1)(2)(3), Buxbaum 
JD(1)(2)(3)(4), Kolevzon A(1)(2)(4)(5), Kostic A(1)(2), Breen MS(6)(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, USA.
(3)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Mindich Child Health and Development Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, USA.
(6)Seaver Autism Center for Research and Treatment, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. michael.breen@mssm.edu.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
NY, USA. michael.breen@mssm.edu.
(8)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. michael.breen@mssm.edu.
(9)Mindich Child Health and Development Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. michael.breen@mssm.edu.

Update of
    medRxiv. 2024 Jan 31:2024.01.29.24301949. doi: 10.1101/2024.01.29.24301949.

Activity-dependent neuroprotective protein (ADNP) syndrome is a rare 
neurodevelopmental disorder resulting in intellectual disability, developmental 
delay and autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and is due to mutations in the ADNP 
gene. Ketamine treatment has emerged as a promising therapeutic option for ADNP 
syndrome, showing safety and apparent behavioral improvements in a first open 
label study. However, the molecular perturbations induced by ketamine remain 
poorly understood. Here, we investigated the longitudinal effect of ketamine on 
the blood transcriptome of 10 individuals with ADNP syndrome. Transcriptomic 
profiling was performed before and at multiple time points after a single 
low-dose intravenous ketamine infusion (0.5 mg/kg). We show that ketamine 
triggers immediate and profound gene expression alterations, with specific 
enrichment of monocyte-related expression patterns. These acute alterations 
encompass diverse signaling pathways and co-expression networks, implicating 
upregulation of immune and inflammatory-related processes and down-regulation of 
RNA processing mechanisms and metabolism. Notably, these changes exhibit a 
transient nature, returning to baseline levels 24 hours to 1 week after 
treatment. These findings enhance our understanding of ketamine's molecular 
effects and lay the groundwork for further research elucidating its specific 
cellular and molecular targets. Moreover, they contribute to the development of 
therapeutic strategies for ADNP syndrome and potentially, ASD more broadly.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41398-024-03005-8
PMCID: PMC11272924
PMID: 39054328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Alexander Kolevzon is on the scientific advisory 
boards of Ovid Therapeutics, Ritrova Therapeutics, and Jaguar Therapeutics and 
consults to Acadia, Alkermes, GW Pharmaceuticals, Neuren Pharmaceuticals, 
Clinilabs Drug Development Corporation, and Scioto Biosciences. Joseph D. 
Buxbaum consults for BridgeBio Pharma. The remainder of the authors declare no 
competing interests.