---
reference_id: "PMID:24485530"
title: "Skin cancer and photoprotection in people of color: a review and recommendations for physicians and the public."
authors:
- Agbai ON
- Buster K
- Sanchez M
- Hernandez C
- Kundu RV
- Chiu M
- Roberts WE
- Draelos ZD
- Bhushan R
- Taylor SC
- Lim HW
journal: J Am Acad Dermatol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2013.11.038
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Asian/statistics & numerical data"
- Attitude to Health/ethnology
- "Black or African American/statistics & numerical data"
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/pathology, prevention & control"
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/pathology, prevention & control"
- Health Education
- "Hispanic or Latino/statistics & numerical data"
- "Melanoma/pathology, prevention & control"
- "Physician's Role"
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
- "Primary Prevention/organization & administration"
- "Skin Neoplasms/pathology, prevention & control"
- Sunlight/adverse effects
- Sunscreening Agents/therapeutic use
- United States
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Skin cancer and photoprotection in people of color: a review and recommendations for physicians and the public.
**Authors:** Agbai ON, Buster K, Sanchez M, Hernandez C, Kundu RV, Chiu M, Roberts WE, Draelos ZD, Bhushan R, Taylor SC, Lim HW
**Journal:** J Am Acad Dermatol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaad.2013.11.038](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaad.2013.11.038)

## Content

1. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2014 Apr;70(4):748-762. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2013.11.038.
Epub 2014 Jan 28.

Skin cancer and photoprotection in people of color: a review and recommendations
for physicians and the public.

Agbai ON(1), Buster K(2), Sanchez M(3), Hernandez C(4), Kundu RV(5), Chiu M(6),
Roberts WE(7), Draelos ZD(8), Bhushan R(9), Taylor SC(10), Lim HW(1).

Author information:
(1)Multicultural Dermatology Center, Department of Dermatology, Henry Ford
Hospital, Detroit, Michigan.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Via Christi Clinic, Wichita, Kansas.
(3)Department of Dermatology, New York University Medical Center, New York, New
York.
(4)Department of Dermatology, University of Illinois College of Medicine,
Chicago, Illinois.
(5)Northwestern Center for Ethnic Skin, Department of Dermatology, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois.
(6)Division of Dermatology, University of California Los Angeles Medical Center,
Los Angeles, California.
(7)Desert Dermatology Rancho Mirage, California.
(8)Dermatology Consulting Services, High Point, North Carolina.
(9)American Academy of Dermatology, Schaumburg, Illinois. Electronic address:
rbhushan@aad.org.
(10)Society Hill Dermatology and Cosmetic Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Comment in
    J Am Acad Dermatol. 2014 Sep;71(3):586. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2014.04.071.
    J Am Acad Dermatol. 2014 Sep;71(3):587-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2014.05.027.

Skin cancer is less prevalent in people of color than in the white population.
However, when skin cancer occurs in non-whites, it often presents at a more
advanced stage, and thus the prognosis is worse compared with white patients.
The increased morbidity and mortality associated with skin cancer in patients of
color compared with white patients may be because of the lack of awareness,
diagnoses at a more advanced stage, and socioeconomic factors such as access to
care barriers. Physician promotion of skin cancer prevention strategies for all
patients, regardless of ethnic background and socioeconomic status, can lead to
timely diagnosis and treatment. Public education campaigns should be expanded to
target communities of color to promote self-skin examination and stress
importance of photoprotection, avoidance of tanning bed use, and early skin
cancer detection and treatment. These measures should result in reduction or
earlier detection of cutaneous malignancies in all communities. Furthermore,
promotion of photoprotection practices may reduce other adverse effects of
ultraviolet exposure including photoaging and ultraviolet-related disorders of
pigmentation.

Copyright © 2014 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. Published by Mosby, Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaad.2013.11.038
PMID: 24485530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
