---
reference_id: "PMID:34127752"
title: In vivo multi-parametric manganese-enhanced MRI for detecting amyloid plaques in rodent models of Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Kim E
- Di Censo D
- Baraldo M
- Simmons C
- Rosa I
- Randall K
- Ballard C
- Dickie BR
- Williams SCR
- Killick R
- Cash D
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-91899-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In vivo multi-parametric manganese-enhanced MRI for detecting amyloid plaques in rodent models of Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Kim E, Di Censo D, Baraldo M, Simmons C, Rosa I, Randall K, Ballard C, Dickie BR, Williams SCR, Killick R, Cash D
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-021-91899-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-91899-5)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2021 Jun 14;11(1):12419. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-91899-5.

In vivo multi-parametric manganese-enhanced MRI for detecting amyloid plaques in 
rodent models of Alzheimer's disease.

Kim E(1), Di Censo D(2), Baraldo M(3), Simmons C(4), Rosa I(2), Randall K(4), 
Ballard C(5), Dickie BR(6), Williams SCR(7), Killick R(3), Cash D(4).

Author information:
(1)BRAIN Centre (Biomarker Research and Imaging for Neuroscience), Department of 
Neuroimaging, King's College London, The James Black Centre, 125 Coldharbour 
Lane, London, SE5 9NU, UK. eugene.kim@kcl.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Life, Health and Environmental Sciences, University of 
L'Aquila, Piazzale Salvatore Tommasi 1, 67100, L'Aquila, Italy.
(3)Department of Old Age Psychiatry, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology & 
Neuroscience, King's College London, 16 De Crespigny Park, London, SE5 8AF, UK.
(4)BRAIN Centre (Biomarker Research and Imaging for Neuroscience), Department of 
Neuroimaging, King's College London, The James Black Centre, 125 Coldharbour 
Lane, London, SE5 9NU, UK.
(5)The University of Exeter Medical School, Medical School Building, St. Luke's 
Campus, Magdalen Road, Exeter, EX1 2LU, UK.
(6)Division of Neuroscience and Experimental Psychology, Faculty of Biology 
Medicine and Health, Geoffrey Jefferson Brain Research Centre, Manchester 
Academic Health Science Centre, The University of Manchester, Stopford Building, 
99 Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PG, UK.
(7)Department of Neuroimaging, Centre for Neuroimaging Sciences, King's College 
London, De Crespigny Park, London, SE5 8AF, UK.

Amyloid plaques are a hallmark of Alzheimer's disease (AD) that develop in its 
earliest stages. Thus, non-invasive detection of these plaques would be 
invaluable for diagnosis and the development and monitoring of treatments, but 
this remains a challenge due to their small size. Here, we investigated the 
utility of manganese-enhanced MRI (MEMRI) for visualizing plaques in transgenic 
rodent models of AD across two species: 5xFAD mice and TgF344-AD rats. Animals 
were given subcutaneous injections of MnCl2 and imaged in vivo using a 9.4 T 
Bruker scanner. MnCl2 improved signal-to-noise ratio but was not necessary to 
detect plaques in high-resolution images. Plaques were visible in all transgenic 
animals and no wild-types, and quantitative susceptibility mapping showed that 
they were more paramagnetic than the surrounding tissue. This, combined with 
beta-amyloid and iron staining, indicate that plaque MR visibility in both 
animal models was driven by plaque size and iron load. Longitudinal relaxation 
rate mapping revealed increased manganese uptake in brain regions of high plaque 
burden in transgenic animals compared to their wild-type littermates. This was 
limited to the rhinencephalon in the TgF344-AD rats, while it was most 
significantly increased in the cortex of the 5xFAD mice. Alizarin Red staining 
suggests that manganese bound to plaques in 5xFAD mice but not in TgF344-AD 
rats. Multi-parametric MEMRI is a simple, viable method for detecting amyloid 
plaques in rodent models of AD. Manganese-induced signal enhancement can enable 
higher-resolution imaging, which is key to visualizing these small amyloid 
deposits. We also present the first in vivo evidence of manganese as a potential 
targeted contrast agent for imaging plaques in the 5xFAD model of AD.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-021-91899-5
PMCID: PMC8203664
PMID: 34127752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.