---
reference_id: "PMID:36967195"
title: "Non-canonical WNT5A-ROR signaling: New perspectives on an ancient developmental pathway."
authors:
- Konopelski Snavely SE
- Srinivasan S
- Dreyer CA
- Tan J
- Carraway KL 3rd
- Ho HH
journal: Curr Top Dev Biol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/bs.ctdb.2023.01.009
keywords:
- "Wnt Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Receptor Tyrosine Kinase-like Orphan Receptors/genetics, metabolism"
- "Wnt-5a Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/physiology
- Morphogenesis
- Wnt Signaling Pathway
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Non-canonical WNT5A-ROR signaling: New perspectives on an ancient developmental pathway.
**Authors:** Konopelski Snavely SE, Srinivasan S, Dreyer CA, Tan J, Carraway KL 3rd, Ho HH
**Journal:** Curr Top Dev Biol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/bs.ctdb.2023.01.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.ctdb.2023.01.009)

## Content

1. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2023;153:195-227. doi: 10.1016/bs.ctdb.2023.01.009. Epub
2023  Mar 17.

Non-canonical WNT5A-ROR signaling: New perspectives on an ancient developmental 
pathway.

Konopelski Snavely SE(1), Srinivasan S(1), Dreyer CA(2), Tan J(1), Carraway KL 
3rd(2), Ho HH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Human Anatomy, University of California Davis, 
School of Medicine, Davis, CA, United States.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, UC Davis Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, University of California Davis, School of Medicine, Sacramento, 
CA, United States.
(3)Department of Cell Biology and Human Anatomy, University of California Davis, 
School of Medicine, Davis, CA, United States. Electronic address: 
hyhho@ucdavis.edu.

Deciphering non-canonical WNT signaling has proven to be both fascinating and 
challenging. Discovered almost 30 years ago, non-canonical WNT ligands signal 
independently of the transcriptional co-activator β-catenin to regulate a wide 
range of morphogenetic processes during development. The molecular and cellular 
mechanisms that underlie non-canonical WNT function, however, remain nebulous. 
Recent results from various model systems have converged to define a core 
non-canonical WNT pathway consisting of the prototypic non-canonical WNT ligand, 
WNT5A, the receptor tyrosine kinase ROR, the seven transmembrane receptor 
Frizzled and the cytoplasmic scaffold protein Dishevelled. Importantly, 
mutations in each of these signaling components cause Robinow syndrome, a 
congenital disorder characterized by profound tissue morphogenetic 
abnormalities. Moreover, dysregulation of the pathway has also been linked to 
cancer metastasis. As new knowledge concerning the WNT5A-ROR pathway continues 
to grow, modeling these mutations will likely provide crucial insights into both 
the physiological regulation of the pathway and the etiology of WNT5A-ROR-driven 
diseases.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/bs.ctdb.2023.01.009
PMCID: PMC11042798
PMID: 36967195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]