---
reference_id: "PMID:36769171"
title: "Blood-Brain Barrier Integrity Damage in Bacterial Meningitis: The Underlying Link, Mechanisms, and Therapeutic Targets."
authors:
- Yang R
- Wang J
- Wang F
- Zhang H
- Tan C
- Chen H
- Wang X
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms24032852
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Blood-Brain Barrier Integrity Damage in Bacterial Meningitis: The Underlying Link, Mechanisms, and Therapeutic Targets.
**Authors:** Yang R, Wang J, Wang F, Zhang H, Tan C, Chen H, Wang X
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms24032852](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24032852)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Feb 2;24(3):2852. doi: 10.3390/ijms24032852.

Blood-Brain Barrier Integrity Damage in Bacterial Meningitis: The Underlying 
Link, Mechanisms, and Therapeutic Targets.

Yang R(1)(2), Wang J(1)(2), Wang F(1)(2), Zhang H(1)(2), Tan C(1)(2)(3)(4), Chen 
H(1)(2)(3)(4), Wang X(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Preventive Veterinary Medicine in Hubei Province, The 
Cooperative Innovation Center for Sustainable Pig Production, Wuhan 430070, 
China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Development of Veterinary Diagnostic Products, Ministry of 
Agriculture of the People's Republic of China, Wuhan 430070, China.
(4)International Research Center for Animal Disease, Ministry of Science and 
Technology of the People's Republic of China, Wuhan 430070, China.

Despite advances in supportive care and antimicrobial treatment, bacterial 
meningitis remains the most serious infection of the central nervous system 
(CNS) that poses a serious risk to life. This clinical dilemma is largely due to 
our insufficient knowledge of the pathology behind this disease. By controlling 
the entry of molecules into the CNS microenvironment, the blood-brain barrier 
(BBB), a highly selective cellular monolayer that is specific to the CNS's 
microvasculature, regulates communication between the CNS and the rest of the 
body. A defining feature of the pathogenesis of bacterial meningitis is the 
increase in BBB permeability. So far, several contributing factors for BBB 
disruption have been reported, including direct cellular damage brought on by 
bacterial virulence factors, as well as host-specific proteins or inflammatory 
pathways being activated. Recent studies have demonstrated that targeting 
pathological factors contributing to enhanced BBB permeability is an effective 
therapeutic complement to antimicrobial therapy for treating bacterial 
meningitis. Hence, understanding how these meningitis-causing pathogens affect 
the BBB permeability will provide novel perspectives for investigating bacterial 
meningitis's pathogenesis, prevention, and therapies. Here, we summarized the 
recent research progress on meningitis-causing pathogens disrupting the barrier 
function of BBB. This review provides handy information on BBB disruption by 
meningitis-causing pathogens, and helps design future research as well as 
develop potential combination therapies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24032852
PMCID: PMC9918147
PMID: 36769171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.