---
reference_id: PMID:23627736
title: "Sulfa and trimethoprim-like drugs - antimetabolites acting as carbonic anhydrase, dihydropteroate synthase and dihydrofolate reductase inhibitors."
authors:
- Capasso C
- Supuran CT
journal: J Enzyme Inhib Med Chem
year: '2014'
doi: 10.3109/14756366.2013.787422
keywords:
- "Anti-Bacterial Agents/chemical synthesis, pharmacology"
- "Antimetabolites/chemical synthesis, pharmacology"
- "Bacteria/drug effects, enzymology"
- "Bacterial Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, chemistry"
- "Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors/chemical synthesis, pharmacology"
- Carbonic Anhydrases/chemistry
- "Dihydropteroate Synthase/antagonists & inhibitors, chemistry"
- "Enzyme Inhibitors/chemical synthesis, pharmacology"
- "Folic Acid Antagonists/chemical synthesis, pharmacology"
- "Sulfanilamides/chemical synthesis, pharmacology"
- Tetrahydrofolate Dehydrogenase/chemistry
- "Trimethoprim/analogs & derivatives, chemical synthesis, pharmacology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sulfa and trimethoprim-like drugs - antimetabolites acting as carbonic anhydrase, dihydropteroate synthase and dihydrofolate reductase inhibitors.
**Authors:** Capasso C, Supuran CT
**Journal:** J Enzyme Inhib Med Chem (2014)
**DOI:** [10.3109/14756366.2013.787422](https://doi.org/10.3109/14756366.2013.787422)

## Content

1. J Enzyme Inhib Med Chem. 2014 Jun;29(3):379-87. doi: 
10.3109/14756366.2013.787422. Epub 2013 Apr 29.

Sulfa and trimethoprim-like drugs - antimetabolites acting as carbonic 
anhydrase, dihydropteroate synthase and dihydrofolate reductase inhibitors.

Capasso C(1), Supuran CT.

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Biochimica delle Proteine - CNR , Napoli , Italy and.

Recent advances in microbial genomics, synthetic organic chemistry and X-ray 
crystallography provided opportunities to identify novel antibacterial targets 
for the development of new classes of antibiotics and to design more potent 
antimicrobial compounds derived from existing antibiotics in clinical use for 
decades. The antimetabolites, sulfa drugs and trimethoprim (TMP)-like agents, 
are inhibitors of three families of enzymes. One family belongs to the carbonic 
anhydrases, which catalyze a simple but physiologically relevant reaction in all 
life kingdoms, carbon dioxide hydration to bicarbonate and protons. The other 
two enzyme families are involved in the synthesis of tetrahydrofolate (THF), 
i.e. dihydropteroate synthase (DHPS) and dihydrofolate reductase. The 
antibacterial agents belonging to the THF and DHPS inhibitors were developed 
decades ago and present significant bacterial resistance problems. However, the 
molecular mechanisms of drug resistance both to sulfa drugs and TMP-like 
inhibitors were understood in detail only recently, when several X-ray crystal 
structures of such enzymes in complex with their inhibitors were reported. Here, 
we revue the state of the art in the field of antibacterials based on inhibitors 
of these three enzyme families.

DOI: 10.3109/14756366.2013.787422
PMID: 23627736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]