---
reference_id: "PMID:25138826"
title: Management of hypertension and heart failure in patients with Addison's disease.
authors:
- Inder WJ
- Meyer C
- Hunt PJ
journal: Clin Endocrinol (Oxf)
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/cen.12592
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of hypertension and heart failure in patients with Addison's disease.
**Authors:** Inder WJ, Meyer C, Hunt PJ
**Journal:** Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cen.12592](https://doi.org/10.1111/cen.12592)

## Content

1. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2015 Jun;82(6):789-92. doi: 10.1111/cen.12592. Epub
2014  Sep 16.

Management of hypertension and heart failure in patients with Addison's disease.

Inder WJ(1), Meyer C(2), Hunt PJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Princess Alexandra Hospital and 
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Qld, Australia.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, St Vincent's Hospital, Melbourne, 
Vic., Australia.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Christchurch Hospital and University of Otago, 
Christchurch, New Zealand.

Addison's disease may be complicated by hypertension and less commonly by heart 
failure. We review the pathophysiology of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis 
in Addison's disease and how this is altered in the setting of hypertension and 
heart failure. An essential first step in management in both conditions is 
optimizing glucocorticoid replacement and considering dose reduction if 
excessive. Following this, if a patient with Addison's disease remains 
hypertensive, the fludrocortisone dose should be reviewed and reduced if there 
are clinical and/or biochemical signs of mineralocorticoid excess. In the 
absence of such signs, where the renin is towards the upper end of the normal 
range or elevated, an angiotensin II (AII) receptor antagonist or angiotensin 
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor is the treatment of choice, and the 
fludrocortisone dose should remain unchanged. Dihydropyridine calcium channel 
blockers are clinically useful as second line agents, but diuretics should be 
avoided. In the setting of heart failure, there is an increase in total body 
sodium and water; therefore, it is appropriate to reduce and rarely consider 
ceasing the fludrocortisone. Loop diuretics may be used, but not aldosterone 
antagonists such as spironolactone or eplerenone. Standard treatment with ACE 
inhibitors, or as an alternative, AII receptor antagonists, are appropriate. 
Measurements of renin are no longer helpful in heart failure to determine the 
volume status but plasma levels of brain natriuretic peptide (BNP/proBNP) may 
help guide therapy.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cen.12592
PMID: 25138826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]