---
reference_id: "PMID:32633805"
title: "Systemic Amyloidosis Recognition, Prognosis, and Therapy: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Gertz MA
- Dispenzieri A
journal: JAMA
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1001/jama.2020.5493
keywords:
- Algorithms
- Benzoxazoles/therapeutic use
- Dexamethasone/therapeutic use
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Gene Silencing
- Heart Failure/etiology
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulin Light-chain Amyloidosis/diagnosis, mortality, physiopathology, therapy"
- Liver Transplantation
- Melphalan/therapeutic use
- Prognosis
- Proteinuria/etiology
- Stem Cell Transplantation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systemic Amyloidosis Recognition, Prognosis, and Therapy: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Gertz MA, Dispenzieri A
**Journal:** JAMA (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jama.2020.5493](https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.5493)

## Content

1. JAMA. 2020 Jul 7;324(1):79-89. doi: 10.1001/jama.2020.5493.

Systemic Amyloidosis Recognition, Prognosis, and Therapy: A Systematic Review.

Gertz MA(1), Dispenzieri A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota.

IMPORTANCE: Many patients with systemic amyloidosis are underdiagnosed. Overall, 
25% of patients with immunoglobulin light chain (AL) amyloidosis die within 6 
months of diagnosis and 25% of patients with amyloid transthyretin (ATTR) 
amyloidosis die within 24 months of diagnosis. Effective therapy exists but is 
ineffective if end-organ damage is severe.
OBJECTIVE: To provide evidence-based recommendations that could allow clinicians 
to diagnose this rare set of diseases earlier and enable accurate staging and 
counseling about prognosis.
EVIDENCE REVIEW: A comprehensive literature search was conducted by a reference 
librarian with publication dates from January 1, 2000, to December 31, 2019. Key 
search terms included amyloid, amyloidosis, nephrotic syndrome, heart failure 
preserved ejection fraction, and peripheral neuropathy. Exclusion criteria 
included case reports, non-English-language text, and case series of fewer than 
10 patients. The authors independently selected and appraised relevant 
literature.
FINDINGS: There was a total of 1769 studies in the final data set. Eighty-one 
articles were included in this review, of which 12 were randomized clinical 
trials of therapy that included 3074 patients, 9 were case series, and 3 were 
cohort studies. The incidence of AL amyloidosis is approximately 12 cases per 
million persons per year and there is an estimated prevalence of 30 000 to 
45 000 cases in the US and European Union. The incidence of variant ATTR 
amyloidosis is estimated to be 0.3 cases per year per million persons with a 
prevalence estimate of 5.2 cases per million persons. Wild-type ATTR is 
estimated to have a prevalence of 155 to 191 cases per million persons. 
Amyloidosis should be considered in the differential diagnosis of adult 
nondiabetic nephrotic syndrome; heart failure with preserved ejection fraction, 
particularly if restrictive features are present; unexplained hepatomegaly 
without imaging abnormalities; peripheral neuropathy with distal sensory 
symptoms, such as numbness, paresthesia, and dysesthesias (although the 
autonomic manifestations occasionally may be the presenting feature); and 
monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance with atypical clinical 
features. Staging can be performed using blood testing only. Therapeutic 
decision-making for AL amyloidosis involves choosing between high-dose 
chemotherapy and stem cell transplant or bortezomib-based chemotherapy. There 
are 3 therapies approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for managing 
ATTR amyloidosis, depending on clinical phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: All forms of amyloidosis are underdiagnosed. All 
forms now have approved therapies that have been demonstrated to improve either 
survival or disability and quality of life. The diagnosis should be considered 
in patients that have a multisystem disorder involving the heart, kidney, liver, 
or nervous system.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.2020.5493
PMID: 32633805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]