---
reference_id: "PMID:17277925"
title: "Critical weight loss in head and neck cancer--prevalence and risk factors at diagnosis: an explorative study."
authors:
- Jager-Wittenaar H
- Dijkstra PU
- Vissink A
- van der Laan BF
- van Oort RP
- Roodenburg JL
journal: Support Care Cancer
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1007/s00520-006-0212-9
keywords:
- Aged
- Female
- "Head and Neck Neoplasms/complications, diagnosis"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Nutrition Disorders/epidemiology, etiology"
- Prevalence
- Risk Factors
- Weight Loss
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Critical weight loss in head and neck cancer--prevalence and risk factors at diagnosis: an explorative study.
**Authors:** Jager-Wittenaar H, Dijkstra PU, Vissink A, van der Laan BF, van Oort RP, Roodenburg JL
**Journal:** Support Care Cancer (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00520-006-0212-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00520-006-0212-9)

## Content

1. Support Care Cancer. 2007 Sep;15(9):1045-50. doi: 10.1007/s00520-006-0212-9. 
Epub 2007 Feb 3.

Critical weight loss in head and neck cancer--prevalence and risk factors at 
diagnosis: an explorative study.

Jager-Wittenaar H(1), Dijkstra PU, Vissink A, van der Laan BF, van Oort RP, 
Roodenburg JL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, University Medical Center 
Groningen, University of Groningen, P.O. Box 30001, 9700 RB, Groningen, The 
Netherlands. h.jager@fd.umcg.nl

GOALS OF WORK: Critical weight loss (> or =5% in 1 month or > or =10% in 6 
months) is a common phenomenon in head and neck cancer patients. It is unknown 
which complaints are most strongly related to critical weight loss in head and 
neck cancer patients at the time of diagnosis. The aim of this explorative study 
was to assess the prevalence of critical weight loss and to analyze risk factors 
for critical weight loss in head and neck cancer patients before treatment.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Critical weight loss and factors reducing dietary intake 
were assessed in 447 patients referred to an ear, nose and throat clinic at the 
time of diagnosis.
MAIN RESULTS: In total, data of 407 patients were analyzed. Critical weight loss 
was present in 19% of the patients. Patients with cancer in the hypopharynx, 
oropharynx/oral cavity and supraglottic larynx had the highest risk for critical 
weight loss. Loss of appetite, dysphagia/passage difficulties and loss of 
taste/aversion were significantly (p < 0.05) associated with critical weight 
loss.
CONCLUSIONS: Already before treatment, critical weight loss is a considerable 
problem in head and neck cancer patients. Critical weight loss is frequently 
observed in patients with cancer in the hypopharynx, oropharynx/oral cavity and 
supraglottic larynx.

DOI: 10.1007/s00520-006-0212-9
PMID: 17277925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]