---
reference_id: "PMID:29628368"
title: Sebelipase alfa improves atherogenic biomarkers in adults and children with lysosomal acid lipase deficiency.
authors:
- Wilson DP
- Friedman M
- Marulkar S
- Hamby T
- Bruckert E
journal: J Clin Lipidol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jacl.2018.02.020
keywords:
- Adult
- "Atherosclerosis/complications, drug therapy, metabolism"
- Biomarkers/metabolism
- Child
- Humans
- "Sterol Esterase/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Wolman Disease/complications
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sebelipase alfa improves atherogenic biomarkers in adults and children with lysosomal acid lipase deficiency.
**Authors:** Wilson DP, Friedman M, Marulkar S, Hamby T, Bruckert E
**Journal:** J Clin Lipidol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jacl.2018.02.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacl.2018.02.020)

## Content

1. J Clin Lipidol. 2018 May-Jun;12(3):604-614. doi: 10.1016/j.jacl.2018.02.020.
Epub 2018 Mar 9.

Sebelipase alfa improves atherogenic biomarkers in adults and children with
lysosomal acid lipase deficiency.

Wilson DP(1), Friedman M(2), Marulkar S(2), Hamby T(3), Bruckert E(4).

Author information:
(1)Cook Children's Medical Center, Fort Worth, TX. Electronic address:
don.wilson@cookchildrens.org.
(2)Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Inc., New Haven, CT.
(3)Cook Children's Medical Center, Fort Worth, TX.
(4)Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Measures of atherogenic cholesterol, with and without concomitant
use of lipid-lowering medications (LLMs), are reported with up to 52 weeks of
sebelipase alfa treatment in children and adults with lysosomal acid lipase
deficiency (LAL-D) participating in the phase 3 Acid Lipase Replacement
Investigating Safety and Efficacy study (NCT01757184).
OBJECTIVE: To examine the effects of sebelipase alfa on levels of atherogenic
biomarkers in the Acid Lipase Replacement Investigating Safety and Efficacy
study.
METHODS: Data were prospectively collected for LDL particle (LDL-P) number,
LDL-C, HDL-C, apolipoprotein B (apoB), apolipoprotein A1 (apoA1), and LDL-P
size. Differences at week 20 between the sebelipase alfa and placebo groups were
assessed for the overall LAL-D cohort and for patients receiving and not
receiving LLMs. Changes from baseline after up to 52 weeks of treatment were
also calculated for the overall cohort and separately for patients receiving and
not receiving LLMs.
RESULTS: Baseline values for LDL-C, LDL-P number, and apoB were elevated while
HDL-C and apoA1 were low. Treatment with sebelipase alfa for 20 weeks
significantly improved atherogenic measures compared with placebo irrespective
of LLM usage. The reduction in LDL-C with sebelipase alfa was associated with a
reduction in the LDL-P number. Treatment for up to 52 weeks was associated with
sustained improvements of LDL-P, LDL-C, HDL-C, apoB, and apoA1, regardless of
LLM use.
CONCLUSION: Patients with LAL-D have high atherogenic risk. It is essential to
address the underlying LAL deficiency to restore cholesterol homeostasis in
LAL-D patients, as treatment with sebelipase alfa improves atherogenic measures
regardless of LLM use and for a sustained period. Sebelipase alfa appears to
reduce LDL-C by decreasing the LDL-P number, suggesting improvement in
cardiovascular disease risk in LAL-D patients.

Copyright © 2018 National Lipid Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jacl.2018.02.020
PMID: 29628368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
