---
reference_id: "PMID:40411977"
title: "Efficacy of encorafenib plus binimetinib in patients with BRAF-mutated melanoma brain metastases: Results from the Dutch Melanoma Treatment Registry."
authors:
- Bloem M
- Suijkerbuijk KPM
- Aarts MJB
- van den Berkmortel FWPJ
- Blank CU
- Blokx WAM
- Boers-Sonderen MJ
- Boreel CDM
- de Groot JWB
- Haanen JBAG
- Hospers GAP
- Kapiteijn E
- van Not OJ
- Piersma D
- Rikhof B
- Stevense-den Boer AM
- van der Veldt AAM
- Vreugdenhil G
- Wouters MWJM
- van den Eertwegh AJM
journal: Eur J Cancer
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2025.115514
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Melanoma/drug therapy, genetics, pathology, mortality, secondary"
- Male
- "Brain Neoplasms/secondary, drug therapy, genetics, mortality"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Aged
- "Carbamates/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Middle Aged
- "Benzimidazoles/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Sulfonamides/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- Netherlands
- Registries
- Mutation
- Adult
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Skin Neoplasms/pathology, genetics, drug therapy"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of encorafenib plus binimetinib in patients with BRAF-mutated melanoma brain metastases: Results from the Dutch Melanoma Treatment Registry.
**Authors:** Bloem M, Suijkerbuijk KPM, Aarts MJB, van den Berkmortel FWPJ, Blank CU, Blokx WAM, Boers-Sonderen MJ, Boreel CDM, de Groot JWB, Haanen JBAG, Hospers GAP, Kapiteijn E, van Not OJ, Piersma D, Rikhof B, Stevense-den Boer AM, van der Veldt AAM, Vreugdenhil G, Wouters MWJM, van den Eertwegh AJM
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejca.2025.115514](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2025.115514)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer. 2025 Jun 18;223:115514. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2025.115514. Epub
2025  May 19.

Efficacy of encorafenib plus binimetinib in patients with BRAF-mutated melanoma
brain metastases: Results from the Dutch Melanoma Treatment Registry.

Bloem M(1), Suijkerbuijk KPM(2), Aarts MJB(3), van den Berkmortel FWPJ(4), Blank
CU(5), Blokx WAM(6), Boers-Sonderen MJ(7), Boreel CDM(8), de Groot JWB(9),
Haanen JBAG(5), Hospers GAP(10), Kapiteijn E(11), van Not OJ(8), Piersma D(12),
Rikhof B(13), Stevense-den Boer AM(14), van der Veldt AAM(15), Vreugdenhil
G(16), Wouters MWJM(17), van den Eertwegh AJM(18).

Author information:
(1)Scientific Bureau, Dutch Institute for Clinical Auditing, Rijnsburgerweg 10,
Leiden 2333AA, the Netherlands; Department of Biomedical Data Sciences, Leiden
University Medical Centre, Einthovenweg 20, Leiden 2333ZC, the Netherlands;
Department of Surgical Oncology, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121,
Amsterdam 1066CX, the Netherlands. Electronic address: m.bloem@lumc.nl.
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht
University, Heidelberglaan 100, Utrecht 3584CX, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, GROW School for Oncology and Reproduction,
Maastricht University Medical Centre+, P. Debyelaan 25, Maastricht 6229 HX, the
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Zuyderland Medical Centre Sittard, Dr. H. van
der Hoffplein 1, Sittard-Geleen 6162BG, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology & Immunology, Netherlands Cancer Institute,
Plesmanlaan 121, Amsterdam 1066CX, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Heidelberglaan
100, Utrecht 3584CX, the Netherlands.
(7)Department of Medical Oncology, Radboud University Medical Centre, Geert
Grooteplein Zuid 10, Nijmegen 6525GA, the Netherlands.
(8)Scientific Bureau, Dutch Institute for Clinical Auditing, Rijnsburgerweg 10,
Leiden 2333AA, the Netherlands; Department of Medical Oncology, University
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Heidelberglaan 100, Utrecht 3584CX,
the Netherlands.
(9)Isala Oncology Center, Isala, Dokter van Heesweg 2, Zwolle 8025AB, the
Netherlands.
(10)Department of Medical Oncology, University Medical Centre Groningen,
University of Groningen, Hanzeplein 1, Groningen 9713GZ, the Netherlands.
(11)Department of Medical Oncology, Leiden University Medical Centre,
Albinusdreef 2, Leiden 2333ZA, the Netherlands.
(12)Department of Internal Medicine, Medisch Spectrum Twente, Koningsplein 1,
Enschede 7512KZ, the Netherlands.
(13)Department of Internal Medicine, Medical Centre Leeuwarden, Henri Dunantweg
2, Leeuwarden 8934AD, the Netherlands.
(14)Department of Internal Medicine, Amphia Hospital, Molengracht 21, Breda
4818CK, the Netherlands.
(15)Department of Medical Oncology and Radiology & Nuclear Medicine, Erasmus
Medical Centre, Gravendijkwal 230, Rotterdam 3015CE, the Netherlands.
(16)Department of Internal Medicine, Maxima Medical Centre, De Run 4600,
Eindhoven 5504DB, the Netherlands.
(17)Scientific Bureau, Dutch Institute for Clinical Auditing, Rijnsburgerweg 10,
Leiden 2333AA, the Netherlands; Department of Biomedical Data Sciences, Leiden
University Medical Centre, Einthovenweg 20, Leiden 2333ZC, the Netherlands;
Department of Surgical Oncology, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121,
Amsterdam 1066CX, the Netherlands.
(18)Department of Medical Oncology, Amsterdam UMC, VU University Medical Center,
Cancer Center Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1118, Amsterdam 1081HZ, the Netherlands.

AIM: Data on the effectiveness of encorafenib/binimetinib in melanoma patients
with brain metastases (BMs) are limited.
METHODS: All patients with BRAF V600-mutated melanoma and BMs treated with
encorafenib/binimetinib between 2019 and 2022 in the Netherlands were included
from the nationwide Dutch Melanoma Treatment Registry. Patients previously
treated with other BRAF/MEK inhibitors were excluded. We analyzed objective
response rates (ORR), progression-free survival (PFS), and overall survival
(OS). Multivariable Cox regression identified factors associated with survival.
Subgroup analyses included asymptomatic versus symptomatic BMs and line of
treatment (first-line versus later-line).
RESULTS: In total, 190 patients were included. Symptomatic BMs were present in
63 % of patients. Encorafenib/binimetinib was the first-line treatment in 64 %
of all patients, while 36 % had prior immunotherapy. Overall, the ORR was
69.4 %, median PFS was 5.5 months (95 %CI 4.9-6.2), and median OS 11.9 months
(95 %CI 10.0-15.7). Age ≥ 70, ECOG PS ≥ 2, symptomatic BMs, and elevated LDH
were significantly associated with worse survival. Patients with prior
immunotherapy had a median PFS of 6.9 months (95 %CI 4.3-9.6) and OS of 17.9
months (95 %CI 13.7-31.2), while this was 4.9 months (95 %CI 4.3-5.5) and 10.1
months (95 %CI 8.1-13.0) in treatment-naïve patients. Median PFS and OS in
patients with asymptomatic versus symptomatic BMs were 6.1 months (95 %CI
4.9-9.8) and 20.5 (95 %CI 14.0-NA) versus 5.3 months (95 %CI 4.9-6.3) and 10.7
(95 %CI 8.9-13.7), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Encorafenib/binimetinib has clinical activity in real-world
melanoma patients with BMs. Their prognosis is determined by the presence of
symptomatic BMs, age, ECOG PS, and LDH levels.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2025.115514
PMID: 40411977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be
considered as potential competing interests. AE participates in the Advisory
Boards of Bristol-Myers Squibb, MSD Oncology, Ipsen, Pierre Fabre, Janssen Cilag
BV. All fees were paid to the institution. GH has received grants from Seerave
and Bristol-Myers Squibb, paid to the institution. GH participates in the
Advisory Boards of Bristol-Myers Squibb, Roche, MSD, Novartis, Sanofi, Pierre
Fabre, and Amgen. All fees were paid to the institution. KS has received grants
from Abbvie, Novartis, Genmab, Philips and Pierre Fabre, and participates in the
Advisory Boards of Abbvie and Sairopa. All fees were paid to the institution. MA
has received personal payment for the GUCS review; a national, online
presentation “Highlight medical oncologie GU” in the Netherlands. MA received
personal support from ASCO (2022) to attend the meeting. MA participated in the
Advisory Boards of Amgen, Bristol Myers Squibb, Novartis, MSD-Merck,
Merck-Pfizer, Pierre Fabre, Sanofi, Astellas, Bayer, and received a research
grant from Merck-Pfizer. All fees were paid personally. AV participates in the
Advisory Boards of Bristol-Myers Squibb, MSD, Ipsen, Eisai, Roche, Novartus,
Sanofi, and Pfizer. All fees were paid to the institution. DP has received
payment from Novartis for education about melanoma for new employees, and from
BMS for case writing for educational purpose. DP participates in the Advisory
Boards of Peirre Fabre. All remaining authors have declared no conflicts of
interest. This study was supported by the Dutch Melanoma Treatment Registry
(DMTR); the Dutch Institute for Clinical Auditing foundation received a start-up
grant from governmental organization the Netherlands Organization for Health
Research and Development (ZonMW, project number 836002002). The DMTR is
structurally funded by Bristol Myers Squibb, Merck Sharpe & Dohme, Novartis, and
Roche Pharma. Roche Pharma stopped funding in 2019, Novartis stopped funding in
2023, and Pierre Fabre started funding the DMTR in 2019. For this work, a
project sponsorship from Pierre Fabre was granted.
