---
reference_id: "PMID:21054165"
title: "Endometriosis: the role of neuroangiogenesis."
authors:
- Asante A
- Taylor RN
journal: Annu Rev Physiol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1146/annurev-physiol-012110-142158
keywords:
- Animals
- "Endometriosis/physiopathology, therapy"
- Female
- Humans
- Menstruation Disturbances/physiopathology
- Mice
- "Neovascularization, Pathologic/physiopathology"
- Neurogenesis/physiology
- Pelvic Pain/physiopathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endometriosis: the role of neuroangiogenesis.
**Authors:** Asante A, Taylor RN
**Journal:** Annu Rev Physiol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev-physiol-012110-142158](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-physiol-012110-142158)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Physiol. 2011;73:163-82. doi: 10.1146/annurev-physiol-012110-142158.

Endometriosis: the role of neuroangiogenesis.

Asante A(1), Taylor RN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Emory University School of Medicine,
Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

Endometriosis is a common cause of pelvic pain and infertility, affecting ∼10%
of reproductive-age women. Annual costs for medical and surgical care in the
United States exceed $20 billion. The disorder is characterized by implants of
endometrial tissue outside the uterine cavity. Endometriotic lesions induce a
state of chronic peritoneal inflammation, accompanied by elevated prostaglandin,
cytokine, and growth factor concentrations. The current therapy is surgical
ablation of ectopic implants and hormones that block the
hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian axis, but these approaches are expensive, carry
perioperative risks, or have unpleasant side effects of hypoestrogenism. Recent
evidence indicates that ectopic endometriotic implants recruit their own unique
neural and vascular supplies through neuroangiogenesis. It is believed that
these nascent nerve fibers in endometriosis implants influence dorsal root
neurons within the central nervous system, increasing pain perception in
patients. We consider the mechanisms and therapeutic implications of
neuroangiogenesis in these lesions and propose potential treatments for the
control or elimination of endometriosis-associated pain.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-physiol-012110-142158
PMID: 21054165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
