---
reference_id: "PMID:30154332"
title: "Impact of Spaceflight and Artificial Gravity on the Mouse Retina: Biochemical and Proteomic Analysis."
authors:
- Mao XW
- Byrum S
- Nishiyama NC
- Pecaut MJ
- Sridharan V
- Boerma M
- Tackett AJ
- Shiba D
- Shirakawa M
- Takahashi S
- Delp MD
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2018'
doi: 10.3390/ijms19092546
keywords:
- Animals
- Apoptosis
- Endothelial Cells/metabolism
- "Gravity, Altered"
- Male
- Mice
- Oxidative Stress
- Proteome
- Proteomics
- Reactive Oxygen Species/metabolism
- Retina/physiology
- "Retinal Pigment Epithelium/cytology, metabolism"
- Space Flight
- Weightlessness
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of Spaceflight and Artificial Gravity on the Mouse Retina: Biochemical and Proteomic Analysis.
**Authors:** Mao XW, Byrum S, Nishiyama NC, Pecaut MJ, Sridharan V, Boerma M, Tackett AJ, Shiba D, Shirakawa M, Takahashi S, Delp MD
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2018)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms19092546](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms19092546)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2018 Aug 28;19(9):2546. doi: 10.3390/ijms19092546.

Impact of Spaceflight and Artificial Gravity on the Mouse Retina: Biochemical 
and Proteomic Analysis.

Mao XW(1), Byrum S(2)(3), Nishiyama NC(4), Pecaut MJ(5), Sridharan V(6), Boerma 
M(7), Tackett AJ(8)(9), Shiba D(10), Shirakawa M(11), Takahashi S(12), Delp 
MD(13).

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Sciences, Division of Biomedical Engineering Sciences 
(BMES), Loma Linda University School of Medicine and Medical Center, Loma Linda, 
CA 92350, USA. xmao@llu.edu.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA.. sbyrum@uams.edu.
(3)Arkansas Children's Research Institute, Little Rock, AR 72202, USA. 
sbyrum@uams.edu.
(4)Department of Basic Sciences, Division of Biomedical Engineering Sciences 
(BMES), Loma Linda University School of Medicine and Medical Center, Loma Linda, 
CA 92350, USA. nnishiyama@llu.edu.
(5)Department of Basic Sciences, Division of Biomedical Engineering Sciences 
(BMES), Loma Linda University School of Medicine and Medical Center, Loma Linda, 
CA 92350, USA. mpecaut@llu.edu.
(6)Division of Radiation Health, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA. 
vmohanseenivasan@uams.edu.
(7)Division of Radiation Health, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA. 
mboerma@uams.edu.
(8)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Arkansas for 
Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA.. ajtackett@uams.edu.
(9)Arkansas Children's Research Institute, Little Rock, AR 72202, USA. 
ajtackett@uams.edu.
(10)JEM Utilization Center, Human Spaceflight Technology Directorate, JAXA, 
Tsukuba 305-8505, Japan. shiba.dai@jaxa.jp.
(11)JEM Utilization Center, Human Spaceflight Technology Directorate, JAXA, 
Tsukuba 305-8505, Japan. shirakawa.masaki@jaxa.jp.
(12)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba 
305-8575, Japan. satoruta@md.tsukuba.ac.jp.
(13)Department of Nutrition, Food and Exercise Sciences, Florida State 
University, Tallahassee, FL 32306, USA. mdelp@fsu.edu.

Astronauts are reported to have experienced some impairment in visual acuity 
during their mission on the International Space Station (ISS) and after they 
returned to Earth. There is emerging evidence that changes in vision may involve 
alterations in ocular structure and function. To investigate possible 
mechanisms, changes in protein expression profiles and oxidative 
stress-associated apoptosis were examined in mouse ocular tissue after 
spaceflight. Nine-week-old male C57BL/6 mice (n = 12) were launched from the 
Kennedy Space Center on a SpaceX rocket to the ISS for a 35-day mission. The 
animals were housed in the mouse Habitat Cage Unit (HCU) in the Japan Aerospace 
Exploration Agency (JAXA) "Kibo" facility on the ISS. The flight mice lived 
either under an ambient microgravity condition (µg) or in a centrifugal habitat 
unit that produced 1 g artificial gravity (µg + 1 g). Habitat control (HC) and 
vivarium control mice lived on Earth in HCUs or normal vivarium cages, 
respectively. Quantitative assessment of ocular tissue demonstrated that the µg 
group induced significant apoptosis in the retina vascular endothelial cells 
compared to all other groups (p < 0.05) that was 64% greater than that in the HC 
group. Proteomic analysis showed that many key pathways responsible for cell 
death, cell repair, inflammation, and metabolic stress were significantly 
altered in µg mice compared to HC animals. Additionally, there were more 
significant changes in regulated protein expression in the µg group relative to 
that in the µg + 1 g group. These data provide evidence that spaceflight induces 
retinal apoptosis of vascular endothelial cells and changes in retinal protein 
expression related to cellular structure, immune response and metabolic 
function, and that artificial gravity (AG) provides some protection against 
these changes. These retinal cellular responses may affect blood⁻retinal barrier 
(BRB) integrity, visual acuity, and impact the potential risk of developing late 
retinal degeneration.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms19092546
PMCID: PMC6165321
PMID: 30154332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.