---
reference_id: "PMID:28971744"
title: Benefits and drawbacks of guanidinoacetic acid as a possible treatment to replenish cerebral creatine in AGAT deficiency.
authors:
- Ostojic SM
journal: Nutr Neurosci
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1080/1028415X.2017.1385176
keywords:
- "Amidinotransferases/deficiency, metabolism"
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diet therapy, metabolism"
- Clinical Trials as Topic
- Creatine/metabolism
- "Developmental Disabilities/diet therapy, metabolism"
- "Glycine/analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use"
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/diet therapy, metabolism"
- "Speech Disorders/diet therapy, metabolism"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Benefits and drawbacks of guanidinoacetic acid as a possible treatment to replenish cerebral creatine in AGAT deficiency.
**Authors:** Ostojic SM
**Journal:** Nutr Neurosci (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1080/1028415X.2017.1385176](https://doi.org/10.1080/1028415X.2017.1385176)

## Content

1. Nutr Neurosci. 2019 May;22(5):302-305. doi: 10.1080/1028415X.2017.1385176.
Epub  2017 Oct 3.

Benefits and drawbacks of guanidinoacetic acid as a possible treatment to
replenish cerebral creatine in AGAT deficiency.

Ostojic SM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)a Applied Bioenergetics Lab, Faculty of Sport and PE , University of Novi Sad
, Lovcenska 16, Novi Sad 21000 , Serbia.
(2)b University of Belgrade School of Medicine , Belgrade , Serbia.

Arginine-glycine amidinotransferase (AGAT) deficiency is a rare inherited
metabolic disorder that severely affects brain bioenergetics. Characterized by
mental retardation, language impairment, and behavioral disorders, AGAT
deficiency is a treatable condition, where long-term creatine supplementation
usually restores brain creatine levels and improves its clinical features. In
some cases of AGAT deficiency, creatine treatment might be somewhat limited due
to possible shortcomings in performance and transport of creatine to the brain.
Guanidinoacetic acid (GAA), a direct metabolic precursor of creatine, has
recently been suggested as a possible alternative to creatine to tackle brain
creatine levels in experimental medicine. AGAT patients might benefit from oral
GAA due to upgraded bioavailability and convenient utilization of the compound,
while possible drawbacks (e.g. brain methylation issues, neurotoxicity, and
hyperhomocysteinemia) should be accounted as well.

DOI: 10.1080/1028415X.2017.1385176
PMID: 28971744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
