---
reference_id: "PMID:36493792"
title: "Abemaciclib plus endocrine therapy for hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative, node-positive, high-risk early breast cancer (monarchE): results from a preplanned interim analysis of a randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial."
authors:
- Johnston SRD
- Toi M
- "O'Shaughnessy J"
- Rastogi P
- Campone M
- Neven P
- Huang CS
- Huober J
- Jaliffe GG
- Cicin I
- Tolaney SM
- Goetz MP
- Rugo HS
- Senkus E
- Testa L
- Del Mastro L
- Shimizu C
- Wei R
- Shahir A
- Munoz M
- San Antonio B
- André V
- Harbeck N
- Martin M
- monarchE Committee Members
journal: Lancet Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(22)00694-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abemaciclib plus endocrine therapy for hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative, node-positive, high-risk early breast cancer (monarchE): results from a preplanned interim analysis of a randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial.
**Authors:** Johnston SRD, Toi M, O'Shaughnessy J, Rastogi P, Campone M, Neven P, Huang CS, Huober J, Jaliffe GG, Cicin I, Tolaney SM, Goetz MP, Rugo HS, Senkus E, Testa L, Del Mastro L, Shimizu C, Wei R, Shahir A, Munoz M, San Antonio B, André V, Harbeck N, Martin M, monarchE Committee Members
**Journal:** Lancet Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1470-2045(22)00694-5](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(22)00694-5)

## Content

1. Lancet Oncol. 2023 Jan;24(1):77-90. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(22)00694-5. Epub 
2022 Dec 6.

Abemaciclib plus endocrine therapy for hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative, 
node-positive, high-risk early breast cancer (monarchE): results from a 
preplanned interim analysis of a randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial.

Johnston SRD(1), Toi M(2), O'Shaughnessy J(3), Rastogi P(4), Campone M(5), Neven 
P(6), Huang CS(7), Huober J(8), Jaliffe GG(9), Cicin I(10), Tolaney SM(11), 
Goetz MP(12), Rugo HS(13), Senkus E(14), Testa L(15), Del Mastro L(16), Shimizu 
C(17), Wei R(18), Shahir A(19), Munoz M(19), San Antonio B(19), André V(18), 
Harbeck N(20), Martin M(21); monarchE Committee Members.

Author information:
(1)The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK. Electronic address: 
stephen.johnston@rmh.nhs.uk.
(2)Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
(3)Baylor University Medical Center, Texas Oncology, US Oncology, Dallas, TX, 
USA.
(4)University of Pittsburgh/UPMC, NSABP Foundation, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(5)Institute de Cancérologie de l'Ouest, Centre Rene Cauducheau, Saint-Herblain, 
Nantes, France.
(6)Universitaire Ziekenhuizen Leuven, Campus Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium.
(7)National Taiwan University Hospital and National Taiwan University College of 
Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(8)Cantonal Hospital St Gallen, Breast Centre St Gallen, Switzerland.
(9)Grupo Medico Camino SC, Mexico City, Mexico.
(10)Trakya University Faculty of Medicine, Edirne, Turkey.
(11)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.
(12)Department of Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(13)University of California San Francisco Hellen Diller Family Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(14)Department of Oncology and Radiotherapy, Medical University of Gdańsk, 
Gdańsk, Poland.
(15)Instituto D'Or de Pesquisa e Ensino (IDOR), Sao Paulo, Brazil.
(16)IRCSS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino, UO Breast Unit, Genoa, Italy; 
Università di Genova, Department of Internal Medicine and Medical Specialties 
(DIM), Genoa, Italy.
(17)National Centre for Global Health and Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(18)Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(19)Loxo@Lilly, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(20)Breast Centre, Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Comprehensive 
Cancer Centre München, LMU University Hospital, Munich, Germany.
(21)Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañon, Universidad Complutense, 
CIBERONC, GEICAM, Madrid, Spain.

Comment in
    Lancet Oncol. 2023 Mar;24(3):e103. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(23)00014-1.
    Lancet Oncol. 2023 Mar;24(3):e104. doi: 10.1016/S1470-2045(23)00065-7.
    Cancer Commun (Lond). 2023 Aug;43(8):938-942. doi: 10.1002/cac2.12466.

BACKGROUND: Adjuvant abemaciclib plus endocrine therapy previously showed a 
significant improvement in invasive disease-free survival and distant 
relapse-free survival in hormone receptor-positive, human epidermal growth 
factor receptor 2 (HER2; also known as ERBB2)-negative, node-positive, 
high-risk, early breast cancer. Here, we report updated results from an interim 
analysis to assess overall survival as well as invasive disease-free survival 
and distant relapse-free survival with additional follow-up.
METHODS: In monarchE, an open-label, randomised, phase 3 trial, adult patients 
(aged ≥18 years) who had hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative, 
node-positive, early breast cancer at a high risk of recurrence with an Eastern 
Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of 0 or 1 were recruited from 603 
sites including hospitals and academic and community centres in 38 countries. 
Patients were randomly assigned (1:1) by means of an interactive web-based 
response system (block size of 4), stratified by previous chemotherapy, 
menopausal status, and region, to receive standard-of-care endocrine therapy of 
physician's choice for up to 10 years with or without abemaciclib 150 mg orally 
twice a day for 2 years (treatment period). All therapies were administered in 
an open-label manner without masking. High-risk disease was defined as either 
four or more positive axillary lymph nodes, or between one and three positive 
axillary lymph nodes and either grade 3 disease or tumour size of 5 cm or larger 
(cohort 1). A smaller group of patients were enrolled with between one and three 
positive axillary lymph nodes and Ki-67 of at least 20% as an additional risk 
feature (cohort 2). This was a prespecified overall survival interim analysis 
planned to occur 2 years after the primary outcome analysis for invasive 
disease-free survival. Efficacy was assessed in the intention-to-treat 
population. Safety was assessed in all treated patients. The study is registered 
with ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT03155997, and is ongoing.
FINDINGS: Between July 17, 2017, and Aug 12, 2019, 5637 patients were randomly 
assigned (5601 [99·4%] were women and 36 [0·6%] were men). 2808 were assigned to 
receive abemaciclib plus endocrine therapy and 2829 were assigned to receive 
endocrine therapy alone. At a median follow-up of 42 months (IQR 37-47), median 
invasive disease-free survival was not reached in either group and the invasive 
disease-free survival benefit previously reported was sustained: HR 0·664 (95% 
CI 0·578-0·762, nominal p<0·0001). At 4 years, the absolute difference in 
invasive disease-free survival between the groups was 6·4% (85·8% [95% CI 
84·2-87·3] in the abemaciclib plus endocrine therapy group vs 79·4% [77·5-81·1] 
in the endocrine therapy alone group). 157 (5·6%) of 2808 patients in the 
abemaciclib plus endocrine therapy group died compared with 173 (6·1%) of 2829 
patients in the endocrine therapy alone group (HR 0·929, 95% CI 0·748-1·153; 
p=0·50). The most common grade 3-4 adverse events were neutropenia (in 548 
[19·6%] of 2791 patients receiving abemaciclib plus endocrine therapy vs 24 
[0·9%] of 2800 patients in the endocrine therapy alone group), leukopenia (318 
[11·4%] vs 11 [0·4%]), and diarrhoea (218 [7·8%] vs six [0·2%]). Serious adverse 
events occurred in 433 (15·5%) of 2791 patients receiving abemaciclib plus 
endocrine therapy versus 256 (9·1%) of 2800 receiving endocrine therapy. There 
were two treatment-related deaths in the abemaciclib plus endocrine therapy 
group (diarrhoea and pneumonitis) and none in the endocrine therapy alone group.
INTERPRETATION: Adjuvant abemaciclib reduces the risk of recurrence. The benefit 
is sustained beyond the completion of treatment with an absolute increase at 4 
years, further supporting the use of abemaciclib in patients with high-risk 
hormone receptor-positive, HER2-negative early breast cancer. Further follow-up 
is needed to establish whether overall survival can be improved with abemaciclib 
plus endocrine therapy in these patients.
FUNDING: Eli Lilly.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1470-2045(22)00694-5
PMCID: PMC11200328
PMID: 36493792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests SRDJ reports grants or 
contracts from Pfizer, Puma Biotechnology, Eli Lilly, AstraZeneca, Novartis, and 
Roche–Genentech for research funding to institute for laboratory studies and 
clinical trials; consulting fees from Eli Lilly, AstraZeneca, Puma 
Biotechnology, Pfizer, Novartis, and Sanofi Genzyme for consulting or an 
advisory role; and payment or honoraria from Pfizer, Eisai, AstraZeneca, and 
Roche–Genentech for speaker's bureau. MT reports grants or contracts from 
Chugai, Takeda, Pfizer, Taiho, JBCRG, KBCRN, Eisai, Eli Lilly, Daiichi-Sankyo, 
AstraZeneca, Astellas, Shimadzu, Yakult, Nippon Kayaku, AFI technology, Luxonus, 
Shionogi, GL Science, and Sanwa Shurui for research grants to their department; 
payment or honoraria from Chugai, Takeda, Pfizer, Kyowa-Kirin, Taiho, Eisai, 
Daiichi-Sankyo, AstraZeneca, Eli Lilly, Merck Sharp and Dohme, Exact Science, 
Novartis, Shimadzu, Yakult, Nippon Kayaku, Devicore Medical Japan, and Sysmex 
for lecture honoraria or honoraria for lecture chair; participation on a data 
safety monitoring board or advisory board for Daiichi-Sankyo, Eli Lilly, Bristol 
Myers Squibb, Athenex Oncology, Bertis, Terumo, and Kansai Medical Net; and 
other financial or non-financial interest from British Journal of Cancer, 
Scientific Reports, Breast Cancer Research and Treatment, Cancer Science, 
Frontiers in Women's Cancer, Asian Journal of Surgery, and Asian Journal of 
Breast Surgery for his role as Associate Editor. JO'S reports consulting fees 
and payment or honoraria for lectures, presentations, speaker's bureaus, 
manuscript writing or educational events from from AbbVie, Agendia, Amgen 
Biotechnology, Aptitude Health, AstraZeneca, Athenex, Bayer, Bristol Myers 
Squibb, Carrick Therapeutics, Celgene Corporation, Daiichi Sankyo, Eisai, G1 
Therapeutics, Genentech, Genzyme, Gilead Sciences, GRAIL, Halozyme Therapeutics, 
Heron Therapeutics, Immunomedics, Ipsen Biopharmaceuticals, Eli Lilly, Merck, 
Myriad, Nektar Therapeutics, Novartis, Ontada, Pfizer, Pharmacyclics, Pierre 
Fabre Pharmaceuticals, Puma Biotechnology, Prime Oncology, Roche, Samsung 
Bioepsis, Sandoz, Sanofi, Seagen, Syndax Pharmaceuticals, Taiho Oncology, 
Takeda, Theralink, and Synthon. MC reports personal payment support from Eli 
Lilly for the present article, advisory board, and speaker's bureau; payment or 
honoraria to institution from Novartis; support for attending meetings from Eli 
Lilly, Novartis, AstraZeneca, and Pfizer; and payment to institution from 
AstraZeneca, Novartis, Sanofi, Pfizer, Seagen, Gilead, Daiichi Sankyo for 
participation on a data safety monitoring board or advisory board. C-SH reports 
research grants to institution from Eli Lilly for the present article; research 
grants to institution or contracts from Daiichi Sankyo, AstraZeneca, EirGenix, 
Eli Lilly and Company, Merck Sharp and Dohme, OBI Pharma, Pfizer, Roche, and 
Novartis; payment or honoraria from Daiichi Sankyo, AstraZeneca, Pfizer, 
Novartis, Roche, and Eli Lilly for speaker's bureau; support for attending 
meetings or travel from Astra Zeneca, Pfizer, Roche, and Novartis; and 
participation on advisory boards from Daiichi Sankyo, AstraZeneca, Eli Lilly, 
Pfizer, Novartis, and Roche. JH reports institutional grants or contracts from 
Celgene, Novartis, Hexal, and Eli Lilly; consulting fees paid to self from Eli 
Lilly, Novartis, Roche, Pfizer, Hexal, AstraZeneca, Merck Sharp and Dohme, 
Celgene, AbbVie, and Daiichi-Sankyo; honoraria or payments to self for lectures, 
presentation, speaker's bureaus, manuscript writing, or educational events from 
Eli Lilly, Novartis, Roche, Pfizer, AstraZeneca, Merck Sharp and Dohme, Celgene, 
Eisai, Abbvie, Seagen, and Gilead; and support for attending meetings or travel 
paid to self from Roche, Pfizer, Novartis, Celgene, Daiichi-Sankyo, and Gilead. 
SMT reports institutional funding for study, consulting work to personal 
(honorariums), and manuscript preparation from Eli Lilly; institutional grants 
or contracts from AstraZeneca, Merck, Mektar, Novartis, Pfizer, Genentech–Roche, 
Gilead, Exelixis, Bristol Myers Squibb, Eisai, Nanostring, Cyclacel, Sanofi, and 
Seagen; and honoraria payments to self for participation in advisory boards or 
consulting from AstraZeneca, Eli Lilly, Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, 
Genentech–Roche, Gilead, Bristol Myers Squibb, Eisai, Sanofi, Seagen, 
Daiichi-Sankyo, Athenex, OncoPep, Kyowa Kirin Pharma, CytomX, Certara, Mersana 
Therapeutics, Ellipses Pharma, 4D Pharma, OncoSec, Infinity Therapeutics, 
BeyondSpring Pharma, OncXerna, Zymeworks, Zentalis, ARC Therapeutics, Reveal 
Genomics, Blueprint Medicines, Myovant, Umoja Biopharma, and Menarini–Stemline. 
MPG reports institutional grants or contracts from Pfizer, Eli Lilly, and 
Sermonix; consulting fees to institution from Eagle Pharmaceuticals, Eli Lilly, 
Biovica, Novartis, Sermonix, Pfizer, and ARC Therapeutics; honoraria or payment 
to self for lectures, presentations, speaker's bureaus, manuscript writing, or 
educational events from Research to Practice, Clinical Education Alliance, 
Medscape, Total Health Conferencing, Curio Science, and MJH Life Sciences; and 
support to institution from Eli Lilly, AstraZeneca, Novartis, Biotheranostics, 
Blueprint Medicines, Sanofi Genzyme, and ARC Therapeutics for participation on a 
data safety monitoring board or advisory board. HSR reports institutional 
research support from Pfizer, Novartis, Eli Lilly, Genentech–Roche, OBI, Merck, 
Gilead Sciences, Daiichi Sankyo, Seattle Genetics, Sermonix, AstraZeneca, and 
Astellas; travel support to academic meetings from Merck, AstraZeneca, and 
Gilead; and consulting or advisory support from Puma, NAPO, and Blueprint. ES 
reports support from Eli Lilly for the present article including investigator 
fees and medical writing; payment or honoraria for lectures, presentations, 
speaker's bureaus, manuscript writing, or educational events from AstraZeneca, 
Cancérodigest, Curio, Science, Egis, Eli Lilly and Company, Exact Sciences, 
Gilead, high5md, Merck Sharp and Dohme, Novartis, Pfizer, and Pierre Fabre; 
support for attending meetings or travel from Egis, Gilead, Novartis, Pfizer, 
and Roche; participation on a data safety monitoring board or advisory board 
from AstraZeneca, Egis, Eli Lilly, Exact Sciences, Merck Sharp and Dohme, 
Novartis, and Pfizer; a leadership or fiduciary role from Stowarzyszenie Różowy 
Motyl as Chair (unpaid); stock or stock options from AstraZeneca, Eli Lilly, and 
Pfizer; receipt of equipment, materials, drugs, medical writing, gifts or other 
services from Astellas, AstraZeneca, and Eli Lilly; and other financial or 
non-financial interests from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Eli Lilly, Novartis, OBI 
Pharma, Pfizer, Roche, and Samsung for contracted research. LT reports support 
from Eli Lilly as the trial sponsor for the study; grants or contracts from 
Novartis for clinical research; consulting fees from Merck Sharp and Dohme, Eli 
Lilly, and Novartis for advisory board; payment or honoraria from Merck Sharp 
and Dohme, Eli Lilly, Pfizer, Daiichi Sankyo, Novartis, and AstraZeneca for 
medical education; and support for attending meetings or travel from Pfizer and 
AstraZeneca. LDM reports an institutional research grant from Eli Lilly, 
Novartis, Roche, Daiichi Sankyo, and Seagen; consulting fees paid to self from 
Eli Lilly; honoraria or payment to self from Roche, Novartis, Pfizer, Eli Lilly, 
AstraZeneca, Merck Sharp and Dohme, Seagen, Gilead, Pierre Fabre, Eisa, Exact 
Sciences, and Ipsen for lectures, presentations, speaker's bureaus, manuscript 
writing or educational events; support for attending meetings or travel from 
Roche, Pfizer, and Eisai; and fees paid to self for participation on a data 
safety monitoring board or advisory Board from Novartis, Roche, Eli Lilly, 
Pfizer, Daiichi-Sankyo, Exact Sciences, Gilead, Pierre Fabre, Eisai, 
AstraZeneca, and Agendia. CS reports research grants from Eli Lilly, and 
honoraria for lectures from Pfizer and Eli Lilly. RW, AS, MMu, BSA, VA are 
employees and stock shareholders of Eli Lilly. NH reports support for the 
present article (medical writing) from Eli Lilly; consulting fees from Gilead, 
Sandoz, and Seagen; payment or honoraria for lectures, presentations, speaker's 
bureaus, manuscript writing, or educational events from Amgen, AsraZeneca, 
Daiichi-Sankyo, Gilead, Eli Lilly, Merck Sharp and Dohme, Novartis, 
Pierre-Fabre, Pfizer, Roche, and Seagen; participation on a data safety 
monitoring board or advisory board from Roche; and a leadership or fiduciary 
role with the West German Study Group and ESMO. MMa reports institutional grants 
from Roche, Novartis, and Puma; consulting fees paid to self from Roche, Eli 
Lilly, Pfizer, Daiichi-Sankyo, AstraZeneca, and Novartis; payment or honoraria 
to self for lectures, presentations, speaker's bureaus, manuscript writing, or 
educational events from Roche, Eli Lilly, Astrazeneca, and Pfizer; support paid 
to self for attending meetings or travel from Daiichi-Sankyo and Roche; and 
support paid to self for participation on a data safety monitoring board or 
advisory board from Novartis. PR, PN, GGJ, and IC declare no competing 
interests.