---
reference_id: PMID:38638822
title: Mast cell activation triggered by SARS-CoV-2 causes inflammation in brain microvascular endothelial cells and microglia.
authors:
- Wu ML
- Xie C
- Li X
- Sun J
- Zhao J
- Wang JH
journal: Front Cell Infect Microbiol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2024.1358873
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mast cell activation triggered by SARS-CoV-2 causes inflammation in brain microvascular endothelial cells and microglia.
**Authors:** Wu ML, Xie C, Li X, Sun J, Zhao J, Wang JH
**Journal:** Front Cell Infect Microbiol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcimb.2024.1358873](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcimb.2024.1358873)

## Content

1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2024 Apr 4;14:1358873. doi: 
10.3389/fcimb.2024.1358873. eCollection 2024.

Mast cell activation triggered by SARS-CoV-2 causes inflammation in brain 
microvascular endothelial cells and microglia.

Wu ML(#)(1), Xie C(#)(1)(2), Li X(1), Sun J(2), Zhao J(2), Wang JH(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Guangzhou, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Respiratory Disease, National Clinical Research 
Center for Respiratory Disease, Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Health, The 
First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 
China.
(3)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(#)Contributed equally

SARS-CoV-2-induced excessive inflammation in brain leads to damage of 
blood-brain barrier, hypoxic-ischemic injury, and neuron degeneration. The 
production of inflammatory cytokines by brain microvascular endothelial cells 
and microglia is reported to be critically associated with the brain pathology 
of COVID-19 patients. However, the cellular mechanisms for SARS-CoV-2-inducing 
activation of brain cells and the subsequent neuroinflammation remain to be 
fully delineated. Our research, along with others', has recently demonstrated 
that SARS-CoV-2-induced accumulation and activation of mast cells (MCs) in mouse 
lung could further induce inflammatory cytokines and consequent lung damages. 
Intracerebral MCs activation and their cross talk with other brain cells could 
induce neuroinflammation that play important roles in neurodegenerative diseases 
including virus-induced neuro-pathophysiology. In this study, we investigated 
the role of MC activation in SARS-CoV-2-induced neuroinflammation. We found that 
(1) SARS-CoV-2 infection triggered MC accumulation in the cerebrovascular region 
of mice; (2) spike/RBD (receptor-binding domain) protein-triggered MC activation 
induced inflammatory factors in human brain microvascular endothelial cells and 
microglia; (3) MC activation and degranulation destroyed the tight junction 
proteins in brain microvascular endothelial cells and induced the activation and 
proliferation of microglia. These findings reveal a cellular mechanism of 
SARS-CoV-2-induced neuroinflammation.

Copyright © 2024 Wu, Xie, Li, Sun, Zhao and Wang.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2024.1358873
PMCID: PMC11024283
PMID: 38638822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that 
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. 
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.