---
reference_id: "PMID:15489854"
title: "Loss-of-function mutations in LEMD3 result in osteopoikilosis, Buschke-Ollendorff syndrome and melorheostosis."
authors:
- Hellemans J
- Preobrazhenska O
- Willaert A
- Debeer P
- Verdonk PC
- Costa T
- Janssens K
- Menten B
- Van Roy N
- Vermeulen SJ
- Savarirayan R
- Van Hul W
- Vanhoenacker F
- Huylebroeck D
- De Paepe A
- Naeyaert JM
- Vandesompele J
- Speleman F
- Verschueren K
- Coucke PJ
- Mortier GR
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1038/ng1453
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Loss-of-function mutations in LEMD3 result in osteopoikilosis, Buschke-Ollendorff syndrome and melorheostosis.
**Authors:** Hellemans J, Preobrazhenska O, Willaert A, Debeer P, Verdonk PC, Costa T, Janssens K, Menten B, Van Roy N, Vermeulen SJ, Savarirayan R, Van Hul W, Vanhoenacker F, Huylebroeck D, De Paepe A, Naeyaert JM, Vandesompele J, Speleman F, Verschueren K, Coucke PJ, Mortier GR
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1453](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1453)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2004 Nov;36(11):1213-8. doi: 10.1038/ng1453. Epub 2004 Oct 17.

Loss-of-function mutations in LEMD3 result in osteopoikilosis, 
Buschke-Ollendorff syndrome and melorheostosis.

Hellemans J(1), Preobrazhenska O, Willaert A, Debeer P, Verdonk PC, Costa T, 
Janssens K, Menten B, Van Roy N, Vermeulen SJ, Savarirayan R, Van Hul W, 
Vanhoenacker F, Huylebroeck D, De Paepe A, Naeyaert JM, Vandesompele J, Speleman 
F, Verschueren K, Coucke PJ, Mortier GR.

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

Osteopoikilosis, Buschke-Ollendorff syndrome (BOS) and melorheostosis are 
disorders characterized by increased bone density. The occurrence of one or more 
of these phenotypes in the same individual or family suggests that these 
entities might be allelic. We collected data from three families in which 
affected individuals had osteopoikilosis with or without manifestations of BOS 
or melorheostosis. A genome-wide linkage analysis in these families, followed by 
the identification of a microdeletion in an unrelated individual with these 
diseases, allowed us to map the gene that is mutated in osteopoikilosis. All the 
affected individuals that we investigated were heterozygous with respect to a 
loss-of-function mutation in LEMD3 (also called MAN1), which encodes an inner 
nuclear membrane protein. A somatic mutation in the second allele of LEMD3 could 
not be identified in fibroblasts from affected skin of an individual with BOS 
and an individual with melorheostosis. XMAN1, the Xenopus laevis ortholog, 
antagonizes BMP signaling during embryogenesis. In this study, LEMD3 interacted 
with BMP and activin-TGFbeta receptor-activated Smads and antagonized both 
signaling pathways in human cells.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1453
PMID: 15489854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]