---
reference_id: "PMID:30914274"
title: Possible link between FSH and RANKL release from adipocytes in men with impaired gonadal function including Klinefelter syndrome.
authors:
- Juel Mortensen L
- Lorenzen M
- Jørgensen N
- Andersson AM
- Nielsen JE
- Petersen LI
- Lanske B
- Juul A
- Hansen JB
- Blomberg Jensen M
journal: Bone
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2019.03.022
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Possible link between FSH and RANKL release from adipocytes in men with impaired gonadal function including Klinefelter syndrome.
**Authors:** Juel Mortensen L, Lorenzen M, Jørgensen N, Andersson AM, Nielsen JE, Petersen LI, Lanske B, Juul A, Hansen JB, Blomberg Jensen M
**Journal:** Bone (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bone.2019.03.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2019.03.022)

## Content

1. Bone. 2019 Jun;123:103-114. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2019.03.022. Epub 2019 Mar 23.

Possible link between FSH and RANKL release from adipocytes in men with impaired 
gonadal function including Klinefelter syndrome.

Juel Mortensen L(1), Lorenzen M(2), Jørgensen N(3), Andersson AM(3), Nielsen 
JE(3), Petersen LI(4), Lanske B(5), Juul A(3), Hansen JB(4), Blomberg Jensen 
M(6).

Author information:
(1)Group of skeletal, mineral and gonadal endocrinology, University Department 
of Growth and Reproduction, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark; Division of 
Bone and Mineral Research, HSDM/HMS, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA.
(2)Group of skeletal, mineral and gonadal endocrinology, University Department 
of Growth and Reproduction, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)University Department of Growth and Reproduction and International Center for 
Research, Research Training in Endocrine Disruption of Male Reproduction and 
Child Health (EDMaRC), Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 9, 
Copenhagen 2100, Denmark.
(4)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Division of Bone and Mineral Research, HSDM/HMS, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, USA.
(6)Group of skeletal, mineral and gonadal endocrinology, University Department 
of Growth and Reproduction, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark; Division of 
Bone and Mineral Research, HSDM/HMS, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA. 
Electronic address: martin.blomberg.jensen@regionh.dk.

INTRODUCTION: The FSH receptor (FSHR) has been found to be expressed in human 
bone cells and bone marrow-adipocytes, and highly-debated mouse studies have 
suggested extra-gonadal effects of gonadotropins on glucose, adipocyte and bone 
homeostasis. These putative effects could be direct or indirectly mediated by 
endocrine factors released from bone-cells or adipocytes. Here, we investigated 
whether gonadotropins are linked with glucose- and lipid-metabolism in 
hypergonadotropic men.
METHODS: Single centre, cross-sectional study of 307 men with idiopathic 
infertility and 28 men with Klinefelter syndrome (KS).
OUTCOME: associations between serum LH and FSH with soluble-RANKL (sRANKL), 
osteoprotegerin (OPG), osteocalcin, fasting glucose and insulin, sex steroids, 
and body composition. Expression of FSHR was studied in human-derived 
adipocyte-cell-models (hMADS, TERT-hWA) and FSH stimulation of RANKL expression 
and secretion in hMADS in vitro.
RESULTS: Serum FSH was not directly linked with glucose- and lipid-metabolism. 
However, FSH was inversely associated with sRANKL in both infertile men and KS 
men (p = .023 and p = .012). Infertile men with elevated FSH (>11 U/L) had 
significantly lower sRANKL (p = .015). sRANKL was positively associated with fat 
percentage, fasting insulin, and glucose (all p < .05). Men with prediabetes had 
higher sRANKL (p = .021), but lower testosterone (p < .0001) and Inhibin B 
(p = .005). The FSHR was expressed in the investigated human derived adipocytes, 
and 3-6 h treatment with FSH markedly increased RANKL release (p < .05).
CONCLUSION: KS and infertile men with prediabetes have low Inhibin B, and 
testosterone but elevated RANKL compared with non-prediabetic men despite 
comparable levels of serum gonadotropins. Serum FSH and sRANKL was inversely 
associated in both infertile and KS men, but the increased release of RANKL from 
FSH treated adipocytes suggest a direct effect of FSH on RANKL production in 
some tissues. Further studies are required to clarify whether FSH targets RANKL 
in the skeleton. ClinicalTrial_ID:NCT01304927.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2019.03.022
PMID: 30914274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]