---
reference_id: "PMID:23877823"
title: "[Uveal melanoma: current insights into clinical relevance of genetic testing]."
authors:
- Metz CH
- Lohmann D
- Zeschnigk M
- Bornfeld N
journal: Klin Monbl Augenheilkd
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1350628
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Uveal melanoma: current insights into clinical relevance of genetic testing].
**Authors:** Metz CH, Lohmann D, Zeschnigk M, Bornfeld N
**Journal:** Klin Monbl Augenheilkd (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0033-1350628](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0033-1350628)

## Content

1. Klin Monbl Augenheilkd. 2013 Jul;230(7):686-91. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1350628. 
Epub 2013 Jul 22.

[Uveal melanoma: current insights into clinical relevance of genetic testing].

[Article in German]

Metz CH(1), Lohmann D, Zeschnigk M, Bornfeld N.

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Augenheilkunde, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Universität 
Duisburg-Essen, Hufelandstrasse 55, Essen. claudia.metz@uk-essen.de

Uveal melanoma is the most common primary intraocular tumour in Caucasians. 
There are approximately 500 new cases of uveal melanoma in Germany per year and 
the incidence rate peaks at the age of 70 years. Half of all uveal melanoma 
patients develop metastatic disease, which can be observed even many years after 
successful treatment of the primary tumour. In most cases the liver is the 
location of first manifestation. Based on the chromosome 3 status uveal 
melanomas can be divided into two major classes that differ in their metastatic 
potential. Tumours with a high risk to metastasise usually show monosomy 3, 
whereas tumours showing disomy 3 rarely metastasise. If a patient wishes to know 
about his individual risk, prognostic testing of the primary tumour tissue can 
be performed after obtaining tumour material via transscleral or transretinal 
biopsy, or by enucleation. To date results of prognostic testing do not 
influence therapeutic strategies. Recently, major key genes involved in uveal 
melanoma development, GNAQ, GNA11, BAP1, SF3B1 and EIF1AX, have been identified. 
Mutation profiling, in addition to chromosomal 3 analysis, will further refine 
the classification or subclassification of uveal melanomas and will hopefully 
influence diagnostic or therapeutic concepts. Hereditary mutations in tumour 
suppressor gene BAP1 are associated with an increased risk for different tumour 
entities. Detection of germ line mutations in this tumour suppressor gene should 
implicate further general screening examinations of the patient to be able to 
detect these tumour entities. Moreover relatives of these patients should be 
offered a screening for BAP1 mutation.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0033-1350628
PMID: 23877823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]