---
reference_id: "PMID:27282758"
title: "Sex Differences in the Prevalence of Oppositional Defiant Disorder During Middle Childhood: a Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Demmer DH
- Hooley M
- Sheen J
- McGillivray JA
- Lum JA
journal: J Abnorm Child Psychol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s10802-016-0170-8
keywords:
- Attention Deficit and Disruptive Behavior Disorders/epidemiology
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Sex Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sex Differences in the Prevalence of Oppositional Defiant Disorder During Middle Childhood: a Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Demmer DH, Hooley M, Sheen J, McGillivray JA, Lum JA
**Journal:** J Abnorm Child Psychol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10802-016-0170-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10802-016-0170-8)

## Content

1. J Abnorm Child Psychol. 2017 Feb;45(2):313-325. doi:
10.1007/s10802-016-0170-8.

Sex Differences in the Prevalence of Oppositional Defiant Disorder During Middle
Childhood: a Meta-Analysis.

Demmer DH(1), Hooley M(2), Sheen J(3), McGillivray JA(3), Lum JA(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia.
dhde@deakin.edu.au.
(2)School of Psychology, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia.
merrilyn.hooley@deakin.edu.au.
(3)School of Psychology, Deakin University, Geelong, Australia.

This review provides a meta-analysed male:female prevalence ratio of
oppositional defiant disorder (ODD) during middle childhood in non-referred
children. It also analyses sex differences in prevalence across cultures and
over time. A systematic search for studies via the following sources was
conducted: PsycInfo, Web of Knowledge, Medline Complete, Scopus, EMBASE,
InfoRMIT, Psychological and Behavioural Sciences Collection, Cochrane Library,
PubMed and ProQuest Health. The studies presented in two previous systematic
reviews were also added to the search results. Inclusion/exclusion criteria were
then applied and final studies were appraised for their methodological quality.
Nineteen independent effect sizes met full inclusion criteria (aggregated sample
N = 44,107). Overall, the prevalence of ODD was significantly higher in boys
than girls (RR = 1.59, 95 % CI [1.36, 1.86], p < 0.001), with the male:female
prevalence ratio found to be 1.59:1. Sex differences in prevalence were
significant in Western (RR = 1.80, 95 % CI [1.55, 2.10], p < 0.001) but not
non-Western cultures (RR = 1.08, 95 % CI [0.76-1.53], p > 0.05). Sex differences
in prevalence were significant in studies published prior to and post the year
2000 (RR = 1.57, 95 % CI [1.22, 2.02], p < 0.001; RR = 1.64, 95 % CI [1.35,
2.00], p < 0.001), and were consistent between these two periods (Q, 1 = 0.36,
p = > 0.05). The sex differences in ODD prevalence are discussed within the
context of (i) predominant theories of sex differences in externalising
behaviours, and (ii) departure from the sex-differences pattern found for other
disruptive behavioural disorders.

DOI: 10.1007/s10802-016-0170-8
PMID: 27282758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
