---
reference_id: "PMID:33348459"
title: Expanding the clinical and genetic spectrum of FDXR deficiency by functional validation of variants of uncertain significance.
authors:
- Stenton SL
- Piekutowska-Abramczuk D
- Kulterer L
- Kopajtich R
- Claeys KG
- Ciara E
- Eisen J
- Płoski R
- Pronicka E
- Malczyk K
- Wagner M
- Wortmann SB
- Prokisch H
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/humu.24160
keywords:
- Humans
- Leigh Disease/genetics
- Mitochondrial Diseases/genetics
- Optic Atrophy/genetics
- Phenotype
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanding the clinical and genetic spectrum of FDXR deficiency by functional validation of variants of uncertain significance.
**Authors:** Stenton SL, Piekutowska-Abramczuk D, Kulterer L, Kopajtich R, Claeys KG, Ciara E, Eisen J, Płoski R, Pronicka E, Malczyk K, Wagner M, Wortmann SB, Prokisch H
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.24160](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.24160)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2021 Mar;42(3):310-319. doi: 10.1002/humu.24160. Epub 2021 Jan 3.

Expanding the clinical and genetic spectrum of FDXR deficiency by functional 
validation of variants of uncertain significance.

Stenton SL(1)(2), Piekutowska-Abramczuk D(3), Kulterer L(1)(2), Kopajtich 
R(1)(2), Claeys KG(4)(5), Ciara E(3), Eisen J(6), Płoski R(7), Pronicka E(3), 
Malczyk K(8), Wagner M(1)(2), Wortmann SB(1)(2)(9)(10), Prokisch H(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.
(2)Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Neurogenomics, Munich, Germany.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Children's Memorial Health Institute (CMHI) 
Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Neurology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Laboratory for Muscle Diseases and Neuropathies, Department of Neurosciences, 
KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(6)Klinikum Frankfurt Höchst, Frankfurt, Germany.
(7)Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(8)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, Children's Memorial Health Institute (CMHI) 
Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Salzburger Landeskliniken and Paracelsus Medical 
University, Salzburg, Austria.
(10)Radboud Centre for Mitochondrial Diseases (RCMM), Amalia Children's 
Hospital, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Ferrodoxin reductase (FDXR) deficiency is a mitochondrial disease described in 
recent years primarily in association with optic atrophy, acoustic neuropathy, 
and developmental delays. Here, we identified seven unpublished patients with 
FDXR deficiency belonging to six independent families. These patients show a 
broad clinical spectrum ranging from Leigh syndrome with early demise and severe 
infantile-onset encephalopathy, to milder movement disorders. In total nine 
individual pathogenic variants, of which seven were novel, were identified in 
FDXR using whole exome sequencing in suspected mitochondrial disease patients. 
Over 80% of these variants are missense, a challenging variant class in which to 
determine pathogenic consequence, especially in the setting of nonspecific 
phenotypes and in the absence of a reliable biomarker, necessitating functional 
validation. Here we implement an Arh1-null yeast model to confirm the 
pathogenicity of variants of uncertain significance in FDXR, bypassing the 
requirement for patient-derived material.

© 2020 The Authors. Human Mutation Published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.24160
PMID: 33348459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]