---
reference_id: "PMID:33393654"
title: "Pott disease: when lumbar pain is not innocent."
authors:
- Kalamara E
- Ballas E
- Petrova G
journal: Adv Respir Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.5603/ARM.a2020.0154
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pott disease: when lumbar pain is not innocent.
**Authors:** Kalamara E, Ballas E, Petrova G
**Journal:** Adv Respir Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.5603/ARM.a2020.0154](https://doi.org/10.5603/ARM.a2020.0154)

## Content

1. Adv Respir Med. 2020;88(6):608-611. doi: 10.5603/ARM.a2020.0154.

Pott disease: when lumbar pain is not innocent.

Kalamara E(1)(2), Ballas E(3), Petrova G(4).

Author information:
(1)10th Pulmonology Clinic "Sotiria" Regional Chest Disease Hospital, Athens, 
Greece. gina.kal88@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, G Papanikolaou General Hospital, 
Thessaloniki, Greece. gina.kal88@gmail.com.
(3)Medical University of Sofia, Bulgaria.
(4)Pediatric Clinic Hospital "Alexandrovska", Medical University of Sofia, 
Bulgaria.

Tuberculosis is a mycobacterial infection that can affect the lungs as well as 
other organs. The involvement of the spine, although rare, can have major 
consequences if not diagnosed and treated in a timely and effective manner, such 
as residual deformities and neurological deficits. On occasion, the atypical 
presentation of tuberculous spondylitis may cause a delay in treatment and 
therefore lead to less favorable outcomes. In this article, we present a rare 
case of progressed tuberculous infection involving the respiratory and 
musculoskeletal system in a 36-year-old patient whose main complaints were 
non-specific and mild, and started only two weeks before his diagnosis, despite 
the advanced disease.

DOI: 10.5603/ARM.a2020.0154
PMID: 33393654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]