---
reference_id: "PMID:28030595"
title: "Prognosis for Hospitalized Patients with Systemic Lupus Erythematosus in China: 5-Year Update of the Jiangsu Cohort."
authors:
- Feng X
- Pan W
- Liu L
- Wu M
- Ding F
- Hu H
- Ding X
- Wei H
- Zou Y
- Qian X
- Wang M
- Wu J
- Tao J
- Tan J
- Da Z
- Zhang M
- Li J
- Sun L
- Jiangsu Lupus Collaborative Group
journal: PLoS One
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0168619
keywords:
- Adult
- Cause of Death
- China
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Hospitalization
- Humans
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/diagnosis, mortality, therapy"
- Male
- Prognosis
- Risk Factors
- Survival Analysis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prognosis for Hospitalized Patients with Systemic Lupus Erythematosus in China: 5-Year Update of the Jiangsu Cohort.
**Authors:** Feng X, Pan W, Liu L, Wu M, Ding F, Hu H, Ding X, Wei H, Zou Y, Qian X, Wang M, Wu J, Tao J, Tan J, Da Z, Zhang M, Li J, Sun L, Jiangsu Lupus Collaborative Group
**Journal:** PLoS One (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0168619](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0168619)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2016 Dec 28;11(12):e0168619. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0168619.
eCollection 2016.

Prognosis for Hospitalized Patients with Systemic Lupus Erythematosus in China:
5-Year Update of the Jiangsu Cohort.

Feng X(1), Pan W(2), Liu L(3), Wu M(4), Ding F(5), Hu H(6), Ding X(7), Wei H(8),
Zou Y(9), Qian X(10), Wang M(11), Wu J(12), Tao J(13), Tan J(14), Da Z(15),
Zhang M(16), Li J(17), Sun L(1); Jiangsu Lupus Collaborative Group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, the Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital
of Nanjing University Medical School, Nanjing, China.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, Huaian First People's Hospital, Huaian, China.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, Xuzhou Central Hospital, Xuzhou, China.
(4)Department of Rheumatology, the Third Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, Changzhou, China.
(5)Department of Endocrinology, Yancheng Third People's Hospital, Yancheng,
China.
(6)Department of Rheumatology, Lianyungang Second People's Hospital,
Lianyungang, China.
(7)Department of Rheumatology, Lianyungang First People's Hospital, Lianyungang,
China.
(8)Department of Rheumatology, Northern Jiangsu People's Hospital, Yangzhou,
China.
(9)Department of Rheumatology, Wuxi People's Hospital, Wuxi, China.
(10)Department of Rheumatology, Jiangsu Province Hospital of TCM, Nanjing,
China.
(11)Department of Rheumatology, Southeast University Zhongda Hospital, Nanjing,
China.
(12)Department of Rheumatology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou, China.
(13)Department of Rheumatology, Wuxi TCM Hospital, Wuxi, China.
(14)Department of Rheumatology, Zhenjiang First People's Hospital, Zhenjiang,
China.
(15)Department of Rheumatology, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University,
Nantong, China.
(16)Department of Rheumatology, Jiangsu Province Hospital, Nanjing, China.
(17)Department of Rheumatology, Affiliated Hospital of Jiangsu University,
Jiangsu, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify early signs associated with poor prognosis in Chinese
patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) through a large
population-based follow-up study.
METHODS: Medical records of > 2,500 SLE patients that first hospitalized between
1999-2009 were collected from 26 centers across Jiangsu province, China, and
entered into a database. These patients were followed-up for 5 to 15 years, and
those remained contact and had known survival status in 2015 were assessed for
the association of factors presented at the initial hospitalization with
mortality at two time points (≤1year and > 1year). The independency of mortality
factors was evaluated using multivariate Cox regression analysis.
RESULTS: Among 1,372 patients we assessed, 92.3% were women and 17.2% were
deceased in 2015. The main causes of death were infection (30.1%),
neuropsychiatric impairment (14.8%), renal failure (14.4%) and cardiopulmonary
involvement (8.5%). Hazard ratios (HR) of independent predictors for mortality
(≤1year and > 1year, respectively) included hospital presentation of
neuropsychiatric involvement (2.03 and 1.91), cardiopulmonary involvement (1.94
and 1.61) and increased serum creatinine (2.52 and 2.58). Patients older than 45
years and with disease durations more than 2 years at admission had unfavorable
short-term outcome (HR 1.76 and 1.79), while the presence of anti-dsDNA and
anti-Sm antibodies indicated diverse prognosis after 1 year (HR 1.60 and 0.45).
Treatment with cyclophosphamide was beneficial for patient's first-year outcome
(HR 0.50), and anti-malarial drugs significantly reduced the risk of mortality
over different time points (HR 0.48 and 0.54). SLEDAI score, proteinuria or
hypocomplementemia was not independently associated with the outcome in this
cohort.
CONCLUSION: SLE patients presented with vital organ damages rather than active
disease at initial hospitalization are likely to have a poor outcome, especially
for those with neuropsychiatric, cardiopulmonary involvements and renal
insufficiency. Early and effective intervention with the use of anti-malarial
drugs may decrease mortality.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0168619
PMCID: PMC5193352
PMID: 28030595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
