---
reference_id: "PMID:30917847"
title: "Biomarkers and algorithms for diagnosis of ovarian cancer: CA125, HE4, RMI and ROMA, a review."
authors:
- Dochez V
- Caillon H
- Vaucel E
- Dimet J
- Winer N
- Ducarme G
journal: J Ovarian Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13048-019-0503-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biomarkers and algorithms for diagnosis of ovarian cancer: CA125, HE4, RMI and ROMA, a review.
**Authors:** Dochez V, Caillon H, Vaucel E, Dimet J, Winer N, Ducarme G
**Journal:** J Ovarian Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13048-019-0503-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13048-019-0503-7)

## Content

1. J Ovarian Res. 2019 Mar 27;12(1):28. doi: 10.1186/s13048-019-0503-7.

Biomarkers and algorithms for diagnosis of ovarian cancer: CA125, HE4, RMI and 
ROMA, a review.

Dochez V(1), Caillon H(2), Vaucel E(3), Dimet J(4), Winer N(3), Ducarme G(5).

Author information:
(1)Service de Gynécologie-Obstétrique, CHU de Nantes, 44093, Nantes, France. 
vincent.dochez@chu-nantes.fr.
(2)Service de Biochimie, CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France.
(3)Service de Gynécologie-Obstétrique, CHU de Nantes, 44093, Nantes, France.
(4)Centre de recherche clinique, Centre Hospitalier Départemental Vendée, La 
Roche sur Yon, France.
(5)Service de Gynécologie-Obstétrique, Centre Hospitalier Départemental Vendée, 
La Roche sur Yon, France.

Ovarian cancer is the 5th leading cause of death for women with cancer 
worldwide. In more than 70% of cases, it is only diagnosed at an advanced stage. 
Our study aims to give an update on the biological markers for diagnosing 
ovarian cancer, specifically HE4, CA 125, RMI and ROMA algorithms.Serum CA125 
assay has low sensitivity in the early stages and can be increased in certain 
conditions such as menstruation or endometriosis. The level of HE4 is 
overexpressed in ovarian tumors. Its specificity is 94% and its level is not 
affected by endometriosis cysts. The combined measures of CA125 and HE4 have 
proved to be highly efficient with an area under the curve (AUC) of up to 0.96. 
Furthermore, this combined measure of CA125 can correct the variations in HE4 
which are due to smoking or contraception combining estrogen plus progestin. 
While the specificity of RMI sometimes reaches 92%, the rather low AUC of 0.86 
does not make it the best diagnostic tool. The specificity of ROMA is lower than 
HE4 (84% compared to 94%).To date, the most efficient biological diagnostic tool 
to diagnose ovarian cancer is the combination of CA125 and HE4.

DOI: 10.1186/s13048-019-0503-7
PMCID: PMC6436208
PMID: 30917847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interest. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer 
Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
and institutional affiliations.