---
reference_id: "PMID:24508088"
title: Ectodysplasin A (EDA) - EDA receptor signalling and its pharmacological modulation.
authors:
- Kowalczyk-Quintas C
- Schneider P
journal: Cytokine Growth Factor Rev
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.cytogfr.2014.01.004
keywords:
- Animals
- Dogs
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia 1, Anhidrotic/drug therapy, genetics"
- Ectodysplasins/genetics
- "Edar Receptor/agonists, genetics"
- Epithelial Cells/cytology
- "Fibroblast Growth Factors/antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Hedgehog Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Humans
- Mesoderm/cytology
- Mice
- Morphogenesis
- NF-kappa B/genetics
- "Skin/growth & development"
- Skin Physiological Phenomena/genetics
- "Transforming Growth Factor beta/antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Wnt Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Wnt Signaling Pathway
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ectodysplasin A (EDA) - EDA receptor signalling and its pharmacological modulation.
**Authors:** Kowalczyk-Quintas C, Schneider P
**Journal:** Cytokine Growth Factor Rev (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cytogfr.2014.01.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cytogfr.2014.01.004)

## Content

1. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2014 Apr;25(2):195-203. doi: 
10.1016/j.cytogfr.2014.01.004. Epub 2014 Jan 23.

Ectodysplasin A (EDA) - EDA receptor signalling and its pharmacological 
modulation.

Kowalczyk-Quintas C(1), Schneider P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Lausanne, CH-1066 Epalinges, 
Switzerland.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Lausanne, CH-1066 Epalinges, 
Switzerland. Electronic address: pascal.schneider@unil.ch.

The TNF family ligand ectodysplasin A (EDA) regulates the induction, 
morphogenesis and/or maintenance of skin-derived structures such as teeth, hair, 
sweat glands and several other glands. Deficiencies in the EDA - EDA receptor 
(EDAR) signalling pathway cause hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED). This 
syndrome is characterized by the absence or malformation of several skin-derived 
appendages resulting in hypotrychosis, hypodontia, heat-intolerance, dry skin 
and dry eyes, susceptibility to airways infections and crusting of various 
secretions. The EDA-EDAR system is an important effector of canonical Wnt 
signalling in developing skin appendages. It functions by stimulating 
NF-κB-mediated transcription of effectors or inhibitors of the Wnt, Sonic 
hedgehog (SHH), fibroblast growth factor (FGF) and transforming growth factor 
beta (TGFβ) pathways that regulate interactions within or between epithelial and 
mesenchymal cells and tissues. In animal models of Eda-deficiency, soluble EDAR 
agonists can precisely correct clinically relevant symptoms with low side 
effects even at high agonist doses, indicating that efficient negative feedback 
signals occur in treated tissues. Hijacking of the placental antibody transport 
system can help deliver active molecules to developing foetuses in a timely 
manner. EDAR agonists may serve to treat certain forms of ectodermal dysplasia.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cytogfr.2014.01.004
PMID: 24508088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]