---
reference_id: "PMID:32889669"
title: "Autosomal Recessive Cerebellar Ataxia Type 1: Phenotypic and Genetic Correlation in a Cohort of Chinese Patients with SYNE1 Variants."
authors:
- Duan X
- Hao Y
- Cao Z
- Zhou C
- Zhang J
- Wang R
- Sun S
- Gu W
journal: Cerebellum
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s12311-020-01186-8
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age of Onset
- Asian People/genetics
- "Cerebellar Ataxia/genetics, pathology"
- Child
- China
- "Cognitive Dysfunction/etiology, genetics, pathology"
- Cytoskeletal Proteins/genetics
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genetic Variation
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/etiology, genetics, pathology"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Motor Neuron Disease/etiology, genetics, pathology"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Exome Sequencing
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal Recessive Cerebellar Ataxia Type 1: Phenotypic and Genetic Correlation in a Cohort of Chinese Patients with SYNE1 Variants.
**Authors:** Duan X, Hao Y, Cao Z, Zhou C, Zhang J, Wang R, Sun S, Gu W
**Journal:** Cerebellum (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12311-020-01186-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12311-020-01186-8)

## Content

1. Cerebellum. 2021 Feb;20(1):74-82. doi: 10.1007/s12311-020-01186-8. Epub 2020
Sep  5.

Autosomal Recessive Cerebellar Ataxia Type 1: Phenotypic and Genetic Correlation 
in a Cohort of Chinese Patients with SYNE1 Variants.

Duan X(1), Hao Y(1), Cao Z(2), Zhou C(2), Zhang J(1), Wang R(1), Sun S(1), Gu 
W(3).

Author information:
(1)Movement Disorder and Neurogenetics Research Center, Department of Neurology, 
China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, 100029, People's Republic of China.
(2)Running Gene Inc, Beijing, 100191, China.
(3)Movement Disorder and Neurogenetics Research Center, Department of Neurology, 
China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, 100029, People's Republic of China. 
jane55.gu@vip.sina.com.

Mutations in the synaptic nuclear envelope protein 1 (SYNE1) gene have been 
reported to cause autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxia (ARCA) type 1 with 
highly variable clinical phenotypes. The aim of this study was to describe the 
phenotypic-genetic spectrum of SYNE1-related ARCA1 patients in the Chinese 
population. We screened 158 unrelated patients with autosomal recessive or 
sporadic ataxia for variants in SYNE1 using next-generation sequencing. 
Pathogenicity assessment of SYNE1 variants was interpreted according to the 
American College of Medical Genetics standards and guidelines. We identified 
eight truncating variants and two missense variants spreading throughout the 
SYNE1 gene from six unrelated families, including nine novel variants and one 
reported variant. Of the six index patients, two patients showed the classical 
pure cerebellar ataxia, while four patients exhibited non-cerebellar phenotypes, 
including motor neuron symptoms, cognitive impairment, or mental retardation. 
The variants associated with motor neuron or cognition involvement tend to be 
located in the C-terminal region of SYNE1 protein, compared with the variants 
related to pure cerebellar ataxia. Our data indicating SYNE1 mutation is one of 
the more common causes of recessive ataxia in the Chinese population. The use of 
next-generation sequencing has enabled the rapid analysis of recessive ataxia 
and further expanded our understanding of genotype-phenotype correlation.

DOI: 10.1007/s12311-020-01186-8
PMID: 32889669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]