---
reference_id: "PMID:21651516"
title: "5-Oxoprolinase deficiency: report of the first human OPLAH mutation."
authors:
- Almaghlouth IA
- Mohamed JY
- Al-Amoudi M
- Al-Ahaidib L
- Al-Odaib A
- Alkuraya FS
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01728.x
keywords:
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/genetics"
- Base Sequence
- Frameshift Mutation
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mutation
- "Pyroglutamate Hydrolase/deficiency, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 5-Oxoprolinase deficiency: report of the first human OPLAH mutation.
**Authors:** Almaghlouth IA, Mohamed JY, Al-Amoudi M, Al-Ahaidib L, Al-Odaib A, Alkuraya FS
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01728.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01728.x)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2012 Aug;82(2):193-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01728.x. Epub
2011 Jun 30.

5-Oxoprolinase deficiency: report of the first human OPLAH mutation.

Almaghlouth IA(1), Mohamed JY, Al-Amoudi M, Al-Ahaidib L, Al-Odaib A, Alkuraya
FS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Gamma-glutamyl cycle is a six-enzyme cycle that represents the primary pathway
for glutathione synthesis and degradation. 5-Oxoprolinase deficiency is an
extremely rare disorder of the gamma-glutamyl cycle with only eight patients
reported to date. Debate continues as to whether this is a benign biochemical
defect because of the heterogeneity of the clinical presentation which ranges
from normal to significant neurological involvement. Here, we report the first
molecularly characterized patients with 5-oxoprolinase deficiency due to a
mutation in OPLAH (which encodes 5-oxoprolinase). The largely benign clinical
course of the patients described herein despite persistent 5-oxoprolinuria
highlights the importance of establishing a molecular diagnosis in the few cases
with abnormal neurological outcome to exclude potentially overlapping
biochemical defects and to explore potential genotype/phenotype correlation.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01728.x
PMID: 21651516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
