---
reference_id: "PMID:27683935"
title: GRIN2A-Related Disorders.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Strehlow V
- Myers KA
- Morgan AT
- Scheffer IE
- Lemke JR
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GRIN2A-Related Disorders.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Strehlow V, Myers KA, Morgan AT, Scheffer IE, Lemke JR

## Content

1. GRIN2A-Related Disorders.

Strehlow V(1), Myers KA(2), Morgan AT(3)(4), Scheffer IE(4), Lemke JR(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2016 Sep 29 [updated 2024 Jul 4].

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Leipzig Medical Center, Leipzig, 
Germany
(2)Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, Canada
(3)Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia
(4)University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: GRIN2A-related disorders encompass a broad phenotypic 
spectrum that includes developmental delay evolving to intellectual disability 
(DD/ID), epilepsy, speech and language disorders, movement disorders, and 
neuropsychiatric disorders. Intellect ranges from normal to profoundly impaired. 
Observed speech disorders include dysarthria and speech dyspraxia, and both 
receptive and expressive language delays; more mildly affected individuals may 
display subtly impaired intelligibility of conversational speech. Epilepsy 
features include seizure onset usually between ages three and six years, focal 
epilepsy with language and/or global developmental regression, and 
electroencephalogram (EEG) abnormalities, including continuous spike-and-wave 
discharges in sleep or very active centrotemporal discharges. Epilepsy is 
typically focal and ranges from self-limited epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes 
to developmental and/or epileptic encephalopathies (DEE/EE), including the 
syndromes of DEE/EE with spike-wave activation in sleep (DEE/EE-SWAS), which 
include Landau-Kleffner syndrome. Movement disorders occur less frequently and 
include ataxia, dystonia, and chorea.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of a GRIN2A-related disorder is established in 
a proband by the identification of a GRIN2A heterozygous pathogenic variant on 
molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapy: In some individuals with pathogenic 
loss-of-function and null GRIN2A variants, treatment with the 
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) coagonist L-serine was associated with 
improvements in behavior, development, EEG features, and/or seizure frequency. 
Supportive care: Significant speech and language deficits require therapy from a 
speech-language pathologist. Seizures should be treated with anti-seizure 
medication (ASM). Multidisciplinary care is recommended by pediatric specialists 
in the fields of including pediatric epilepsy, movement disorders, 
speech-language disorders, physical therapy, occupational therapy, feeding and 
nutrition, behavioral disorders, and genetic counseling. Surveillance: 
Developmental surveillance in all affected children; routine monitoring of 
speech and language by a speech-language pathologist should be considered for 
all children, particularly those diagnosed before reaching school age. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: In individuals with GRIN2A-related disorders due 
to pathogenic missense variants activating the NMDAR (i.e., gain-of-function 
variants), receptor-specific agonists and other activators (e.g., L-serine) 
should be avoided as this could result in worsening of symptoms. In individuals 
with pathogenic missense variants inhibiting the NMDAR as well as null variants, 
NMDA receptor blockers should be used with caution (e.g., memantine, 
dextromethorphan, ketamine). Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is appropriate 
to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic at-risk relatives in 
order to identify as early as possible those who would benefit from evaluation 
for speech disorders and/or seizures and institution of treatment.
GENETIC COUNSELING: GRIN2A-related disorders are inherited in an autosomal 
dominant manner. Some individuals diagnosed with a GRIN2A-related disorder have 
the disorder as the result of a pathogenic variant inherited from an affected 
parent. Approximately 50% of individuals diagnosed with a GRIN2A-related 
disorder have the disorder as the result of a GRIN2A pathogenic variant that 
occurred as a de novo event in the affected individual or, rarely, as a 
postzygotic de novo event in a mosaic, apparently unaffected parent. Each child 
of an individual with a GRIN2A-related disorder has a 50% chance of inheriting 
the GRIN2A pathogenic variant. Once the GRIN2A pathogenic variant has been 
identified in an affected family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic 
testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 27683935