---
reference_id: "PMID:3171790"
title: Rapid intravenous rehydration by means of a single polyelectrolyte solution with or without dextrose.
authors:
- Rahman O
- Bennish ML
- Alam AN
- Salam MA
journal: J Pediatr
year: '1988'
doi: 10.1016/s0022-3476(88)80374-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rapid intravenous rehydration by means of a single polyelectrolyte solution with or without dextrose.
**Authors:** Rahman O, Bennish ML, Alam AN, Salam MA
**Journal:** J Pediatr (1988)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0022-3476(88)80374-3](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022-3476(88)80374-3)

## Content

1. J Pediatr. 1988 Oct;113(4):654-60. doi: 10.1016/s0022-3476(88)80374-3.

Rapid intravenous rehydration by means of a single polyelectrolyte solution with 
or without dextrose.

Rahman O(1), Bennish ML, Alam AN, Salam MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health.

We compared the efficacy and safety of a single polyelectrolyte solution, Dhaka 
solution (DS), containing 133 mmol/L sodium, 13 mmol/L potassium, 98 mmol/L 
chloride, and 48 mmol/L acetate with and without 139 mmol/L (25 gm/L) dextrose 
in the rapid (4 hours) rehydration of 67 patients with diarrhea and moderate or 
severe dehydration requiring parenteral fluid therapy. Of the 67 patient, 31 
were randomly assigned to receive the dextrose-containing solution (DS + D) and 
36 DS without dextrose. On admission to the hospital, the two groups of patients 
were similar with respect to enteric pathogens detected, proportion with 
hyponatremia, magnitude of dehydration as assessed by clinical criteria, serum 
protein or creatinine concentration, and plasma glucose levels. At the end of 
the 4-hour infusion, both groups of patients had similar decreases in serum 
creatinine and protein levels and similar volume of urine output, but patients 
receiving DS + D had a significantly higher plasma glucose level than patients 
receiving DS (7.8 mmol/L (140 mg/dl) vs 5.39 mmol/L (97 mg/dl), P less than 
0.01). One patient in the DS group had hypoglycemia (plasma glucose 2.0 mmol/L 
(36 mg/dl) at 4 hours. No other complications were noted. Serum protein values 
24 hours after admission were little changed from 4-hour values, suggesting that 
rehydration was complete at the end of 4 hours. We conclude that, in our 
patients, rehydration can be carried out safely and rapidly with the use of a 
single solution and that adding 139 mmol/L (25 gm/L) of dextrose to the solution 
can prevent hypoglycemia without producing an osmotic diuresis.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-3476(88)80374-3
PMID: 3171790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]