---
reference_id: "PMID:16239177"
title: "The United Kingdom Infantile Spasms Study (UKISS) comparing hormone treatment with vigabatrin on developmental and epilepsy outcomes to age 14 months: a multicentre randomised trial."
authors:
- Lux AL
- Edwards SW
- Hancock E
- Johnson AL
- Kennedy CR
- Newton RW
- "O'Callaghan FJ"
- Verity CM
- Osborne JP
- United Kingdom Infantile Spasms Study
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(05)70199-X
keywords:
- "Adaptation, Psychological/physiology"
- Anti-Inflammatory Agents/therapeutic use
- "Anticonvulsants/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Child Development
- Cosyntropin/therapeutic use
- Disease Progression
- "Epilepsy/drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Prednisolone/therapeutic use
- Secondary Prevention
- "Spasms, Infantile/drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Treatment Outcome
- United Kingdom/epidemiology
- "Vigabatrin/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The United Kingdom Infantile Spasms Study (UKISS) comparing hormone treatment with vigabatrin on developmental and epilepsy outcomes to age 14 months: a multicentre randomised trial.
**Authors:** Lux AL, Edwards SW, Hancock E, Johnson AL, Kennedy CR, Newton RW, O'Callaghan FJ, Verity CM, Osborne JP, United Kingdom Infantile Spasms Study
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(05)70199-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(05)70199-X)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2005 Nov;4(11):712-7. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(05)70199-X.

The United Kingdom Infantile Spasms Study (UKISS) comparing hormone treatment
with vigabatrin on developmental and epilepsy outcomes to age 14 months: a
multicentre randomised trial.

Lux AL(1), Edwards SW, Hancock E, Johnson AL, Kennedy CR, Newton RW, O'Callaghan
FJ, Verity CM, Osborne JP; United Kingdom Infantile Spasms Study.

Author information:
(1)Royal United Hospital Bath NHS Trust and the School for Health, University of
Bath, Bath, UK.

BACKGROUND: Infantile spasms is a severe infantile seizure disorder that is
difficult to treat and has a high morbidity. Absence of spasms on days 13 and 14
after randomisation is more common in infants allocated hormone treatments than
in those allocated vigabatrin. We sought to assess whether early control of
spasms is associated with improved developmental or epilepsy outcomes.
METHODS: Infants enrolled in the United Kingdom Infantile Spasms Study (UKISS)
were randomly assigned hormone treatment (n=55) or vigabatrin (n=52) and were
followed up until clinical assessment at 12-14 months of age. We assessed
neurodevelopment with the Vineland adaptive behaviour scales (VABS) at 14 months
of age on an intention to treat basis.
FINDINGS: Of 107 infants enrolled, five died and 101 survivors reached both
follow-up assessments. Absence of spasms at final clinical assessment (hormone
41/55 [75%] vs vigabatrin 39/51 [76%]) was similar in each treatment group
(difference 1.9%, 95% CI -18.3% to 14.4%; chi(2)=0.05; p=0.82). Mean VABS score
did not differ significantly (hormone 78.6 [SD 16.8] vs vigabatrin 77.5 [SD
12.7]; difference 1.0, 95% CI -4.9 to 7.0; t(99)=0.35, p=0.73). In infants with
no identified underlying aetiology, the mean VABS score was higher in those
allocated hormone treatment than in those allocated vigabatrin (88.2 [17.3] vs
78.9 [14.3]; difference 9.3, 95% CI 1.2 to 17.3; t(95)=2.28, p=0.025).
INTERPRETATION: Hormone treatment controls spasms better than does vigabatrin
initially, but not at 12-14 months of age. Better initial control of spasms by
hormone treatment in those with no identified underlying aetiology may lead to
improved developmental outcome.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(05)70199-X
PMID: 16239177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
