---
reference_id: "PMID:16718293"
title: "Neurophysiological findings in a case of cervical anterior spinal artery syndrome: compound muscle action potentials, a marker for prognosis."
authors:
- Lu M
- Kang D
- Fan D
journal: N Z Med J
year: '2006'
keywords:
- Action Potentials
- Adult
- "Anterior Spinal Artery Syndrome/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- "Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Non-Steroidal/therapeutic use"
- Aspirin/therapeutic use
- Cervical Vertebrae
- Humans
- Male
- Methylprednisolone/therapeutic use
- Neck Muscles
- Neuroprotective Agents/therapeutic use
- Prognosis
- Quadriplegia/etiology
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neurophysiological findings in a case of cervical anterior spinal artery syndrome: compound muscle action potentials, a marker for prognosis.
**Authors:** Lu M, Kang D, Fan D
**Journal:** N Z Med J (2006)

## Content

1. N Z Med J. 2006 May 19;119(1234):U1982.

Neurophysiological findings in a case of cervical anterior spinal artery
syndrome: compound muscle action potentials, a marker for prognosis.

Lu M(1), Kang D, Fan D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Peking University Third Hospital, Haidian District,
Beijing, China.

We report a case of cervical anterior spinal artery syndrome (ASAS). MRI showed
abnormal hypointense on T1-weighted images and hyperintense on T2-weighted
images from vertebrae C2 to T3. The lesion involved the anterior two-third
bilaterally. Spinal angiography showed the superior segmental obstruction of the
anterior spinal artery. Regarding nerve conduction studies, no CMAP (the
compound muscle action potentials) could be obtained in either median nerves or
ulnar nerves, and F-waves were absent. Six months after the onset, there was no
any recovery of strength in both arms of the ASAS patient. In our opinion, CMAP
could be seen a marker of prognosis for ASAS patients, and absent CMAP might
forecast the bad prognosis.

PMID: 16718293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
