---
reference_id: "PMID:25851806"
title: Five Chinese patients with 5-oxoprolinuria due to glutathione synthetase and 5-oxoprolinase deficiencies.
authors:
- Li X
- Ding Y
- Liu Y
- Ma Y
- Song J
- Wang Q
- Yang Y
journal: Brain Dev
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2015.03.005
keywords:
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism, urine"
- Asian People
- Case-Control Studies
- "Child, Preschool"
- China
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Glutathione Synthase/deficiency, genetics, metabolism, urine"
- Humans
- Hydroxyproline/urine
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mutation
- "Pyroglutamate Hydrolase/deficiency, genetics, metabolism, urine"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Five Chinese patients with 5-oxoprolinuria due to glutathione synthetase and 5-oxoprolinase deficiencies.
**Authors:** Li X, Ding Y, Liu Y, Ma Y, Song J, Wang Q, Yang Y
**Journal:** Brain Dev (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.braindev.2015.03.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.braindev.2015.03.005)

## Content

1. Brain Dev. 2015 Nov;37(10):952-9. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2015.03.005. Epub
2015  Apr 4.

Five Chinese patients with 5-oxoprolinuria due to glutathione synthetase and
5-oxoprolinase deficiencies.

Li X(1), Ding Y(1), Liu Y(1), Ma Y(1), Song J(1), Wang Q(1), Yang Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 100034,
China.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 100034,
China. Electronic address: yanlingy@vip.sina.com.

OBJECTIVE: 5-Oxoprolinuria is a rare inherited metabolic disorder caused by a
defective gamma-glutamyl cycle resulting from mutations in the genes encoding
5-oxoprolinase (OPLAH) and glutathione synthetase (GSS). No inherited
5-oxoprolinuria case has been reported in mainland China until now. In this
study, clinical, biochemical, and genetic aspects of five Chinese
5-oxoprolinuria patients with OPLAH or GSS gene mutations were investigated.
METHODS: Three boys and two girls from five unrelated Chinese families with
symptomatic 5-oxoprolinuria were identified within the past 3years in Peking
University First Hospital. OPLAH and GSS genes were analyzed.
RESULTS: Patients were hospitalized between the age of 13days to 1year and
3months for hypersomnia, developmental retardation, feeding deficiency,
vomiting, icterus and recurrent pneumonia. All patients had significantly
elevated urine 5-oxoproline. Three novel mutations (c.1904G>A and
c.2813_2815delGGG in Patient 1, c.2978G>T in Patient 2) on OPLAH, on GSS, one
novel mutation (c.1252C>T in Patient 3) and a reported mutation (c.491G>A in
Patients 3-5) were detected. Patient 4 has homozygous mutation c.491G>A, the
others are heterozygous. After treatment by l-carnitine, vitamin E, B1, B2 and
coenzyme Q10, three patients with GSS deficiency improved, but the two
5-oxoprolinase-deficient patients did not respond to treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: 5-Oxoprolinase deficiency and GSS deficiency share some clinical
and biochemical features. Genetic analysis is important for the deferential
diagnosis. In this study, five Chinese patients had severe central nervous
system damage. Antioxidant treatments were proved effective for the three
patients with GSS deficiency but not for the two patients with 5-oxoprolinase
deficiency.

Copyright © 2015 The Japanese Society of Child Neurology. Published by Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.braindev.2015.03.005
PMID: 25851806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
