---
reference_id: "PMID:1663439"
title: "Succimer, an oral lead chelator."
authors:
- Mann KV
- Travers JD
journal: Clin Pharm
year: '1991'
keywords:
- "Administration, Oral"
- Chelation Therapy/methods
- Drug Interactions
- Drug Monitoring
- Drug Stability
- Humans
- Lead
- Lead Poisoning/drug therapy
- "Succimer/adverse effects, pharmacokinetics, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Succimer, an oral lead chelator.
**Authors:** Mann KV, Travers JD
**Journal:** Clin Pharm (1991)

## Content

1. Clin Pharm. 1991 Dec;10(12):914-22.

Succimer, an oral lead chelator.

Mann KV(1), Travers JD.

Author information:
(1)Medical Affairs, McNeil Consumer Products Company, Fort Washington, PA 19034.

Comment in
    Clin Pharm. 1992 May;11(5):387-8; author reply 388-9.
    Clin Pharm. 1991 Dec;10(12):942.

The pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, clinical efficacy, adverse effects, and 
dosage and administration of succimer when used for the treatment of lead 
poisoning are reviewed. Succimer is an orally active, heavy-metal chelating 
agent that forms stable, water-soluble complexes with lead; it also chelates 
other toxic heavy metals, such as arsenic and mercury. It is a designated orphan 
drug that is indicated for the treatment of lead poisoning, specifically in 
children with blood lead concentrations higher than 45 micrograms/dL. Succimer 
reverses the adverse metabolic effects of lead on heme synthesis while 
increasing urinary lead output without adversely affecting essential mineral 
excretion at the recommended dosage regimen. The rebound in lead concentrations 
that can occur after short courses of chelating therapies (caused by 
redistribution of lead from bone stores) may require frequent and multiple 
courses of chelation therapy. The most common adverse effects reported in 
clinical trials of succimer in children and adults were nausea, vomiting, 
diarrhea, appetite loss, and loose stools; these effects may be related to the 
drug's unpleasant mercaptan odor. There are no known drug interactions between 
succimer and other drugs, including iron supplements, although data are limited. 
The recommended initial dosage in children is 10 mg/kg or 350 mg/sq m every 
eight hours for five days. The dosage is then reduced to 10 mg/kg or 350 mg/sq m 
every 12 hours for an additional two weeks. Clinical studies indicate that 
succimer is relatively selective for lead and effectively lowers blood lead 
concentrations. Although clinical experience is limited, an oral lead chelator 
may offer advantages over currently available agents.

PMID: 1663439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]