---
reference_id: "PMID:32670577"
title: Novel pathogenic mutations identified in the first Chinese pedigree of complete C6 deficiency.
authors:
- Li PH
- Wong WW
- Leung EN
- Lau CS
- Au E
journal: Clin Transl Immunology
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/cti2.1148
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel pathogenic mutations identified in the first Chinese pedigree of complete C6 deficiency.
**Authors:** Li PH, Wong WW, Leung EN, Lau CS, Au E
**Journal:** Clin Transl Immunology (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cti2.1148](https://doi.org/10.1002/cti2.1148)

## Content

1. Clin Transl Immunology. 2020 Jul 8;9(7):e1148. doi: 10.1002/cti2.1148. 
eCollection 2020.

Novel pathogenic mutations identified in the first Chinese pedigree of complete 
C6 deficiency.

Li PH(1), Wong WW(2), Leung EN(2), Lau CS(1), Au E(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology & Clinical Immunology Department of Medicine Queen 
Mary Hospital The University of Hong Kong Hong Kong.
(2)Division of Clinical Immunology Department of Pathology Queen Mary Hospital 
Hong Kong.

OBJECTIVES: Complete C6 deficiency (C6Q0) is a rare primary immunodeficiency 
leading to increased susceptibility to recurrent Neisseria infections. Patients 
with C6Q0 have mostly been reported in individuals of African ancestry 
previously, but never in Chinese. We identify the first Chinese patients with 
C6Q0 through family screening of an index case presenting with recurrent 
Neisseria meningitis with septicaemia and performed extensive clinical, 
serological and genetic investigations.
METHODS: Two variants in C6 were identified by next-generation sequencing and 
confirmed by Sanger sequencing in an index case of C6Q0. Immunological 
investigations, complement haemolytic assays (CH50/AH50), C6 gene sequencing and 
quantification of serum C6 levels were performed for all available members of 
his nonconsanguineous family.
RESULTS: Three C6Q0 patients were identified with near-absent C6 levels, absent 
CH50/AH50 activity and compound heterozygous for two nonsense mutations in the 
C6 gene: NM_000065.4:c.1786C>T (p.Arg596Ter) and NM_000065.4:c.1816C>T 
(p.Arg606Ter). Neither mutations have been reported to be pathogenic previously. 
Two other family members who were heterozygous for either p.Arg596Ter or and 
p.Arg606Ter had intermediate C6 levels but preserved CH50/AH50 activity. These 
two loss-of-function mutations showed a strong genotype-phenotype correlation in 
C6 levels.
CONCLUSIONS: We report on two compound heterozygous mutations in C6, p.Arg596Ter 
and p.Arg606Ter inherited in three patients of the first recorded Chinese 
pedigree of C6Q0. Neither mutations had been reported to be pathogenic 
previously. We demonstrate that heterozygous family members with subtotal C6 
levels had preserved complement haemolytic function and demonstrate a threshold 
effect of C6 protein level.

© 2020 The Authors. Clinical & Translational Immunology published by John Wiley 
& Sons Australia, Ltd on behalf of Australian and New Zealand Society for 
Immunology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/cti2.1148
PMCID: PMC7343556
PMID: 32670577

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.