---
reference_id: "PMID:31988463"
title: Lentiviral gene therapy for X-linked chronic granulomatous disease.
authors:
- Kohn DB
- Booth C
- Kang EM
- Pai SY
- Shaw KL
- Santilli G
- Armant M
- Buckland KF
- Choi U
- De Ravin SS
- Dorsey MJ
- Kuo CY
- Leon-Rico D
- Rivat C
- Izotova N
- Gilmour K
- Snell K
- Dip JX
- Darwish J
- Morris EC
- Terrazas D
- Wang LD
- Bauser CA
- Paprotka T
- Kuhns DB
- Gregg J
- Raymond HE
- Everett JK
- Honnet G
- Biasco L
- Newburger PE
- Bushman FD
- Grez M
- Gaspar HB
- Williams DA
- Malech HL
- Galy A
- Thrasher AJ
- Net4CGD consortium
journal: Nat Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41591-019-0735-5
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Antigens, CD34/genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromosomes, Human, X"
- Comorbidity
- Gene Silencing
- "Genes, Regulator"
- Genetic Therapy/methods
- Genetic Vectors
- "Granulomatous Disease, Chronic/genetics, therapy"
- Hematopoietic Stem Cells/cytology
- Humans
- Lentivirus/genetics
- Male
- NADPH Oxidases/genetics
- Neutrophils/metabolism
- Patient Safety
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic"
- Transplantation Conditioning
- Treatment Outcome
- United Kingdom
- United States
- Young Adult
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Lentiviral gene therapy for X-linked chronic granulomatous disease.
**Authors:** Kohn DB, Booth C, Kang EM, Pai SY, Shaw KL, Santilli G, Armant M, Buckland KF, Choi U, De Ravin SS, Dorsey MJ, Kuo CY, Leon-Rico D, Rivat C, Izotova N, Gilmour K, Snell K, Dip JX, Darwish J, Morris EC, Terrazas D, Wang LD, Bauser CA, Paprotka T, Kuhns DB, Gregg J, Raymond HE, Everett JK, Honnet G, Biasco L, Newburger PE, Bushman FD, Grez M, Gaspar HB, Williams DA, Malech HL, Galy A, Thrasher AJ, Net4CGD consortium
**Journal:** Nat Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41591-019-0735-5](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-019-0735-5)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2020 Feb;26(2):200-206. doi: 10.1038/s41591-019-0735-5. Epub 2020 Jan
 27.

Lentiviral gene therapy for X-linked chronic granulomatous disease.

Kohn DB(1), Booth C(2), Kang EM(3), Pai SY(4), Shaw KL(5), Santilli G(2), Armant 
M(4), Buckland KF(2), Choi U(3), De Ravin SS(3), Dorsey MJ(6), Kuo CY(5), 
Leon-Rico D(2), Rivat C(2), Izotova N(2), Gilmour K(2), Snell K(2), Dip JX(2), 
Darwish J(2), Morris EC(7), Terrazas D(5), Wang LD(4)(8), Bauser CA(9), Paprotka 
T(9), Kuhns DB(10), Gregg J(11), Raymond HE(11), Everett JK(11), Honnet G(12), 
Biasco L(2), Newburger PE(13), Bushman FD(11), Grez M(14), Gaspar HB(2)(15), 
Williams DA(4), Malech HL(3), Galy A(12)(16), Thrasher AJ(17); Net4CGD 
consortium.

Collaborators: Buckland KF, Bauser CA, Honnet G, Grez M, Gaspar HB, Galy A, 
Thrasher AJ.

Author information:
(1)University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. dkohn@mednet.ucla.edu.
(2)Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health and Great Ormond Street 
Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(3)Laboratory of Clinical Immunology and Microbiology, National Institute of 
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 
USA.
(4)Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(6)University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(7)University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(8)City of Hope, Beckman Research Institute, Duarte, CA, USA.
(9)Eurofins Genomics Sequencing Europe, Konstanz, Germany.
(10)Leidos Biomedical Research, Inc., Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer 
Research, Frederick, MD, USA.
(11)University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(12)Genethon, Evry, France.
(13)University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA.
(14)Georg-Speyer Haus, Frankfurt, Germany.
(15)Orchard Therapeutics, London, UK.
(16)Inserm, University of Evry, Université Paris Saclay Genethon, Evry, France.
(17)Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health and Great Ormond Street 
Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK. a.thrasher@ucl.ac.uk.

Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) is a rare inherited disorder of phagocytic 
cells1,2. We report the initial results of nine severely affected X-linked CGD 
(X-CGD) patients who received ex vivo autologous CD34+ hematopoietic stem and 
progenitor cell-based lentiviral gene therapy following myeloablative 
conditioning in first-in-human studies (trial registry nos. NCT02234934 and 
NCT01855685). The primary objectives were to assess the safety and evaluate the 
efficacy and stability of biochemical and functional reconstitution in the 
progeny of engrafted cells at 12 months. The secondary objectives included the 
evaluation of augmented immunity against bacterial and fungal infection, as well 
as assessment of hematopoietic stem cell transduction and engraftment. Two 
enrolled patients died within 3 months of treatment from pre-existing 
comorbidities. At 12 months, six of the seven surviving patients demonstrated 
stable vector copy numbers (0.4-1.8 copies per neutrophil) and the persistence 
of 16-46% oxidase-positive neutrophils. There was no molecular evidence of 
either clonal dysregulation or transgene silencing. Surviving patients have had 
no new CGD-related infections, and six have been able to discontinue CGD-related 
antibiotic prophylaxis. The primary objective was met in six of the nine 
patients at 12 months follow-up, suggesting that autologous gene therapy is a 
promising approach for CGD patients.

DOI: 10.1038/s41591-019-0735-5
PMCID: PMC7115833
PMID: 31988463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests D.B.K. (Kohn), H.L.M., 
D.A.W. & A.J.T. are Scientific Advisory Board members and H.B.G. is Chief 
Scientific Officer for Orchard Therapeutics. H.B.G. is an employee and 
equity/stock holder for Orchard Therapeutics. A.J.T. is an equity/stock holder 
for Orchard Therapeutics. Orchard Therapeutics has obtained an exclusive option 
to license from Genethon for the rights and know-how related to the lentiviral 
vector G1XCGD. C.A.B. and T.P. consult for a sequencing service provider, and 
C.A.B. consults for Novimmune and SOBI. Eurofins Genomics Sequencing Europe 
(formerly GATC Biotech AG) is a for-profit company (sequencing service 
provider). The work performed by Eurofins Genomics Sequencing Europe included in 
the manuscript is provided to the greater scientific community as a fee for 
service product. E.C.M. reports Advisory Board attendance for Orchard 
Therapeutics. With regards to interests outside of the submitted work, L.D.W. 
reports grants from the St. Baldrick's Foundation, Damon-Runyon Cancer Research 
Foundation, and Alex's Lemonade Stand Foundation and personal fees from Magenta 
Therapeutics. A.J.T. reports Board membership and consultancy with Rocket 
Pharmaceuticals, Generation Bio, and Board membership with 4BIOCapital. S.-Y.P. 
reports salary support from Boston Children’s Hospital and a grant from National 
Institutes of Health. K.L.S. reports personal fees and non-financial support 
from Orchard Therapeutics, Ltd. E.M.K., G.S., M.A., K.F.B., U.C., S.S.D.R., 
M.J.D., C.Y.K., D.L.-R., C.R., N.I., K.G., K.S., J.D., E.C.M., D.B.K. (Kuhns), 
J.G., H.R., J.K.E., G.H., P.E.N., F.D.B., M.G., J.X.-B.D. and A.G. have no 
competing interests to disclose.

X-CGD is caused by mutations in CYBB encoding the gp91phox subunit of the phagocyte nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH)-oxidase (NOX2). Patients are susceptible to recurrent life-threatening infections, impacting their quality of life and life-expectancy. Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) can be curative, and recent advances have improved the results from this treatment considerably3,4. Clinical trials of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell (HSPC) gene therapy were first initiated with gammaretroviral (γ-RV) vectors.5,6. However, clonal expansion of gene-corrected cells mediated by potent enhancer elements in the γ-RV long-terminal repeats (LTRs)5,7, eventually lead to leukoproliferative complications. In addition, CpG dinucleotide promoter methylation lead to silencing of transgene expression7. To retain the efficacy of gene therapy for X-CGD, but minimize mutagenic risk, a self-inactivating lentiviral vector called G1XCGD was developed (Fig. 1a, full sequence shown in Extended Data 1). To enhance the safety of this vector, a novel chimeric internal promoter was used to preferentially drive gp91phox expression at high levels in phagocytes 8,9. Complementary clinical studies were initiated, including a multicenter trial in the USA, a UK study and compassionate-use program with nearly identical clinical protocols, eligibility criteria, myeloablative conditioning, stem cell product manufacturing methods, vector batches, and post-transplant analyses.

Ongoing clinical studies of gene therapy with G1XCGD were initiated in the UK (n = 3, plus one compassionate-use patient) and in the USA (n = 5). Dates of therapy are provided in Table 1. Patients 1, 3, 5, and 9 were treated in the UK. Patients 2, 4, 6, 7, and 8 were treated in the USA. The patients were all male with severe deficiency of gp91phox and absent NADPH-oxidase activity. They ranged in age from 2 to 27 years, and six of the nine were >18 years of age at entry. All patients had clinical histories of severe X-CGD-related infections, some active at the time of treatment, and several had chronic inflammatory complications (Table 1). Patients were followed until death or for a minimum of 12 months, with a maximum follow-up of 36 months. Drug products were manufactured from granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and Plerixafor-mobilized leukaphereses, and infused after myeloablative conditioning (Table S1, see online methods). Drug product infused for the nine patients achieved final CD34+ cell doses of 6.5–32.6×106/kg (Table S2, Extended Data 2).

Within 1 month of gene therapy, corrected circulating neutrophils were detectable in peripheral blood (Fig. 2a, 2b; assays conducted in a subset of patients, once at each time point for each patient). Dihydrorhodamine (DHR) fluorescent assays were applied serially to follow the levels of corrected neutrophils. DHR+ activity was observed in >15% of polymorphonuclear neutrophils in all patients within 1 month Fig. 2c and Extended Data 3a. Follow-up demonstrated sustained, stable persistence of oxidase-positive neutrophils in six of seven surviving patients; the percentage of oxidase-positive neutrophils at 12 months was 16–46% in these individuals, indicating that the primary objective of evaluating the efficacy in the progeny of engrafted cells and stability at 12 months had been met. Expression of transgene-derived gp91phox was confirmed by flow cytometry as occurring in a percentage of circulating neutrophils that paralleled the DHR data (data not shown). Quantification of NADPH-oxidase generation of superoxide was performed by measurement of neutrophil-stimulated reduction of ferricytochrome c and corrected for the percentage of functional cells. These results demonstrated that the level of activity was within, or just below, the expected normal range of superoxide production per activated neutrophil (Fig. 2d; assays conducted in a subset of patients, once at each time point for each patient), further strengthening the conclusion that the primary objective relating to efficacy was met.

Following reinfusion, VCN remained stable in neutrophils in six patients over the course of follow-up, suggestive of successful transduction and engraftment of HSPCs (Fig. 2e, Extended Data 3b). In general, the percentage of DHR-positive neutrophils increased linearly with granulocyte VCN (Fig. 2f). VCN also remained stable in other cell lineages (Extended Data 4). One patient (Patient 5, who required three attempts to collect CD34+ cells) had a high initial VCN and a high percentage of DHR-positive neutrophils, but a decrease in VCN and a parallel decrease in the percentage of oxidase-positive neutrophils (<0.5%) over 18 months of follow-up. The patient remained clinically well at last follow-up on prophylactic antimicrobials.

Longitudinal analysis of vector integration-site distributions was carried out for the nine patients over 3 months–3 years of sampling. More than 106 million sequence reads identified 724,685 unique integration sites in multiple cell types (Fig. 3a). Lentiviral vector integration was favored in transcription units and transcription-associated features, as seen previously10. The analysis documented highly polyclonal populations of gene-modified cells; after 1 year, an average of 9,482 unique integration sites were detected in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs; assayed in Patients 2, 4, 6 and 7). Mathematical reconstructions of population sizes using Chao1 estimation11 with PMBC samples from these same four patients 12 months after treatment suggest an average of at least 69,034 progenitor cells were delivering gene-corrected cells to peripheral blood at 1 year (Extended Data 5). In a previous gene therapy trial to treat CGD, which used a γ-RV vector, clones with integration sites in MECOM (MDS/EVI1) expanded by 1 year in peripheral blood to comprise more than 20% of cells in the first patient and more than 80% of cells in the second7, and were implicated in later adverse events. In this study, with the lentiviral G1XCGD vector and assayed in neutrophils, the most abundant clones did not harbor integration sites in or near these genes (Fig 3b), and no clone at genes of concern in the previous trial expanded to comprise more than 0.3% of the total population in any cell type (Extended Data 6). In addition, there was no evidence of significant gene silencing, nor of CpG dinucleotide methylation in vector regulatory sequences (Fig. 3c)

The infusion of the medicinal drug product containing genetically modified cells was well tolerated and there were no infusion-related adverse events. All patients experienced typical conditioning-related events, including transient neutropenia, thrombocytopenia and/or mucositis. There were two deaths: one (Patient 1) due to hyperacute sterile pneumonitis 9 weeks after infusion of gene-corrected cells on a background of prior extensive Aspergillus lung disease and pneumonectomy; and the other (Patient 8) due to a fatal intracranial bleed post-transplant associated with refractory autoimmune platelet destruction precipitated by previous alloimmunization to multiple granulocyte transfusions. Pre-mortem magnetic resonance imaging showed the bleed to be centered at a site of metastatic fungal infection. These deaths were not considered related to the drug product. There was one serious adverse reaction, consistent with similar cases in other diseases treated with gene therapy and transplant12,13: Patient 5 experienced immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome at initial engraftment of functional neutrophils, manifesting as a pericardial effusion and abdominal pain, which was fully resolved with steroid cover. In the remaining patients, there were two adverse events recorded after transplant: one patient (Patient 2) developed transient symptoms of gastric outflow obstruction 3–4 months after gene therapy that had been a recurrent pre-transplant problem; there was no evidence of outflow obstruction on endoscopy and symptoms did not recur. Another patient (Patient 6) had several spontaneous pneumothoraces, related to pre-transplant bronchiectasis, established pulmonary fibrosis and was markedly lymphopenic at enrollment, having received several courses of corticosteroid for inflammatory pulmonary disease. Of the patients who had colitis at some time prior to gene therapy, none have had clinical recurrences to date. In one patient (Patient 3) who had active colitis with a perianal fistula and perineal ulceration at the time of gene therapy, there was resolution of the lesion soon after gene therapy with no recurrence.

After 2,036 patient days (approximately 66 patient months), all seven surviving patients remained clinically well without new CGD-related infections. The six patients with stable DHR+ neutrophils >10% were no longer receiving CGD-related prophylactic antibiotic or antifungal treatment (some patients continued to receive penicillin V or equivalent prophylaxis per individual institution-specific protocols for patients who received myeloablative conditioning). Patient 6 remained on antibiotic prophylaxis due to pre-existing lung disease and lymphopenia but is currently off antifungal therapy (Table 1). The secondary objectives to assess immunologic reconstitution and patient health (US protocol) and immunity against bacterial and fungal infection (UK protocol) were therefore met.

Following gene therapy, all patients with successful engraftment remain stable through to the last follow-up (up to 3 years in three patients). Seven patients remained free of new infectious complications, and six had sustained presence of neutrophils and restored NADPH-oxidase activity with no evidence of transcriptional silencing of the integrated vector genome or clonal expansion. Two patients died within 3 months of gene therapy likely due to pre-existing disease-related complications present at transplant and unrelated to the drug product itself. The other seven patients have remained well, apart from persistent chronic fibrotic pulmonary problems in one individual (Patient 6).

One patient (Patient 5), a pediatric patient, initially achieved high levels of neutrophil recovery although the levels of activity declined over several months, suggesting that only a low frequency of long-term transduced HSCs had engrafted, possibly as a result of chronic inflammation14. This patient had also received long-term linezolid, an antimicrobial agent with known myelosuppressive activity14, which may also have contributed to difficulty recovering sufficient CD34+ cells for transduction, requiring three separate attempts. Since this analysis was performed, four additional patients (aged 3, 8, 11, and 31 years) have been treated in the USA with cryopreserved cells, with no product-related complications. At the last follow-up (2–9 months post-treatment), all were well, with no new CGD-related infections. While the additional adult patient has sustained high levels of DHR+ neutrophils (77.2% at 6 months), the response of the newly treated pediatric patients has been similar to that of Patient 5 with initial high levels of neutrophil recovery followed by a decline. It is unclear at present why the engraftment of gene-marked cells was poor in these pediatric patients and whether the mechanisms were similar (due to pre-existing disease and concomitant drug therapies) or unrelated (immunological or technical).

Early attempts at gene therapy for CGD with γ-RV vectors achieved some transient therapeutic benefits, but in several cases were associated with clonal leukoproliferation5,615. Here, integration-site analysis in blood cells revealed highly polyclonal engraftment of gene-corrected stem cells, with no clonal expansion associated with enriched integration near cancer-associated genes5,7 (Fig. 3a, 3b and Extended Data 4). In a previous ɣ-RV trial, methylation of CpG dinucleotides within the vector promoter sequence resulted in silencing of gene expression. The chimeric myeloid promoter in G1XCGD responds to transcription factors present mostly in mature myeloid cells and drives sufficient expression of gp91phox to reconstitute oxidase production in blood granulocytes and monocytes8. No silencing or methylation was detected. In each patient, all blood cell lineages had similar levels of gene marking, with the exception of T cells that had lower frequencies and lower diversity of vector integrants (Extended Data 3). This latter finding may reflect a lack of lymphodepletion in the conditioning regimen.

The level of reconstitution of phagocyte oxidase function required to mediate a meaningful clinical effect can be estimated from studies of female carriers of X-CGD, patients with X-CGD with small amounts of residual NADPH-oxidase activity (who have been shown to exhibit a significant survival advantage compared with patients with complete absence of oxidase activity), and from preclinical vector assessments6,16–18. On that basis, we predict that long-term functional correction of more than 10% of circulating myeloid cells with oxidase activity per cell approaching the normal range will provide lasting clinical benefit. The level of benefit may approach normal resistance to infection at or above 20% of circulating myeloid cells corrected, although individual factors may be influential. In this study, a target threshold of 10% was demonstrated in the six surviving adult patients, and above 20% in five of these six surviving adult patients. Quantitative assessment of superoxide production in engrafted neutrophils confirmed sustained activity. Clinical efficacy could in the future be improved with higher titer vector preparations or the use of transduction enhancers, and by avoiding the loss of primitive HSPC in the autologous graft, which may already be compromised by chronic inflammation19,20.

The advantages of autologous HSC gene therapy over HSCT includes the avoidance of graft-versus-host disease and other alloreactive complications, and reduced complexity of conditioning regimen. These results demonstrate promising effective autologous gene therapy in severely affected patients with X-CGD without evidence of genotoxicity. Further studies are warranted to formally assess longer term clinical efficacy and safety of G1XCGD in patients with X-CGD.

Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the UK and US studies are detailed in Supplementary Table S1 In brief, male patients with X-linked chronic granulomatous disease (X-CGD), aged 2 years and older (>6 months for UK protocol), with molecular diagnosis of X-CGD confirmed by DNA sequencing and supported by laboratory evidence for absent or significantly reduced biochemical activity of the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH)-oxidase, and absence of 10/10 human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-matched donor (sibling or unrelated) were eligible.

The primary objective of the UK and US studies included evaluation of safety and the evaluation of efficacy and stability by biochemical and function reconstitution in progeny of engrafted cells at 12 months. The secondary objectives differed slightly between the two trials, and included clinical efficacy and evaluation of augmented immunity against bacterial and fungal infection (UK protocol), evaluation of immunologic reconstitution and patient health (US protocol) and assessment of hematopoietic stem cell transduction and engraftment (both protocols). Primary and secondary objectives are detailed more fully in Supplementary Table S1.

The protocol and informed consent documents were reviewed and approved or accepted by the US National Institutes of Health Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee, the UK Gene Therapy Advisory Committee, and the local institutional ethical and biosafety review boards at all participating clinical sites. The studies were performed in the USA under Food and Drug Administration-approved investigational new drug (IND) BB#16141; Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) approved EudraCT Number 2012-000242-35 in the UK, and are registered at Clinicaltrials.gov ([USA] NCT02234934, [UK] NCT01855685). Genethon sponsored the UK trial and acquired exclusive rights for the commercial exploitation of the data generated under the US trial; during the trial, Orchard Therapeutics obtained an exclusive license from Genethon to certain rights and intellectual property related to the lentiviral vector G1XCGD, including clinical data, and named this program OTL-102.

The procedural schemas for the clinical trials are shown for the use of either fresh cells or cryopreserved cells (Fig. 1b, 1c). Cryopreserved cells were used increasingly over fresh cells as the studies progressed. The UK sites started using cryopreserved cells in 2016 and the US followed in 2018 in patients treated after those included in this manuscript. This was primarily for safety reasons as cryopreserved cells gave an extended shelf-life, which allowed full cell product characterization to be performed prior to initiation of conditioning. Following informed consent and eligibility confirmation, CD34+ cells recovered by bone marrow or apheresis were transduced ex vivo by the G1XCGD lentiviral vector. Patients received busulfan myeloablative conditioning with pharmacokinetic monitoring. Drug products were infused intravenously through a central venous line over 30–45 minutes. Patient vital signs and clinical condition were monitored closely during and after the infusion for adverse reactions.

Clinical lots of G1XCGD lentiviral vector21 were produced at Genethon and Yposkesi (Evry, France). 293T cells were transfected with plasmids encoding the G1XCGD vector, HIV-1 gag/pol, HIV-1 rev, and the VSV-G glycoprotein. Culture supernatants were collected and processed using clarification, ion exchange chromatography, tangential flow filtration, gel filtration, formulation in X-Vivo 20 medium (Lonza), and aliquots were cryopreserved22. The titer of the vector preparations ranged between 2.1 and 3.3 E+09 IG (average 2.5 ± 0.5 E+09 IG/mL n = 5) genomes/mL, measured at Genethon using HCT116 colon carcinoma cells. Physical titers ranged between 1.3 and 3.8 E+04 ng P24/mL (average 2.4 ± 1.1 E+04 ng P24/mL n = 5) measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). All lots of vector tested negative for replication competent lentivirus and met GMP release specifications.

Cells were manufactured onsite at study sites in the US and UK (University of California, Los Angeles, USA; Boston Children’s Hospital, USA; National Institutes of Health, USA; Great Ormond Street Hospital, UK). Harvested cells to use as back-up were collected from bone marrow isolation or mobilized peripheral blood. Mobilization of peripheral blood stem cells was accomplished by administration of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) 10 μg/kg subcutaneously (SC) daily × 5 days, with leukapheresis performed on the fifth day. The back-up leukapheresis units were cryopreserved as per each site’s standard operating procedure for standard hematopoietic progenitor cell products and stored in the vapor phase of liquid nitrogen (LN2) freezers. At least 1 month later, a second mobilization was performed to collect stem cells to manufacture the drug product. For some patients, cells for the back-up graft were obtained from the same mobilization used for manufacture of the drug product. On the fourth or fifth day of G CSF, a dose of plerixafor 0.24 mg/kg was administered intravenously 8–12 hours prior to leukapheresis, with a fifth dose of G-CSF given 2 hours prior to the apheresis. This collection was processed to isolate CD34+ cells using the CliniMACS system (Miltenyi Biotec, Germany). For some patients, a second leukapheresis was performed after a second dose of plerixafor on day 5 or 6, and a sixth dose of G-CSF was given on the sixth day of mobilization protocol.

Selected CD34+ cells were placed into cell culture in serum-free medium with recombinant human cytokines (stem cell factor, flt-3 ligand, thrombopoietin and interleukin-3). On the next 2 successive days, the G1XCGD vector was added to the cells in culture to a final concentration of 1E+08 IG/mL. The following day, the cells were removed from culture, washed twice, and formulated for intravenous administration. Samples were retained at multiple steps during the processing and from the final drug product (FDP). FDP was tested for sterility, gram-stain reactivity, endotoxin, mycoplasma, viability, CD34, and gp91phox surface expression by flow cytometry, colony-forming unit (CFU) numbers, and percentage vector-insert+ CFU by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Aliquots of the drug product were also grown in vitro for 7 days, followed by extraction of genomic DNA for vector copy number (VCN) determination by quantitative PCR (qPCR) or using digital droplet PCR (ddPCR) to measure the number of vector copies per human genome. In some patients, after regulatory approval of an amended manufacturing protocol, the drug product was cryopreserved in Cryostor 5 (5% dimethyl sulfoxide [DMSO], Sigma Aldrich) in Kryosure 20 bags (Saint-Gobain Performance Plastics), stored in vapor phase of LN2, and thawed at bedside immediately prior to administration.

Drug products were manufactured from G-CSF and Plerixafor-mobilized leukaphereses. A cryopreserved unmanipulated cell fraction was taken as back-up in the event of non-engraftment, and a CD34-selected cell preparation taken for G1XCGD transduction. In one case (Patient 8), freshly collected CD34+ cells were augmented with additional thawed autologous selected CD34+ cells that had been collected and frozen previously, to enable the initial required cell dose for transduction to be achieved. Collection of CD34+ cells was problematic in another patient (Patient 5), requiring three separate attempts (one aborted due to a systemic inflammatory reaction during administration of mobilizing agents). Drug product infused for the nine patients achieved final CD34+ cell doses of 6.5–32.6×106/kg (Table S2 Fig. S2). Transduction efficiency met release criteria for all cell products, with VCN ranging from 0.7 to 5.5 copies per cell (Table S2; Fig. S2b) in infused cells, indicating the secondary objective relating to evaluation of CD34+ hematopoietic cell transduction was met. For some products, the transduction efficiency of colony-forming units grown from the drug product were assessed for the presence of the vector by PCR; between 49.2 and 79.2% of the colonies were PCR-positive (Fig. S2c), indicating the primary objective to assess the efficacy in the progeny of engrafted cells was met. Busulfan was administered with pharmacokinetic drug monitoring and dosage adjustment leading to consistent dosing (Fig. S2d). Fresh cells post-transduction were administered within a few hours from the completion of processing, and cryopreserved cells were thawed at bedside and infused directly.

For cytoreductive conditioning, patients received intravenous busulfan twice daily for 3 days, starting at a dose of 2.0 mg/kg, and dose-adjusted based on pharmacokinetics to reach a total net area under the curve (AUC) for busulfan of 70,000–75,000 ng/mL*h. Serum busulfan levels were measured at intervals (immediately after infusion [time = 0] and at 0.5, 1, 2, 4 and 6 h) following the completion of the first infusion. Subsequent busulfan dosages were adjusted based on pharmacokinetic measurements to reach the target AUC on average over all doses, with busulfan levels re-measured after the final (6th) or penultimate (5th) busulfan dose to allow calculation of total busulfan exposure (Table 1; Fig. S2d).

Upon recovery of neutrophils, follow-up evaluations were performed per the clinical protocol at 1, 2, 3, 6, 9, 12, 18 and 24 months after gene therapy (and continue to be monitored in long-term follow-up). Neutrophil NADPH-oxidase activity was measured by standard methods16. CGD-related antibiotic therapy and antifungal therapies were discontinued when, in the opinion of the clinical team, adequate production of corrected neutrophils was evident and when pre-existing infections were deemed to have been cleared.

Bisulfite conversion, PCR, sequencing, and bioinformatics analysis were performed at Eurofins Genomics Sequencing Europe (Konstanz, Germany). Bisulfite conversion was performed using the Zymo Research EZ 96 DNA Methylation Lightning Mag Prep kit (Zymo Research) according to manufacturer instructions. PCR was performed using a nested primer set to generate a 654bp fragment of the promoter region for sequencing. The PCR fragments were prepared for sequencing using the Eurofins Genomics Sequencing Europe standard protocols. Sequencing was performed on an Illumina HiSeq 4000 (Illumina, Inc.) to generate approximately 5 million 150bp read pairs for each sample. The sequencing reads were mapped to the promoter reference sequence using Bismark and Bowtie23,24. Methylation analysis was performed using the Bis-SNP adopted modules of GATK25–27.

For patients 2, 4, 6, 7 and 8, analysis of integration site distributions was carried out as described previously28,29. DNA was purified from transduction products prior to infusion or from blood cells from patients sampled longitudinally. DNA was cleaved by sonication, then DNA adaptors were ligated to the broken DNA ends. Two rounds of PCR were carried out to isolate host-vector DNA junction fragments. Each sample was analyzed four times independently to suppress PCR jackpotting. Samples were sequenced using the Illumina MiSeq. Analysis was carried out using the INSPIIRED pipeline29. Clonal structure was assessed using the sonic abundance method30, which uses information on the numbers of linker positions recovered per integration sites to count the numbers of cells sampled.

For patients 3, 5, and 9, integration sites were collected from Ficoll -purified granulocytes and fluorescence-sorted lymphocytes and monocytes through linear-amplification mediated (LAM)-PCR and high-throughput Illumina sequencing, as described previously31,32. Briefly, genomic DNA from isolated cell types was extracted (QIAamp DNA Blood Mini kit or Micro kit, QIAGEN), and whole -genome amplification was performed (Repli-G Mini Kit, QIAGEN) only on FACS-sorted lymphocytes as described previously33. A total of 300 ng of genomic DNA underwent two rounds of linear amplification (100 cycles in total) to enrich for vector long terminal repeat (LTR) -genome junctions, which were then captured using 5’ biotinylated LTR specific primers and streptavidin magnetic beads. To follow, complementary strand synthesis was performed, then parallel digestion with three different restriction enzymes (MluCI, HpyCH4 IV and Aci I), and ligation to a linker cassette. The resulting fragments were then amplified by two additional exponential PCR steps. These LAM-PCR products were separated by gel electrophoresis on Spreadex high resolution gels (Elchrom Scientific) for visual inspection, and were pooled using barcoded adaptors in a library suitable for Illumina sequencing.

Available samples that passed our quality control of a minimum of 100 cells (by break-point analysis) were included in the analysis. The maximum relative clonal abundances in neutrophils was 2.3% and PBMC was 1.0% in the samples included.

CMV promoter; R, R region of long terminal repeat (LTR); U5, Region unique to the 5’ LTR; Psi, encapsidation sequence; RRE, rev responsive element; cPPT, central polypurine tract; CTSG, cathepsin G 5’ minimal flanking regions; FES, human c-fes; coGP91, codon-optimized sequence CYBB gene which is translated into the cytochrome b-245, beta polypeptide; WPRE, mutated woodchuck hepatitis virus posttranscriptional regulatory element; PPT, HIV-1 polyadenylated region (post translational), dU3, region unique to the 3’ LTR (U3) of the HIV-1 LTR, in which a 400 bp deletion (d) was introduced to inactivate the HIV-1 enhancer/promoter region; SV40 ori, Simian Virus 40 origin of replication; KANr, kanamycin resistance gene; COLE1, Colicin E1 resistance gene.

Panel a shows the final CD34+ cell products (left-axis) obtained for each patient. Panel b shows the VCN per infused cell post-transduction as determined by quantitative PCR. Transduction was also assessed by analyzing the percentage of vector CFUs PCR-positive for GX1CGD vector detected in the final cell product (Panel c). Vertical bars indicate mean and SD. Panel d displays the total net AUC busulfan exposure obtained by the sum of all pharmacokinetic measurements. Target total exposure of 70,000–75,000 ng/mL*h is indicated by the shaded area.

AUC, area under the curve; CFU, colony-forming unit; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; SD, standard deviation; VCN, vector copy number

Panel a shows the mean (±SEM) of % DHR neutrophil up to 24 months post treatment, as measured by a dihydrorhodamine oxidation assay. Panel b shows the mean neutrophil VCN (±SEM) up to 24 months post treatment.

DHR, dihydrorhodamine; SEM, standard error of mean; VCN, vector copy number

VCN determined by qPCR in multiple-cell lineages for patients surviving >1 month post-GT at each follow up, showing stable integration of vector into multiple immune cell types.

GT, gene therapy; qPCR, quantitative PCR; VCN, vector copy number

Longitudinal analysis of minimal population size estimated using the CHAO1 method. The x-axis shows time since cell infusion. D0 indicates the pre-infusion product. The y-axis shows the numbers of unique integration sites (log scale). Cell types are color coded (bottom). For a few patients a reduced number of cell types were available for analysis.

NK, natural killer; PBMC, peripheral blood mononuclear cell

Catalogue of cell clones with integration sites within MECOM (MDS/EVI1), PRDM16, and SETBP2. These genes were chosen for analysis because they were targets of integration in expanded cell clones in the first-RV-based CGD trial, and were implicated in adverse outcomes. The x-axis shows the time point queried, the y-axis shows clonal abundance. Cell types queried are color coded (key at the bottom). No cell clones with integration sites near these genes of concern reaches ≥0.3% in abundance and there is no evidence for longitudinal increases in proportion.

CGD, chronic granulomatous disease; γ-RV, gammaretroviral; NK, natural killer; PBMC, peripheral blood mononuclear cell