---
reference_id: "PMID:35778363"
title: Familial forms and molecular profile of primary hyperaldosteronism.
authors:
- Araujo-Castro M
- Martín Rojas-Marcos P
- Parra Ramírez P
journal: Hipertens Riesgo Vasc
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.hipert.2022.05.007
keywords:
- Humans
- Aldosterone/metabolism
- Steroid 11-beta-Hydroxylase/metabolism
- Cytochrome P-450 CYP11B2/metabolism
- Angiotensin II/metabolism
- "Sodium-Potassium-Exchanging ATPase/genetics, metabolism"
- Hyperaldosteronism/genetics
- Adrenocorticotropic Hormone/metabolism
- "G Protein-Coupled Inwardly-Rectifying Potassium Channels/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial forms and molecular profile of primary hyperaldosteronism.
**Authors:** Araujo-Castro M, Martín Rojas-Marcos P, Parra Ramírez P
**Journal:** Hipertens Riesgo Vasc (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hipert.2022.05.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hipert.2022.05.007)

## Content

1. Hipertens Riesgo Vasc. 2022 Oct-Dec;39(4):167-173. doi:
10.1016/j.hipert.2022.05.007. Epub 2022 Jun 28.

Familial forms and molecular profile of primary hyperaldosteronism.

Araujo-Castro M(1), Martín Rojas-Marcos P(2), Parra Ramírez P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Nutrition Hospital Universitario Ramón y
Cajal, Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: marta.araujo@salud.madrid.org.
(2)La Paz University Hospital: Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain.

Primary hyperaldosteronism (PAH) is the most frequent cause of secondary
arterial hypertension. Most PAHs occur sporadically, but 5% of cases have a
hereditary origin (familial PAH). Four forms of familial PAH have been
described. Type I familial PAH is produced by a fusion of the CYP11B2 and
CYP11B1 genes, in this way the synthesis of aldosterone becomes to be regulated
by ACTH instead of by angiotensin II. In type II, III and IV familial PAH there
is an increase in the transcription and expression of CYP11B2 responsible for
aldosterone synthesis due to a germinal mutation in CLCN2, KCNJ5 and CACNA1H,
respectively. On the other hand, somatic mutations have been identified in 50%
of sporadic PAHs, with gain-of-function mutations at the level of KCNJ5, ATP1A1,
ATP2B3 and CACNA1D being the most common. This review provides a detailed
description of the different forms of familial PAH and the molecular profile of
patients with sporadic PAH.

Copyright © 2022 SEH-LELHA. Publicado por Elsevier España, S.L.U. All rights
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hipert.2022.05.007
PMID: 35778363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
