---
reference_id: "PMID:34137924"
title: "Bone Histomorphometry and (18)F-Sodium Fluoride Positron Emission Tomography Imaging: Comparison Between only Bone Turnover-based and Unified TMV-based Classification of Renal Osteodystrophy."
authors:
- Aaltonen L
- Koivuviita N
- Seppänen M
- Burton IS
- Kröger H
- Löyttyniemi E
- Metsärinne K
journal: Calcif Tissue Int
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00223-021-00874-9
keywords:
- Bone Remodeling
- Chronic Kidney Disease-Mineral and Bone Disorder/diagnostic imaging
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Fluorides
- Humans
- Positron-Emission Tomography
- Sodium Fluoride
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bone Histomorphometry and (18)F-Sodium Fluoride Positron Emission Tomography Imaging: Comparison Between only Bone Turnover-based and Unified TMV-based Classification of Renal Osteodystrophy.
**Authors:** Aaltonen L, Koivuviita N, Seppänen M, Burton IS, Kröger H, Löyttyniemi E, Metsärinne K
**Journal:** Calcif Tissue Int (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00223-021-00874-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00223-021-00874-9)

## Content

1. Calcif Tissue Int. 2021 Dec;109(6):605-614. doi: 10.1007/s00223-021-00874-9. 
Epub 2021 Jun 17.

Bone Histomorphometry and (18)F-Sodium Fluoride Positron Emission Tomography 
Imaging: Comparison Between only Bone Turnover-based and Unified TMV-based 
Classification of Renal Osteodystrophy.

Aaltonen L(1), Koivuviita N(2), Seppänen M(3)(4), Burton IS(5), Kröger H(5)(6), 
Löyttyniemi E(7), Metsärinne K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Kidney Center, Turku University Hospital, PL 52, 
Kiinamyllynkatu 4-8, 20521, Turku, Finland. louise.aaltonen@tyks.fi.
(2)Department of Medicine, Kidney Center, Turku University Hospital, PL 52, 
Kiinamyllynkatu 4-8, 20521, Turku, Finland.
(3)Turku PET Centre, University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 4-8, 20521, Turku, 
Finland.
(4)Department of Clinical Physiology, Nuclear Medicine, Turku University 
Hospital, PL 52, Kiinamyllynkatu 4-8, 20521, Turku, Finland.
(5)Kuopio Musculoskeletal Research Unit (KMRU), Institute of Clinical Medicine, 
University of Eastern Finland, POB 1627, Kuopio, Finland.
(6)Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland.
(7)Department of Biostatistics, University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 10, 20014, 
Turku, Finland.

Bone biopsy is the gold standard for characterization of renal osteodystrophy 
(ROD). However, the classification of the subtypes of ROD based on 
histomorphometric parameters is not unambiguous and the range of normal values 
for turnover differ in different publications. 18F-Sodium Fluoride positron 
emission tomography (18F-NaF PET) is a dynamic imaging technique that measures 
turnover. 18F-NaF PET has previously been shown to correlate with 
histomorphometric parameters. In this cross-sectional study, 26 patients on 
dialysis underwent a 18F-NaF PET and a bone biopsy. Bone turnover-based 
classification was assessed using Malluche's historical reference values for 
normal bone turnover. In unified turnover-mineralization-volume (TMV)-based 
classification, the whole histopathological picture was evaluated and the range 
for normal turnover was set accordingly. Fluoride activity was measured in the 
lumbar spine (L1-L4) and at the anterior iliac crest. On the basis of 
turnover-based classification of ROD, 12% had high turnover and 61% had low 
turnover bone disease. On the basis of unified TMV-based classification of ROD, 
42% had high turnover/hyperparathyroid bone disease and 23% had low 
turnover/adynamic bone disease. When using unified TMV-based classification of 
ROD, 18F-NaF PET had an AUC of 0.86 to discriminate hyperparathyroid bone 
disease from other types of ROD and an AUC of 0.87, for discriminating adynamic 
bone disease. There was a disproportion between turnover-based classification 
and unified TMV-based classification. More research is needed to establish 
normal range of bone turnover in patients with CKD and to establish the role of 
PET imaging in ROD.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00223-021-00874-9
PMCID: PMC8531121
PMID: 34137924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The results presented in this paper have not 
been published previously in whole or part. Louise Aaltonen, Niina Koivuviita, 
Marko Seppänen, Inari S. Burton, Heikki Kröger, Eliisa Löyttyniemi and Kaj 
Metsärinne declare no competing interests.                                      
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                     