---
reference_id: "PMID:28044059"
title: "The ESC/E(Z) complex, an effector of response to ovarian steroids, manifests an intrinsic difference in cells from women with premenstrual dysphoric disorder."
authors:
- Dubey N
- Hoffman JF
- Schuebel K
- Yuan Q
- Martinez PE
- Nieman LK
- Rubinow DR
- Schmidt PJ
- Goldman D
journal: Mol Psychiatry
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/mp.2016.229
keywords:
- Adult
- Affect/physiology
- Cell Line
- Estradiol
- Female
- Gene Expression Regulation/genetics
- Gene Silencing/physiology
- Humans
- Ovary/metabolism
- "Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder/genetics, metabolism"
- Progesterone
- "Repressor Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Steroids/metabolism
- Transcriptome/genetics
- Up-Regulation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The ESC/E(Z) complex, an effector of response to ovarian steroids, manifests an intrinsic difference in cells from women with premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
**Authors:** Dubey N, Hoffman JF, Schuebel K, Yuan Q, Martinez PE, Nieman LK, Rubinow DR, Schmidt PJ, Goldman D
**Journal:** Mol Psychiatry (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/mp.2016.229](https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2016.229)

## Content

1. Mol Psychiatry. 2017 Aug;22(8):1172-1184. doi: 10.1038/mp.2016.229. Epub 2017 
Jan 3.

The ESC/E(Z) complex, an effector of response to ovarian steroids, manifests an 
intrinsic difference in cells from women with premenstrual dysphoric disorder.

Dubey N(1), Hoffman JF(1), Schuebel K(2), Yuan Q(2), Martinez PE(1), Nieman 
LK(3), Rubinow DR(4), Schmidt PJ(1), Goldman D(2).

Author information:
(1)Behavioral Endocrinology Branch, NIMH, IRP/NIH/HHS, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, NIAAA, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Intramural Research Program on Reproductive and Adult Endocrinology, The 
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, 
NIH, DHSS, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

Clinical evidence suggests that mood and behavioral symptoms in premenstrual 
dysphoric disorder (PMDD), a common, recently recognized, psychiatric condition 
among women, reflect abnormal responsivity to ovarian steroids. This 
differential sensitivity could be due to an unrecognized aspect of hormonal 
signaling or a difference in cellular response. In this study, lymphoblastoid 
cell line cultures (LCLs) from women with PMDD and asymptomatic controls were 
compared via whole-transcriptome sequencing (RNA-seq) during untreated (ovarian 
steroid-free) conditions and following hormone treatment. The women with PMDD 
manifested ovarian steroid-triggered behavioral sensitivity during a hormone 
suppression and addback clinical trial, and controls did not, leading us to 
hypothesize that women with PMDD might differ in their cellular response to 
ovarian steroids. In untreated LCLs, our results overall suggest a divergence 
between mRNA (for example, gene transcription) and protein (for example, RNA 
translation in proteins) for the same genes. Pathway analysis of the LCL 
transcriptome revealed, among others, over-expression of ESC/E(Z) complex genes 
(an ovarian steroid-regulated gene silencing complex) in untreated LCLs from 
women with PMDD, with more than half of these genes over-expressed as compared 
with the controls, and with significant effects for MTF2, PHF19 and SIRT1 
(P<0.05). RNA and protein expression of the 13 ESC/E(Z) complex genes were 
individually quantitated. This pattern of increased ESC/E(Z) mRNA expression was 
confirmed in a larger cohort by qRT-PCR. In contrast, protein expression of 
ESC/E(Z) genes was decreased in untreated PMDD LCLs with MTF2, PHF19 and SIRT1 
all significantly decreased (P<0.05). Finally, mRNA expression of several 
ESC/E(Z) complex genes were increased by progesterone in controls only, and 
decreased by estradiol in PMDD LCLs. These findings demonstrate that LCLs from 
women with PMDD manifest a cellular difference in ESC/E(Z) complex function both 
in the untreated condition and in response to ovarian hormones. Dysregulation of 
ESC/E(Z) complex function could contribute to PMDD.

DOI: 10.1038/mp.2016.229
PMCID: PMC5495630
PMID: 28044059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The Authors have no potential conflicts of 
interest or financial support regarding this manuscript.