---
reference_id: PMID:36805082
title: A high-fidelity RNA-targeting Cas13 restores paternal Ube3a expression and improves motor functions in Angelman syndrome mice.
authors:
- Li J
- Shen Z
- Liu Y
- Yan Z
- Liu Y
- Lin X
- Tang J
- Lv R
- Geng G
- Xiong ZQ
- Zhou C
- Yang H
journal: Mol Ther
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2023.02.015
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- "Angelman Syndrome/genetics, therapy"
- "RNA, Antisense/genetics"
- Obesity
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A high-fidelity RNA-targeting Cas13 restores paternal Ube3a expression and improves motor functions in Angelman syndrome mice.
**Authors:** Li J, Shen Z, Liu Y, Yan Z, Liu Y, Lin X, Tang J, Lv R, Geng G, Xiong ZQ, Zhou C, Yang H
**Journal:** Mol Ther (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymthe.2023.02.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymthe.2023.02.015)

## Content

1. Mol Ther. 2023 Jul 5;31(7):2286-2295. doi: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2023.02.015. Epub 
2023 Feb 18.

A high-fidelity RNA-targeting Cas13 restores paternal Ube3a expression and 
improves motor functions in Angelman syndrome mice.

Li J(1), Shen Z(1), Liu Y(1), Yan Z(2), Liu Y(1), Lin X(3), Tang J(1), Lv R(1), 
Geng G(1), Xiong ZQ(4), Zhou C(5), Yang H(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, State Key Laboratory of Neuroscience, Key 
Laboratory of Primate Neurobiology, Center for Excellence in Brain Science and 
Intelligence Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.
(2)Shenzhen Branch, Guangdong Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture, Genome 
Analysis Laboratory of the Ministry of Agriculture, Agricultural Genomics 
Institute at Shenzhen, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Shenzhen 
518000, China.
(3)Department of Neurology and Institute of Neurology, The First Affiliated 
Hospital, Institute of Neuroscience, Fujian Medical University, #20, Chazhong 
Road, Taijiang District, Fuzhou 350005, China.
(4)Institute of Neuroscience, State Key Laboratory of Neuroscience, Key 
Laboratory of Primate Neurobiology, Center for Excellence in Brain Science and 
Intelligence Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China. 
Electronic address: xiongzhiqi@ion.ac.cn.
(5)Institute of Neuroscience, State Key Laboratory of Neuroscience, Key 
Laboratory of Primate Neurobiology, Center for Excellence in Brain Science and 
Intelligence Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China. 
Electronic address: zhouchangyang@ion.ac.cn.
(6)Institute of Neuroscience, State Key Laboratory of Neuroscience, Key 
Laboratory of Primate Neurobiology, Center for Excellence in Brain Science and 
Intelligence Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China; 
Shanghai Center for Brain Science and Brain-Inspired Intelligence Technology, 
Shanghai 201210, China; HuidaGene Therapeutics Co., Ltd., Shanghai 200131, 
China. Electronic address: huiyang@ion.ac.cn.

Angelman syndrome (AS) is a rare neurodevelopmental disorder caused by loss of 
function mutations in maternally expressed UBE3A. No gene-specific treatment is 
available for patients so far. Although intact and transcriptionally active, 
paternally inherited UBE3A is silenced by elongation of antisense long noncoding 
RNA UBE3A-ATS in neurons. Here, we demonstrated that RNA targeting of paternal 
Ube3a-ATS with a high-fidelity CRISPR-Cas13 (hfCas13x.1) system could restore 
Ube3a expression to similar levels as that of maternal Ube3a in the cultured 
mouse neurons. Furthermore, injection into lateral ventricles with 
neuron-specific hSyn1 promoter-driven hfCas13x.1 packaged in adeno-associated 
virus (AAV-PHP.eb) could restore paternal Ube3a expression in cortex and 
hippocampus of neonatal AS mice for up to 4 months after treatment. Behavioral 
tests showed that expression of paternal Ube3a significantly alleviated 
AS-related symptoms, including obesity and motor function. Our results suggested 
that hfCas13x.1-mediated suppression of the Ube3a-ATS lncRNA potentially serves 
as a promising targeted intervention for AS.

Copyright © 2023 The American Society of Gene and Cell Therapy. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2023.02.015
PMCID: PMC10362381
PMID: 36805082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to declare that are relevant to the content of this 
article.