---
reference_id: "PMID:30555667"
title: "Lupus pernio (Besnier-Tenneson syndrome): A rare form of sarcoidosis."
authors:
- Hubail A
- Belkharoeva R
- Tepluk N
- Belerosova T
journal: Dermatol Reports
year: '2018'
doi: 10.4081/dr.2018.7696
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lupus pernio (Besnier-Tenneson syndrome): A rare form of sarcoidosis.
**Authors:** Hubail A, Belkharoeva R, Tepluk N, Belerosova T
**Journal:** Dermatol Reports (2018)
**DOI:** [10.4081/dr.2018.7696](https://doi.org/10.4081/dr.2018.7696)

## Content

1. Dermatol Reports. 2018 Oct 1;10(2):7696. doi: 10.4081/dr.2018.7696.
eCollection  2018 Oct 1.

Lupus pernio (Besnier-Tenneson syndrome): A rare form of sarcoidosis.

Hubail A(1), Belkharoeva R(1), Tepluk N(1), Belerosova T(1).

Author information:
(1)Hospital of Skin and Venereal Disease Hospital named after VA Rakhmanov. I.M.
Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russia.

Lupus pernio (LP) is a chronic non-life threatining type of cutaneous
sarcoidosis that can be related to chronic fibrotic sarcoidosis,
hyperglobulinemia and hypercalcemia. The aim of this case report is to evaluate
the clinical and demographic features of cutaneous sarcoidosis mainly presenting
with a rare manifestation of LP. In this paper we report a case of systemic
sarcoidosis presenting with LP and a review of the available literature. LP is a
rare presentation with infiltrated erythematoviolaceous plaques affecting the
nose. We address the main management approach, and possible association with an
underlying systemic sarcoidosis. LP is a rare but chronic manifestation of
systemic sarcoidosis that needs to be treated in order to prevent cosmetic
defects and psychological effects. It is important to recognize such a condition
early in order to avoid a delay in treatment and worsening of the condition,
both physically and psychologically. Further research regarding the diagnostic
approach and management is required to understand this condition thoroughly.

DOI: 10.4081/dr.2018.7696
PMCID: PMC6250080
PMID: 30555667

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: the authors declare no
potential conflict of interest.
