---
reference_id: "PMID:34028001"
title: Serum or plasma ferritin concentration as an index of iron deficiency and overload.
authors:
- Garcia-Casal MN
- Pasricha SR
- Martinez RX
- Lopez-Perez L
- Peña-Rosas JP
journal: Cochrane Database Syst Rev
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD011817.pub2
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Anemia, Iron-Deficiency/blood, diagnosis"
- Bias
- Biomarkers/blood
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Ferritins/blood
- Humans
- Infant
- "Iron Overload/blood, diagnosis"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Pregnancy
- Pregnant People
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serum or plasma ferritin concentration as an index of iron deficiency and overload.
**Authors:** Garcia-Casal MN, Pasricha SR, Martinez RX, Lopez-Perez L, Peña-Rosas JP
**Journal:** Cochrane Database Syst Rev (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/14651858.CD011817.pub2](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD011817.pub2)

## Content

1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2021 May 24;5(5):CD011817. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD011817.pub2.

Serum or plasma ferritin concentration as an index of iron deficiency and 
overload.

Garcia-Casal MN(1), Pasricha SR(2), Martinez RX(3), Lopez-Perez L(4), Peña-Rosas 
JP(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Safety, World Health Organization, Geneva , 
Switzerland.
(2)Division: Population Health and Immunity, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of 
Medical Research, Parkville, Melbourne, Australia.
(3)WHO Consultant, Hamburg, Germany.
(4)WHO Consultant, Tlalnepantla, Mexico.
(5)Department of Nutrition and Food Safety, World Health Organization, Geneva, 
Switzerland.

Update of
    doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD011817.

BACKGROUND: Reference standard indices of iron deficiency and iron overload are 
generally invasive, expensive, and can be unpleasant or occasionally risky. 
Ferritin is an iron storage protein and its concentration in the plasma or serum 
reflects iron stores; low ferritin indicates iron deficiency, while elevated 
ferritin reflects risk of iron overload. However, ferritin is also an 
acute-phase protein and its levels are elevated in inflammation and infection. 
The use of ferritin as a diagnostic test of iron deficiency and overload is a 
common clinical practice.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the diagnostic accuracy of ferritin concentrations 
(serum or plasma) for detecting iron deficiency and risk of iron overload in 
primary and secondary iron-loading syndromes.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the following databases (10 June 2020): DARE 
(Cochrane Library) Issue 2 of 4 2015, HTA (Cochrane Library) Issue 4 of 4 2016, 
CENTRAL (Cochrane Library) Issue 6 of 12 2020, MEDLINE (OVID) 1946 to 9 June 
2020, Embase (OVID) 1947 to week 23 2020, CINAHL (Ebsco) 1982 to June 2020, Web 
of Science (ISI) SCI, SSCI, CPCI-exp & CPCI-SSH to June 2020, POPLINE 16/8/18, 
Open Grey (10/6/20), TRoPHI (10/6/20), Bibliomap (10/6/20), IBECS (10/6/20), 
SCIELO (10/6/20), Global Index Medicus (10/6/20) AIM, IMSEAR, WPRIM, IMEMR, 
LILACS (10/6/20), PAHO (10/6/20), WHOLIS 10/6/20, IndMED (16/8/18) and Native 
Health Research Database (10/6/20). We also searched two trials registers and 
contacted relevant organisations for unpublished studies.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included all study designs seeking to evaluate serum or 
plasma ferritin concentrations measured by any current or previously available 
quantitative assay as an index of iron status in individuals of any age, sex, 
clinical and physiological status from any country.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We followed standard Cochrane methods. We designed 
the data extraction form to record results for ferritin concentration as the 
index test, and bone marrow iron content for iron deficiency and liver iron 
content for iron overload as the reference standards. Two other authors further 
extracted and validated the number of true positive, true negative, false 
positive, false negative cases, and extracted or derived the sensitivity, 
specificity, positive and negative predictive values for each threshold 
presented for iron deficiency and iron overload in included studies. We assessed 
risk of bias and applicability using the Quality Assessment of Diagnostic 
Accuracy Studies (QUADAS)-2 tool. We used GRADE assessment to enable the quality 
of evidence and hence strength of evidence for our conclusions.
MAIN RESULTS: Our search was conducted initially in 2014 and updated in 2017, 
2018 and 2020 (10 June). We identified 21,217 records and screened 14,244 
records after duplicates were removed. We assessed 316 records in full text. We 
excluded 190 studies (193 records) with reasons and included 108 studies (111 
records) in the qualitative and quantitative analysis. There were 11 studies (12 
records) that we screened from the last search update and appeared eligible for 
a future analysis. We decided to enter these as awaiting classification. We 
stratified the analysis first by participant clinical status: apparently healthy 
and non-healthy populations. We then stratified by age and pregnancy status as: 
infants and children, adolescents, pregnant women, and adults. Iron deficiency 
We included 72 studies (75 records) involving 6059 participants. Apparently 
healthy populations Five studies screened for iron deficiency in people without 
apparent illness. In the general adult population, three studies reported 
sensitivities of 63% to 100% at the optimum cutoff for ferritin, with 
corresponding specificities of 92% to 98%, but the ferritin cutoffs varied 
between studies. One study in healthy children reported a sensitivity of 74% and 
a specificity of 77%. One study in pregnant women reported a sensitivity of 88% 
and a specificity of 100%. Overall confidence in these estimates was very low 
because of potential bias, indirectness, and sparse and heterogenous evidence. 
No studies screened for iron overload in apparently healthy people. People 
presenting for medical care There were 63 studies among adults presenting for 
medical care (5042 participants). For a sample of 1000 subjects with a 35% 
prevalence of iron deficiency (of the included studies in this category) and 
supposing a 85% specificity, there would be 315 iron-deficient subjects 
correctly classified as having iron deficiency and 35 iron-deficient subjects 
incorrectly classified as not having iron deficiency, leading to a 90% 
sensitivity. Thresholds proposed by the authors of the included studies ranged 
between 12 to 200 µg/L. The estimated diagnostic odds ratio was 50. Among 
non-healthy adults using a fixed threshold of 30 μg/L (nine studies, 512 
participants, low-certainty evidence), the pooled estimate for sensitivity was 
79% with a 95% confidence interval of (58%, 91%) and specificity of 98%, with a 
95% confidence interval of (91%, 100%). The estimated diagnostic odds ratio was 
140, a relatively highly informative test. Iron overload We included 36 studies 
(36 records) involving 1927 participants. All studies concerned non-healthy 
populations. There were no studies targeting either infants, children, or 
pregnant women. Among all populations (one threshold for males and females; 36 
studies, 1927 participants, very low-certainty evidence): for a sample of 1000 
subjects with a 42% prevalence of iron overload (of the included studies in this 
category) and supposing a 65% specificity, there would be 332 iron-overloaded 
subjects correctly classified as having iron overload and 85 iron-overloaded 
subjects incorrectly classified as not having iron overload, leading to a 80% 
sensitivity. The estimated diagnostic odds ratio was 8.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: At a threshold of 30 micrograms/L, there is low-certainty 
evidence that blood ferritin concentration is reasonably sensitive and a very 
specific test for iron deficiency in people presenting for medical care. There 
is very low certainty that high concentrations of ferritin provide a sensitive 
test for iron overload in people where this condition is suspected. There is 
insufficient evidence to know whether ferritin concentration performs similarly 
when screening asymptomatic people for iron deficiency or overload.

Copyright © 2021 The Cochrane Collaboration. Published by John Wiley & Sons, 
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD011817.pub2
PMCID: PMC8142307
PMID: 34028001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclaimer: Juan Pablo Peña‐Rosas and Maria 
Nieves Garcia‐Casal are full‐time staff members of the World Health 
Organization. The authors alone are responsible for the views expressed in this 
publication and they do not necessarily represent the decisions, policy or views 
of the World Health Organization. WHO gratefully acknowledges the financial 
contribution of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Nutrition International, 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the US Agency for 
International Development (USAID), towards the work in the area of biomarkers of 
nutrition. Sant‐Rayn Pasricha has received an unrestricted research grant as a 
co‐investigator from Vifor Pharma Ltd and has served as a consultant to the 
Australian Red Cross Blood Service. Dr Pasricha received partial financial 
support from the Department of Nutrition and Food Safety, World Health 
Organization for this work. Ricardo X. Martinez is a consultant at WHO. He 
received partial financial support from the Department of Nutrition and Food 
Safety, World Health Organization for this work. Lucero D. Lopez‐Perez is an 
independent consultant with no known conflicts of interest. She received partial 
financial support from the Department of Nutrition and Food Safety, World Health 
Organization for this work.