---
reference_id: "PMID:29875417"
title: SETBP1 induces transcription of a network of development genes by acting as an epigenetic hub.
authors:
- Piazza R
- Magistroni V
- Redaelli S
- Mauri M
- Massimino L
- Sessa A
- Peronaci M
- Lalowski M
- Soliymani R
- Mezzatesta C
- Pirola A
- Banfi F
- Rubio A
- Rea D
- Stagno F
- Usala E
- Martino B
- Campiotti L
- Merli M
- Passamonti F
- Onida F
- Morotti A
- Pavesi F
- Bregni M
- Broccoli V
- Baumann M
- Gambacorti-Passerini C
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-04462-8
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Animals
- "Brain/embryology, metabolism"
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Gene Ontology
- HEK293 Cells
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Humans
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- "Leukemia/genetics, pathology"
- Mice
- Mutation
- "Nails, Malformed/genetics"
- Neurogenesis/genetics
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic/genetics"
- Protein Binding
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SETBP1 induces transcription of a network of development genes by acting as an epigenetic hub.
**Authors:** Piazza R, Magistroni V, Redaelli S, Mauri M, Massimino L, Sessa A, Peronaci M, Lalowski M, Soliymani R, Mezzatesta C, Pirola A, Banfi F, Rubio A, Rea D, Stagno F, Usala E, Martino B, Campiotti L, Merli M, Passamonti F, Onida F, Morotti A, Pavesi F, Bregni M, Broccoli V, Baumann M, Gambacorti-Passerini C
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-018-04462-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-04462-8)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2018 Jun 6;9(1):2192. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-04462-8.

SETBP1 induces transcription of a network of development genes by acting as an 
epigenetic hub.

Piazza R(1), Magistroni V(2), Redaelli S(2), Mauri M(2), Massimino L(2), Sessa 
A(3), Peronaci M(2), Lalowski M(4), Soliymani R(4), Mezzatesta C(2), Pirola 
A(2), Banfi F(3), Rubio A(3), Rea D(5), Stagno F(6), Usala E(7), Martino B(8), 
Campiotti L(9), Merli M(10), Passamonti F(11), Onida F(12), Morotti A(13), 
Pavesi F(14), Bregni M(15), Broccoli V(3)(16), Baumann M(4), 
Gambacorti-Passerini C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Milano-Bicocca and San 
Gerardo hospital, 20900, Monza, Italy. rocco.piazza@unimib.it.
(2)Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Milano-Bicocca and San 
Gerardo hospital, 20900, Monza, Italy.
(3)Stem Cell and Neurogenesis Unit, Division of Neuroscience, San Raffaele 
Scientific Institute, 20132, Milan, Italy.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Developmental Biology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Meilahti Clinical Proteomics Core Facility, University of Helsinki, 00290, 
Helsinki, Finland.
(5)Service d'Hématologie Adulte, Hôpital Saint-Louis, 75010, Paris, France.
(6)Chair and Hematology Section, Ferrarotto Hospital, AOU Policlinico, 95123, 
Catania, Italy.
(7)Azienda Brotzu U.O. Ematologia e CTMO, Ospedale Businco, 09121, Cagliari, 
Italy.
(8)UO Ematologia Azienda Ospedaliera "BIANCHI MELACRINO MORELLI", 89124, Reggio 
Calabria, Italy.
(9)Dipartimento Medicina Clinica e Sperimentale, Università Insubria, 21100, 
Varese, Italy.
(10)Division of Hematology, University Hospital Ospedale di Circolo e Fondazione 
Macchi, 21100, Varese, Italy.
(11)Hematology, Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Sperimentale, University of 
Varese, 21100, Varese, Italy.
(12)BMT Center - Oncohematology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale 
Maggiore Policlinico, University of Milan, 20122, Milan, Italy.
(13)Department of Clinical and Biological Sciences, University of Torino, 10043, 
Orbassano (Torino), Italy.
(14)Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation Unit, IRCCS San Raffaele 
Scientific Institute, 20132, Milan, Italy.
(15)Oncology Unit, ASST Valle Olona, Ospedale di Circolo di Busto Arsizio, 
21052, Busto Arsizio, Italy.
(16)CNR Institute of Neuroscience, 20129, Milan, Italy.

SETBP1 variants occur as somatic mutations in several hematological malignancies 
such as atypical chronic myeloid leukemia and as de novo germline mutations in 
the Schinzel-Giedion syndrome. Here we show that SETBP1 binds to gDNA in AT-rich 
promoter regions, causing activation of gene expression through recruitment of a 
HCF1/KMT2A/PHF8 epigenetic complex. Deletion of two AT-hooks abrogates the 
binding of SETBP1 to gDNA and impairs target gene upregulation. Genes controlled 
by SETBP1 such as MECOM are significantly upregulated in leukemias containing 
SETBP1 mutations. Gene ontology analysis of deregulated SETBP1 target genes 
indicates that they are also key controllers of visceral organ development and 
brain morphogenesis. In line with these findings, in utero brain electroporation 
of mutated SETBP1 causes impairment of mouse neurogenesis with a profound delay 
in neuronal migration. In summary, this work unveils a SETBP1 function that 
directly affects gene transcription and clarifies the mechanism operating in 
myeloid malignancies and in the Schinzel-Giedion syndrome caused by SETBP1 
mutations.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-04462-8
PMCID: PMC5989213
PMID: 29875417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.