---
reference_id: "PMID:18479477"
title: Topical retinoids in acne--an evidence-based overview.
authors:
- Thielitz A
- Abdel-Naser MB
- Fluhr JW
- Zouboulis CC
- Gollnick H
journal: J Dtsch Dermatol Ges
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1111/j.1610-0387.2008.06741.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Topical retinoids in acne--an evidence-based overview.
**Authors:** Thielitz A, Abdel-Naser MB, Fluhr JW, Zouboulis CC, Gollnick H
**Journal:** J Dtsch Dermatol Ges (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1610-0387.2008.06741.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1610-0387.2008.06741.x)

## Content

1. J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2008 Dec;6(12):1023-31. doi: 
10.1111/j.1610-0387.2008.06741.x. Epub 2008 May 13.

Topical retinoids in acne--an evidence-based overview.

[Article in English, German]

Thielitz A(1), Abdel-Naser MB, Fluhr JW, Zouboulis CC, Gollnick H.

Author information:
(1)University Clinic of Dermatology, Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg, 
Germany.

Republished in
    J Dtsch Dermatol Ges. 2010 Mar;8 Suppl 1:S15-23. doi: 
10.1111/j.1610-0387.2008.06741_suppx.x.

Topical retinoids are important tools in the management of acne because they act 
against comedones and microcomedones and have direct anti-inflammatory effects. 
The substances approved for acne treatment comprise tretinoin 
(all-trans-retinoic acid), isotretinoin (13-cis retinoic acid) as well as the 
synthetic third-generation polyaromatic retinoids adapalene and tazarotene, the 
latter being approved for acne treatment in the US only. Retinaldehyde is used 
in cosmetic preparations against acne. All topical retinoids are effective as 
single agents in mild to moderate acne but differ in efficacy and tolerability. 
Tazarotene 0.1% is more effective than tretinoin 0.025% or 0.1% microsphere gel 
or adapalene 0.1% gel or cream (EBM-level 2c). Adapalene 0.1% is equally 
effective to tretinoin 0.025% or tretinoin microsphere 0.1% gel or tretinoin 
0.05% cream or isotretinoin 0.05% gel (EBM-level 2c). Adapalene 0.1% gel is 
significantly better tolerated than tazarotene 0.1% gel, tretinoin 0.025% and 
tretinoin 0.05% gel, tretinoin 0.05% cream, tretinoin microsphere 0.1% gel or 
isotretinoin 0.05% gel (EBM-level 2c). The safety profile of topical retinoids 
differs from their systemic counterparts and is related mainly to local adverse 
effects, such as erythema, dryness, itching and stinging. The currently 
available evidence justifies the use of topical retinoids in most types of acne 
and during maintenance treatment.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1610-0387.2008.06741.x
PMID: 18479477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]