---
reference_id: "PMID:19557318"
title: "Predictors of pregnancy outcome in antiphospholipid syndrome: a review."
authors:
- De Carolis S
- Botta A
- Santucci S
- Garofalo S
- Martino C
- Perrelli A
- Salvi S
- Ferrazzani S
- Caforio L
- Scambia G
journal: Clin Rev Allergy Immunol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1007/s12016-009-8144-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predictors of pregnancy outcome in antiphospholipid syndrome: a review.
**Authors:** De Carolis S, Botta A, Santucci S, Garofalo S, Martino C, Perrelli A, Salvi S, Ferrazzani S, Caforio L, Scambia G
**Journal:** Clin Rev Allergy Immunol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12016-009-8144-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12016-009-8144-z)

## Content

1. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2010 Apr;38(2-3):116-24. doi: 
10.1007/s12016-009-8144-z.

Predictors of pregnancy outcome in antiphospholipid syndrome: a review.

De Carolis S(1), Botta A, Santucci S, Garofalo S, Martino C, Perrelli A, Salvi 
S, Ferrazzani S, Caforio L, Scambia G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Catholic University of Sacred 
Hearth, Rome, Italy. saradecarolis@libero.it

In pregnant women, antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is associated with an 
increased risk of preeclampsia, fetal intrauterine growth restriction, and other 
complications related to uteroplacental insufficiency. In the last two decades, 
several studies were performed to identify the predictive role of some 
parameters in relation to obstetric outcome in APS patients. Among these, the 
uterine velocimetry Doppler is the most studied. It provides a non-invasive 
method for the study of uteroplacental blood flow, being able to detect a 
condition of impaired placental perfusion, due to the presence of circulating 
antiphospholipid antibodies (aPL). To date, the uterine artery Doppler 
velocimetry resulted to be a useful tool to identify APS pregnancies at higher 
risk of adverse pregnancy outcome. False-positive IgM for toxoplasmosis, others, 
rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes viruses (TORCH) complex is associated to a 
worse pregnancy outcome because it reflects a dysregulation of the immune system 
which may amplify placental autoimmune damage. Moreover low levels of complement 
components are related to an increased incidence of obstetrical complications, 
suggesting that placental deposition of immune complexes and activation of 
complement cascade may contribute to placental failure APS related. The abnormal 
uterine Doppler velocimetry, false-positive TORCH IgM and low levels of 
complement components can be considered prognostic indexes of poor pregnancy 
outcome in APS.

DOI: 10.1007/s12016-009-8144-z
PMID: 19557318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]