---
reference_id: "PMID:36293220"
title: "Diagnostic Odyssey in an Adult Patient with Ophthalmologic Abnormalities and Hearing Loss: Contribution of RNA-Seq to the Diagnosis of a PEX1 Deficiency."
authors:
- Muñoz-Pujol G
- Alforja-Castiella S
- Casaroli-Marano R
- Morales-Romero B
- García-Villoria J
- Yépez VA
- Gagneur J
- Gusic M
- Prokisch H
- Tort F
- Ribes A
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms232012367
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic Odyssey in an Adult Patient with Ophthalmologic Abnormalities and Hearing Loss: Contribution of RNA-Seq to the Diagnosis of a PEX1 Deficiency.
**Authors:** Muñoz-Pujol G, Alforja-Castiella S, Casaroli-Marano R, Morales-Romero B, García-Villoria J, Yépez VA, Gagneur J, Gusic M, Prokisch H, Tort F, Ribes A
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms232012367](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms232012367)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Oct 15;23(20):12367. doi: 10.3390/ijms232012367.

Diagnostic Odyssey in an Adult Patient with Ophthalmologic Abnormalities and 
Hearing Loss: Contribution of RNA-Seq to the Diagnosis of a PEX1 Deficiency.

Muñoz-Pujol G(1), Alforja-Castiella S(2), Casaroli-Marano R(2), Morales-Romero 
B(1), García-Villoria J(1), Yépez VA(3)(4), Gagneur J(3)(4), Gusic M(3)(5), 
Prokisch H(3)(5), Tort F(1), Ribes A(1).

Author information:
(1)Secció d'Errors Congènits del Metabolisme-IBC, Servei de Bioquímica i 
Genètica Molecular, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, IDIBAPS, CIBERER, 08028 
Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Department of Surgery, School of Medicine and Health Science, Universitat de 
Barcelona, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, 08028 Barcelon, Spain.
(3)Institute of Human Genetics, School of Medicine, Technical University of 
Munich, 81675 Munich, Germany.
(4)Department of Informatics, Technical University of Munich, 85748 Garching, 
Germany.
(5)Institute of Neurogenomics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, 
Germany.

Peroxisomal biogenesis disorders (PBDs) are a heterogeneous group of genetic 
diseases. Multiple peroxisomal pathways are impaired, and very long chain fatty 
acids (VLCFA) are the first line biomarkers for the diagnosis. The clinical 
presentation of PBDs may range from severe, lethal multisystemic disorders to 
milder, late-onset disease. The vast majority of PBDs belong to Zellweger 
Spectrum Disordes (ZSDs) and represents a continuum of overlapping clinical 
symptoms, with Zellweger syndrome being the most severe and Heimler syndrome the 
less severe disease. Mild clinical conditions frequently present normal or 
slight biochemical alterations, making the diagnosis of these patients 
challenging. In the present study we used a combined WES and RNA-seq strategy to 
diagnose a patient presenting with retinal dystrophy as the main clinical 
symptom. Results showed the patient was compound heterozygous for mutations in 
PEX1. VLCFA were normal, but retrospective analysis of lysosphosphatidylcholines 
(LPC) containing C22:0-C26:0 species was altered. This simple test could avoid 
the diagnostic odyssey of patients with mild phenotype, such as the individual 
described here, who was diagnosed very late in adult life. We provide functional 
data in cell line models that may explain the mild phenotype of the patient by 
demonstrating the hypomorphic nature of a deep intronic variant altering PEX1 
mRNA processing.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms232012367
PMCID: PMC9604267
PMID: 36293220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.