---
reference_id: "PMID:35778310"
title: Characterization of silver diamine fluoride cytotoxicity using microfluidic tooth-on-a-chip and gingival equivalents.
authors:
- Hu S
- Muniraj G
- Mishra A
- Hong K
- Lum JL
- Hong CHL
- Rosa V
- Sriram G
journal: Dent Mater
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.dental.2022.06.025
keywords:
- Dental Caries
- Dentin
- "Fluorides, Topical"
- Gingiva
- Humans
- Lab-On-A-Chip Devices
- Microfluidics
- Quaternary Ammonium Compounds/toxicity
- Silver Compounds
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of silver diamine fluoride cytotoxicity using microfluidic tooth-on-a-chip and gingival equivalents.
**Authors:** Hu S, Muniraj G, Mishra A, Hong K, Lum JL, Hong CHL, Rosa V, Sriram G
**Journal:** Dent Mater (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.dental.2022.06.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dental.2022.06.025)

## Content

1. Dent Mater. 2022 Aug;38(8):1385-1394. doi: 10.1016/j.dental.2022.06.025. Epub 
2022 Jun 29.

Characterization of silver diamine fluoride cytotoxicity using microfluidic 
tooth-on-a-chip and gingival equivalents.

Hu S(1), Muniraj G(2), Mishra A(2), Hong K(3), Lum JL(3), Hong CHL(2), Rosa 
V(4), Sriram G(5).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Dentistry, National University of Singapore, Singapore. Electronic 
address: denhus@nus.edu.sg.
(2)Faculty of Dentistry, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
(3)National University Centre for Oral Health Singapore, National University 
Hospital, Singapore.
(4)Faculty of Dentistry, National University of Singapore, Singapore; ORCHIDS: 
Oral Care Health Innovations and Designs Singapore, National University of 
Singapore, Singapore. Electronic address: vini@nus.edu.sg.
(5)Faculty of Dentistry, National University of Singapore, Singapore; ORCHIDS: 
Oral Care Health Innovations and Designs Singapore, National University of 
Singapore, Singapore. Electronic address: sriram@nus.edu.sg.

OBJECTIVE: This study aims to characterize the cytotoxicity potential of silver 
diamine fluoride (SDF) on dental pulp stem cells (DPSC) and gingival 
equivalents.
METHODS: DPSC cultured on 96-well plates was exposed directly to SDF 
(0.0001-0.01%) and cell viability (IC50) quantified. Effect of SDF on DPSC 
viability under flow (with dentin barrier) conditions was evaluated using a 
custom-designed microfluidic "tooth-on-a-chip". Permeability of dentin discs 
(0.5-1.5 mm thickness) was evaluated using lucifer yellow permeation assay. 
Dentin discs were treated with 38% SDF (up to 3 h), and cell viability 
(live/dead assay) of the DPSC cultured in the inlet (unexposed) and outlet 
(exposed) regions of the pulp channel was evaluated. To assess the mucosal 
corrosion potential, gingival equivalents were treated with 38% SDF for 3 or 
60 min (OECD test guideline 431) and characterized by MTT assay and 
histomorphometric analysis.
RESULTS: DPSC exposed directly to SDF showed a dose-dependent reduction in cell 
viability (IC50: 0.001%). Inlet channels (internal control) of the 
tooth-on-a-chip exposed to PBS and SDF-exposed dentin discs showed> 85% DPSC 
viability. In contrast, the outlet channels of SDF-exposed dentin discs showed a 
decreased viability of< 31% and 0% (1.5 and ≤1.0 mm thick dentin disc, 
respectively) (p < 0.01). The gingiva equivalents treated with SDF for 3 and 
60 min demonstrated decreased epithelial integrity, loss of intercellular 
cohesion and corneal layer detachment with significant reduction in intact 
epithelial thickness (p < 0.05).
SIGNIFICANCE: SDF penetrated the dentin (≤1 mm thick) inducing significant death 
of the pulp cells. SDF also disrupted gingival epithelial integrity resulting in 
mucosal corrosion.

Copyright © 2022 The Academy of Dental Materials. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.dental.2022.06.025
PMID: 35778310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]