---
reference_id: "PMID:16218467"
title: Cardiac involvement in systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Doria A
- Iaccarino L
- Sarzi-Puttini P
- Atzeni F
- Turriel M
- Petri M
journal: Lupus
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1191/0961203305lu2200oa
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac involvement in systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Doria A, Iaccarino L, Sarzi-Puttini P, Atzeni F, Turriel M, Petri M
**Journal:** Lupus (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1191/0961203305lu2200oa](https://doi.org/10.1191/0961203305lu2200oa)

## Content

1. Lupus. 2005;14(9):683-6. doi: 10.1191/0961203305lu2200oa.

Cardiac involvement in systemic lupus erythematosus.

Doria A(1), Iaccarino L, Sarzi-Puttini P, Atzeni F, Turriel M, Petri M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Rheumatology, University of Padua, Padua, Italy. adoria@unipd.it

Pericarditis is the most common cardiac abnormality in systemic lupus 
erythematosus (SLE) patients, but lesions of the valves, myocardium and coronary 
vessels may all occur. In the past, cardiac manifestations were severe and life 
threatening, often leading to death. Therefore, they were frequently found in 
post-mortem examinations. Nowadays cardiac manifestations are often mild and 
asymptomatic. However, they can be frequently recognized by echocardiography and 
other noninvasive tests. Echocardiography is a sensitive and specific technique 
in detecting cardiac abnormalities, particularly mild pericarditis, valvular 
lesions and myocardial dysfunction. Therefore, echocardiography should be 
performed periodically in SLE patients. Vascular occlusion, including coronary 
arteries, may develop due to vasculitis, premature atherosclerosis or 
antiphospholipid antibodies associated with SLE. Premature atherosclerosis is 
the most frequent cause of coronary artery disease (CAD) in SLE patients. 
Efforts should be made to control traditional risk factors as well as all other 
factors which could contribute to atherosclerotic plaque development.

DOI: 10.1191/0961203305lu2200oa
PMID: 16218467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]