---
reference_id: "PMID:11062477"
title: Autosomal dominant hypophosphataemic rickets is associated with mutations in FGF23.
authors:
- ADHR Consortium
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1038/81664
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal dominant hypophosphataemic rickets is associated with mutations in FGF23.
**Authors:** ADHR Consortium
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/81664](https://doi.org/10.1038/81664)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2000 Nov;26(3):345-8. doi: 10.1038/81664.

Autosomal dominant hypophosphataemic rickets is associated with mutations in 
FGF23.

ADHR Consortium.

Proper serum phosphate concentrations are maintained by a complex and poorly 
understood process. Identification of genes responsible for inherited disorders 
involving disturbances in phosphate homeostasis may provide insight into the 
pathways that regulate phosphate balance. Several hereditary disorders of 
isolated phosphate wasting have been described, including X-linked 
hypophosphataemic rickets (XLH), hypophosphataemic bone disease (HBD), 
hereditary hypophosphataemic rickets with hypercalciuria (HHRH) and autosomal 
dominant hypophosphataemic rickets (ADHR). Inactivating mutations of the gene 
PHEX, encoding a member of the neutral endopeptidase family of proteins, are 
responsible for XLH (refs 6,7). ADHR (MIM 193100) is characterized by low serum 
phosphorus concentrations, rickets, osteomalacia, lower extremity deformities, 
short stature, bone pain and dental abscesses. Here we describe a positional 
cloning approach used to identify the ADHR gene which included the annotation of 
37 genes within 4 Mb of genomic sequence. We identified missense mutations in a 
gene encoding a new member of the fibroblast growth factor (FGF) family, FGF23. 
These mutations in patients with ADHR represent the first mutations found in a 
human FGF gene.

DOI: 10.1038/81664
PMID: 11062477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]