---
reference_id: "PMID:40368782"
title: Arrhythmias in Cronkhite-Canada Syndrome.
authors:
- Deguchi R
- Ueda T
- Sano M
- Sato H
- Teramura E
- Imai J
- Fujisawa M
- Tsuruya K
- Arase Y
- Kagawa T
journal: Intern Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.2169/internalmedicine.4834-24
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arrhythmias in Cronkhite-Canada Syndrome.
**Authors:** Deguchi R, Ueda T, Sano M, Sato H, Teramura E, Imai J, Fujisawa M, Tsuruya K, Arase Y, Kagawa T
**Journal:** Intern Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.2169/internalmedicine.4834-24](https://doi.org/10.2169/internalmedicine.4834-24)

## Content

1. Intern Med. 2025 Nov 1;64(21):3117-3121. doi:
10.2169/internalmedicine.4834-24.  Epub 2025 May 15.

Arrhythmias in Cronkhite-Canada Syndrome.

Deguchi R(1), Ueda T(1), Sano M(1), Sato H(1), Teramura E(1), Imai J(1), 
Fujisawa M(1), Tsuruya K(1), Arase Y(1), Kagawa T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Tokai University School of Medicine, Japan.

A 69-year-old man underwent upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopic 
examinations for a detailed evaluation of diarrhea that had persisted for 
several months, which revealed multiple polyposis in the stomach, duodenum, 
colon, and terminal ileum. The histopathological findings also led to a 
diagnosis of Cronkhite-Canada syndrome (CCS). On admission, the patient had 
hypoalbuminemia and electrolyte abnormalities, including hypokalemia, and 
developed paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (Paf), although there were no apparent 
organic lesions in the heart. The patient's sinus rhythm was restored by 
electrical cardioversion, steroid therapy for CCS improved diarrhea symptoms and 
endoscopic findings, and the electrocardiogram findings were normal.

DOI: 10.2169/internalmedicine.4834-24
PMCID: PMC12659947
PMID: 40368782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors state that they have no Conflict of 
Interest (COI).