---
reference_id: "PMID:41089414"
title: "Clinical Manifestations and Neural Basis of Semantic Dementia: Converging Evidences From Brain Imaging Studies."
authors:
- Chen X
- Chen Y
- Peng G
- Liu X
journal: Clin Interv Aging
year: '2025'
doi: 10.2147/CIA.S520351
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Manifestations and Neural Basis of Semantic Dementia: Converging Evidences From Brain Imaging Studies.
**Authors:** Chen X, Chen Y, Peng G, Liu X
**Journal:** Clin Interv Aging (2025)
**DOI:** [10.2147/CIA.S520351](https://doi.org/10.2147/CIA.S520351)

## Content

1. Clin Interv Aging. 2025 Oct 9;20:1715-1728. doi: 10.2147/CIA.S520351. 
eCollection 2025.

Clinical Manifestations and Neural Basis of Semantic Dementia: Converging 
Evidences From Brain Imaging Studies.

Chen X(1), Chen Y(1), Peng G(1), Liu X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, People's Republic of China.

Semantic dementia (SD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder primarily 
characterized by core linguistic deficits, notably impaired confrontation naming 
and single-word comprehension. Associated features include surface dyslexia, 
prosopagnosia, relatively preserved speech production, and emotional or 
behavioral abnormalities. Neuroimaging reveals initial asymmetrical atrophy of 
the anterior temporal pole, with subsequent progression posteriorly and 
contralaterally. Early detection is challenging due to initial presentation 
often manifesting as mild word-finding difficulties, furthermore, comorbid 
behavioral-emotional symptoms and distinct clinical profiles associated with 
right- versus left-sided atrophy complicate diagnosis. Therefore, this paper 
comprehensively delineates the principal clinical features of SD, encompassing 
language deficits, emotional impairment, behavioral disturbances, and other 
domains. It also reviews structural and functional imaging findings and 
investigates the relationship between clinical manifestations and patterns of 
brain injury. To advance understanding of SD's clinical manifestation, the paper 
introduces the controlled semantic and social-semantic frameworks.

© 2025 Chen et al.

DOI: 10.2147/CIA.S520351
PMCID: PMC12517184
PMID: 41089414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.