---
reference_id: "PMID:25441438"
title: "GFR decline as an alternative end point to kidney failure in clinical trials: a meta-analysis of treatment effects from 37 randomized trials."
authors:
- Inker LA
- Lambers Heerspink HJ
- Mondal H
- Schmid CH
- Tighiouart H
- Noubary F
- Coresh J
- Greene T
- Levey AS
journal: Am J Kidney Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2014.08.017
keywords:
- "Endpoint Determination/methods, standards"
- Glomerular Filtration Rate/physiology
- Humans
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
- "Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic/methods, standards"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GFR decline as an alternative end point to kidney failure in clinical trials: a meta-analysis of treatment effects from 37 randomized trials.
**Authors:** Inker LA, Lambers Heerspink HJ, Mondal H, Schmid CH, Tighiouart H, Noubary F, Coresh J, Greene T, Levey AS
**Journal:** Am J Kidney Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1053/j.ajkd.2014.08.017](https://doi.org/10.1053/j.ajkd.2014.08.017)

## Content

1. Am J Kidney Dis. 2014 Dec;64(6):848-59. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2014.08.017. Epub 
2014 Oct 16.

GFR decline as an alternative end point to kidney failure in clinical trials: a 
meta-analysis of treatment effects from 37 randomized trials.

Inker LA(1), Lambers Heerspink HJ(2), Mondal H(3), Schmid CH(4), Tighiouart 
H(3), Noubary F(3), Coresh J(5), Greene T(6), Levey AS(7).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA. Electronic address: 
linker@tuftsmedicalcenter.org.
(2)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Pharmacology, University of Groningen, 
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(3)The Institute for Clinical Research and Health Policy Studies, Tufts Medical 
Center and Tufts Clinical and Translational Science Institute, Tufts University, 
Boston, MA.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, Brown University School of Public Health, 
Providence, RI.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, MD.
(6)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT.
(7)Division of Nephrology, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA.

Comment in
    Am J Kidney Dis. 2014 Dec;64(6):841-4. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2014.10.002.

BACKGROUND: There is increased interest in using alternative end points for 
trials of kidney disease progression. The currently established end points of 
end-stage renal disease and doubling of serum creatinine level, equivalent to a 
57% decline in estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), are late events in 
chronic kidney disease (CKD), requiring large clinical trials with long 
follow-up. As part of a comprehensive evaluation of lesser declines in eGFR as 
alternative end points, we describe the consistency of treatment effects of 
intervention on the alternative and established end points in past trials.
STUDY DESIGN: Diagnostic test study.
SETTING & POPULATION: 9,488 participants from 37 randomized controlled trials of 
CKD progression across 5 intervention types.
INDEX TEST: Alternative end points including percentage change in eGFR from 
baseline (20%, 30%, 40%, and 57%) throughout study duration and to 12, 18, and 
24 months. eGFR change confirmed versus nonconfirmed at the next visit.
REFERENCE TEST: The historically established end point of time to composite of 
treated kidney failure (end-stage renal disease), untreated kidney failure 
(GFR<15mL/min/1.73m(2)), or doubling of serum creatinine level throughout study 
duration.
RESULTS: Over a median of 3.62 years' follow-up, there were 3,070 established 
end points. Compared to the established end point, the number of alternative end 
points was greater for smaller versus larger declines in eGFR and longer versus 
shorter follow-up intervals. There was a general trend toward attenuation of the 
treatment effect with end points defined by a lesser eGFR decline, with greater 
attenuation with nonconfirmed end points, except for the low-protein-diet 
intervention, for which a stronger treatment effect was observed. The ratio (95% 
credible interval) of the HR for the alternative to established end point for 
the 5 intervention types ranged from 0.91 (0.64-1.43) to 1.12 (0.89-1.40) for 
40% decline and from 0.88 (0.63-1.39) to 1.15 (0.88-1.54) for 30% decline for 
the overall study duration, indicating consistency of treatment effects.
LIMITATIONS: Limited variety of interventions tested and low statistical power 
for many CKD clinical trials.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide some support for the use of lesser eGFR 
declines as a surrogate end point, with stronger support for the 40% than 30% 
decline.

Copyright © 2014 National Kidney Foundation, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2014.08.017
PMID: 25441438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]