---
reference_id: "PMID:29189513"
title: Successful Nonmyeloablative Allogeneic Stem Cell Transplant in a Child With Emberger Syndrome and GATA2 Mutation.
authors:
- Rastogi N
- Abraham RS
- Chadha R
- Thakkar D
- Kohli S
- Nivargi S
- Prakash Yadav S
journal: J Pediatr Hematol Oncol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1097/MPH.0000000000000995
keywords:
- Allografts
- "Antilymphocyte Serum/administration & dosage"
- Child
- "Cyclophosphamide/administration & dosage"
- Female
- "GATA2 Deficiency/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- GATA2 Transcription Factor/genetics
- "Graft vs Host Disease/genetics, prevention & control"
- Humans
- Mutation
- "Mycophenolic Acid/administration & dosage"
- Peripheral Blood Stem Cell Transplantation
- "Skin Diseases/genetics, prevention & control"
- "Tacrolimus/administration & dosage"
- Transplantation Conditioning
- "Vidarabine/administration & dosage, analogs & derivatives"
- Whole-Body Irradiation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Successful Nonmyeloablative Allogeneic Stem Cell Transplant in a Child With Emberger Syndrome and GATA2 Mutation.
**Authors:** Rastogi N, Abraham RS, Chadha R, Thakkar D, Kohli S, Nivargi S, Prakash Yadav S
**Journal:** J Pediatr Hematol Oncol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MPH.0000000000000995](https://doi.org/10.1097/MPH.0000000000000995)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2018 Aug;40(6):e383-e388. doi: 
10.1097/MPH.0000000000000995.

Successful Nonmyeloablative Allogeneic Stem Cell Transplant in a Child With 
Emberger Syndrome and GATA2 Mutation.

Rastogi N(1), Abraham RS(2), Chadha R(3), Thakkar D(1), Kohli S(1), Nivargi 
S(1), Prakash Yadav S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Hematology Oncology & Bone Marrow 
Transplant Unit.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(3)Department of Hematopathology, SRL, Fortis Memorial Research Institute, 
Gurgaon, Haryana, India.

Emberger syndrome with underlying guanine-adenine-thymine-adenine 2 (GATA2) 
mutation is a rare disorder and very few successful nonmyeloablative allogeneic 
hematopoietic stem cell transplants (HSCTs) have been reported. We report a case 
of Emberger syndrome with GATA2 mutation in a 9-year-old girl who presented with 
congenital sensorineural deafness, warts, lymphedema, and Myelodysplastic 
syndrome. Her sister had died of a similar illness. She underwent a 
nonmyeloablative matched related donor peripheral blood HSCT with rabbit 
antithymoglobulin (5 mg/kg), fludarabine (160 mg/m), cyclophophamide (29 mg/kg), 
and total body irradiation (2 Gray). Graft versus host disease prophylaxis 
consisted of tacrolimus and mycophenolate moefetil. She had neutrophil 
engraftment on day+15 and fully donor chimerism by day+30. She developed limited 
chronic skin graft versus host disease on tapering off immunosuppression. She is 
disease free on day+475. The review of literature showed a total of 28 patients 
with GATA2 mutation have undergone HSCT mostly nonmyeloablative and overall 
survival is 75%. Nonmyeloablatove HSCT is feasible and safe for the patients 
with GATA2 mutation.

DOI: 10.1097/MPH.0000000000000995
PMID: 29189513 [Indexed for MEDLINE]