---
reference_id: "PMID:38519273"
title: "Brain-first vs. body-first Parkinson's disease: An update on recent evidence."
authors:
- Horsager J
- Borghammer P
journal: Parkinsonism Relat Disord
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2024.106101
keywords:
- Humans
- "Parkinson Disease/pathology, physiopathology, diagnostic imaging"
- alpha-Synuclein/metabolism
- "Brain/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Connectome
- "Enteric Nervous System/pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Brain-first vs. body-first Parkinson's disease: An update on recent evidence.
**Authors:** Horsager J, Borghammer P
**Journal:** Parkinsonism Relat Disord (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.parkreldis.2024.106101](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parkreldis.2024.106101)

## Content

1. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2024 May;122:106101. doi:
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2024.106101. Epub 2024 Mar 15.

Brain-first vs. body-first Parkinson's disease: An update on recent evidence.

Horsager J(1), Borghammer P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine and PET, Aarhus University Hospital, Denmark.
Electronic address: jacobnls@rm.dk.
(2)Department of Nuclear Medicine and PET, Aarhus University Hospital, Denmark;
Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Denmark. Electronic address:
perborgh@rm.dk.

We recently proposed a new disease model of Parkinson's disease - the
a-Synuclein Origin site and Connectome model. The model posits that the initial
pathology starts either in the olfactory bulb or amygdala leading to a
brain-first subtype, or in the enteric nervous system leading to a body-first
subtype. These subtypes should be distinguishable early in the disease course on
a range of imaging, clinical, and neuropathological markers. Here, we review
recent original human studies, which tested the predictions of the model.
Molecular imaging studies were generally in agreement with the model, whereas
structural imaging studies, such as MRI volumetry, showed conflicting findings.
Most large-scale clinical studies were supportive, reporting clustering of
relevant markers of the body-first subtype, including REM-sleep behavior
disorder, constipation, autonomic dysfunction, neuropsychiatric symptoms, and
cognitive impairment. Finally, studies of a-synuclein deposition in antemortem
and postmortem tissues revealed distribution of pathology, which generally
supports the model.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2024.106101
PMID: 38519273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be
considered as potential competing interests:Per Borghammer reports financial
support was provided by Lundbeck Foundation. Jacob Horsager reports financial
support was provided by Lundbeck Foundation. If there are other authors, they
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
