---
reference_id: "PMID:36253931"
title: "Monkeypox treatment: Current evidence and future perspectives."
authors:
- Khani E
- Afsharirad B
- Entezari-Maleki T
journal: J Med Virol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/jmv.28229
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monkeypox treatment: Current evidence and future perspectives.
**Authors:** Khani E, Afsharirad B, Entezari-Maleki T
**Journal:** J Med Virol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmv.28229](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.28229)

## Content

1. J Med Virol. 2023 Jan;95(1):e28229. doi: 10.1002/jmv.28229. Epub 2022 Nov 7.

Monkeypox treatment: Current evidence and future perspectives.

Khani E(1), Afsharirad B(1), Entezari-Maleki T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Tabriz University of 
Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
(2)Cardiovascular Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, 
Tabriz, Iran.

Comment in
    J Med Virol. 2023 May;95(5):e28798. doi: 10.1002/jmv.28798.

As of September 11, 2022, 57 669 reports of monkeypox infection raised global 
concern. Previous vaccinia virus vaccination can protect from monkeypox. 
However, after smallpox eradication, immunization against that was stopped. 
Indeed, therapeutic options following the disease onset are of great value. This 
study aimed to review the available evidence on virology and treatment 
approaches for monkeypox and provide guidance for patient care and future 
studies. Since no randomized clinical trials were ever performed, we reviewed 
monkeypox animal model studies and clinical trials on the safety and 
pharmacokinetics of available medications. Brincidofovir and tecovirimat were 
the most studied medications that got approval for smallpox treatment according 
to the Animal Rule. Due to the conserved virology among Orthopoxviruses, 
available medications might also be effective against monkeypox. However, 
tecovirimat has the strongest evidence to be effective and safe for monkeypox 
treatment, and if there is a choice between the two drugs, tecovirimat has shown 
more promise so far. The risk of resistance should be considered in patients who 
failed to respond to tecovirimat. Hence, the target-based design of novel 
antivirals will enhance the availability and spectrum of effective 
anti-Orthopoxvirus agents.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.28229
PMID: 36253931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]