---
reference_id: "PMID:17360484"
title: Molecular diagnosis of pituitary adenoma predisposition caused by aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein gene mutations.
authors:
- Georgitsi M
- Raitila A
- Karhu A
- Tuppurainen K
- Mäkinen MJ
- Vierimaa O
- Paschke R
- Saeger W
- van der Luijt RB
- Sane T
- Robledo M
- De Menis E
- Weil RJ
- Wasik A
- Zielinski G
- Lucewicz O
- Lubinski J
- Launonen V
- Vahteristo P
- Aaltonen LA
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0700004104
keywords:
- Acromegaly/genetics
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Female
- Founder Effect
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia/genetics
- Mutation
- "Pituitary Neoplasms/ethnology, genetics"
- Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular diagnosis of pituitary adenoma predisposition caused by aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein gene mutations.
**Authors:** Georgitsi M, Raitila A, Karhu A, Tuppurainen K, Mäkinen MJ, Vierimaa O, Paschke R, Saeger W, van der Luijt RB, Sane T, Robledo M, De Menis E, Weil RJ, Wasik A, Zielinski G, Lucewicz O, Lubinski J, Launonen V, Vahteristo P, Aaltonen LA
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0700004104](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0700004104)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Mar 6;104(10):4101-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0700004104. Epub 2007 Feb 28.

Molecular diagnosis of pituitary adenoma predisposition caused by aryl
hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein gene mutations.

Georgitsi M(1), Raitila A, Karhu A, Tuppurainen K, Mäkinen MJ, Vierimaa O,
Paschke R, Saeger W, van der Luijt RB, Sane T, Robledo M, De Menis E, Weil RJ,
Wasik A, Zielinski G, Lucewicz O, Lubinski J, Launonen V, Vahteristo P, Aaltonen
LA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Molecular and Cancer Biology Research
Program, University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 63, 00014 Helsinki, Finland.

Pituitary adenomas are common neoplasms of the anterior pituitary gland.
Germ-line mutations in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein (AIP)
gene cause pituitary adenoma predisposition (PAP), a recent discovery based on
genetic studies in Northern Finland. In this population, a founder mutation
explained a significant proportion of all acromegaly cases. Typically, PAP
patients were of a young age at diagnosis but did not display a strong family
history of pituitary adenomas. To evaluate the role of AIP in pituitary adenoma
susceptibility in other populations and to gain insight into patient selection
for molecular screening of the condition, we investigated the possible
contribution of AIP mutations in pituitary tumorigenesis in patients from Europe
and the United States. A total of 460 patients were investigated by AIP
sequencing: young acromegaly patients, unselected acromegaly patients,
unselected pituitary adenoma patients, and endocrine neoplasia-predisposition
patients who were negative for MEN1 mutations. Nine AIP mutations were
identified. Because many of the patients displayed no family history of
pituitary adenomas, detection of the condition appears challenging. Feasibility
of AIP immunohistochemistry (IHC) as a prescreening tool was tested in 50
adenomas: 12 AIP mutation-positive versus 38 mutation-negative pituitary tumors.
AIP IHC staining levels proved to be a useful predictor of AIP status, with 75%
sensitivity and 95% specificity for germ-line mutations. AIP contributes to PAP
in all studied populations. AIP IHC, followed by genetic counseling and possible
AIP mutation analysis in IHC-negative cases, a procedure similar to the
diagnostics of the Lynch syndrome, appears feasible in identification of PAP.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0700004104
PMCID: PMC1820715
PMID: 17360484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
