---
reference_id: "PMID:38212464"
title: "Long COVID manifests with T cell dysregulation, inflammation and an uncoordinated adaptive immune response to SARS-CoV-2."
authors:
- Yin K
- Peluso MJ
- Luo X
- Thomas R
- Shin MG
- Neidleman J
- Andrew A
- Young KC
- Ma T
- Hoh R
- Anglin K
- Huang B
- Argueta U
- Lopez M
- Valdivieso D
- Asare K
- Deveau TM
- Munter SE
- Ibrahim R
- Ständker L
- Lu S
- Goldberg SA
- Lee SA
- Lynch KL
- Kelly JD
- Martin JN
- Münch J
- Deeks SG
- Henrich TJ
- Roan NR
journal: Nat Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41590-023-01724-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long COVID manifests with T cell dysregulation, inflammation and an uncoordinated adaptive immune response to SARS-CoV-2.
**Authors:** Yin K, Peluso MJ, Luo X, Thomas R, Shin MG, Neidleman J, Andrew A, Young KC, Ma T, Hoh R, Anglin K, Huang B, Argueta U, Lopez M, Valdivieso D, Asare K, Deveau TM, Munter SE, Ibrahim R, Ständker L, Lu S, Goldberg SA, Lee SA, Lynch KL, Kelly JD, Martin JN, Münch J, Deeks SG, Henrich TJ, Roan NR
**Journal:** Nat Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41590-023-01724-6](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41590-023-01724-6)

## Content

1. Nat Immunol. 2024 Feb;25(2):218-225. doi: 10.1038/s41590-023-01724-6. Epub
2024  Jan 11.

Long COVID manifests with T cell dysregulation, inflammation and an 
uncoordinated adaptive immune response to SARS-CoV-2.

Yin K(#)(1)(2), Peluso MJ(#)(3), Luo X(1)(2), Thomas R(1), Shin MG(1), Neidleman 
J(1)(2), Andrew A(1)(2), Young KC(1)(2), Ma T(1)(2), Hoh R(3), Anglin K(3), 
Huang B(3), Argueta U(3), Lopez M(3), Valdivieso D(3), Asare K(3), Deveau TM(4), 
Munter SE(4), Ibrahim R(3), Ständker L(5), Lu S(6), Goldberg SA(6), Lee SA(7), 
Lynch KL(8), Kelly JD(6), Martin JN(6), Münch J(5), Deeks SG(3), Henrich TJ(9), 
Roan NR(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Gladstone Institutes, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, 
CA, USA.
(2)Department of Urology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Division of HIV, Infectious Diseases, and Global Medicine, University of 
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(4)Division of Experimental Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, 
San Francisco, CA, USA.
(5)Core Facility Functional Peptidomics, Ulm University Medical Center, Ulm, 
Germany.
(6)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(7)Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital and the University of California, 
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(8)Division of Laboratory Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.
(9)Division of Experimental Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, 
San Francisco, CA, USA. timothy.henrich@ucsf.edu.
(10)Gladstone Institutes, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA. nadia.roan@gladstone.ucsf.edu.
(11)Department of Urology, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco, CA, USA. nadia.roan@gladstone.ucsf.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Update of
    bioRxiv. 2023 Aug 04:2023.02.09.527892. doi: 10.1101/2023.02.09.527892.

Long COVID (LC) occurs after at least 10% of severe acute respiratory syndrome 
coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infections, yet its etiology remains poorly 
understood. We used 'omic" assays and serology to deeply characterize the global 
and SARS-CoV-2-specific immunity in the blood of individuals with clear LC and 
non-LC clinical trajectories, 8 months postinfection. We found that LC 
individuals exhibited systemic inflammation and immune dysregulation. This was 
evidenced by global differences in T cell subset distribution implying ongoing 
immune responses, as well as by sex-specific perturbations in cytolytic subsets. 
LC individuals displayed increased frequencies of CD4+ T cells poised to migrate 
to inflamed tissues and exhausted SARS-CoV-2-specific CD8+ T cells, higher 
levels of SARS-CoV-2 antibodies and a mis-coordination between their 
SARS-CoV-2-specific T and B cell responses. Our analysis suggested an improper 
crosstalk between the cellular and humoral adaptive immunity in LC, which can 
lead to immune dysregulation, inflammation and clinical symptoms associated with 
this debilitating condition.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41590-023-01724-6
PMCID: PMC10834368
PMID: 38212464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: M.J.P. reports consulting fees from Gilead 
Sciences and AstraZeneca, outside the submitted work. S.G.D. reports grants 
and/or personal fees from Gilead Sciences, Merck & Co., Viiv, AbbVie, Eli Lilly, 
ByroLogyx and Enochian Biosciences, outside the submitted work. T.J.H. receives 
grant support from Merck and consults for Roche. All other authors report no 
conflicts of interest.