---
reference_id: "PMID:15077302"
title: "The role of subchondral bone remodeling in osteoarthritis: reduction of cartilage degeneration and prevention of osteophyte formation by alendronate in the rat anterior cruciate ligament transection model."
authors:
- Hayami T
- Pickarski M
- Wesolowski GA
- McLane J
- Bone A
- Destefano J
- Rodan GA
- Duong LT
journal: Arthritis Rheum
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1002/art.20124
keywords:
- Acid Phosphatase/metabolism
- Alendronate/pharmacology
- Animals
- "Anterior Cruciate Ligament/pathology, surgery"
- "Bone Remodeling/drug effects, physiology"
- "Calcinosis/pathology, physiopathology"
- "Cartilage, Articular/blood supply, pathology"
- Collagen/urine
- Collagen Type I
- Collagen Type II/urine
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Disease Progression
- Extracellular Matrix Proteins/metabolism
- Glycoproteins/metabolism
- Isoenzymes/metabolism
- Male
- Matrilin Proteins
- "Osteoarthritis, Knee/drug therapy, etiology, physiopathology"
- "Osteoclasts/enzymology, pathology"
- Peptides/urine
- Rats
- Sclerosis
- Severity of Illness Index
- Tartrate-Resistant Acid Phosphatase
- Transforming Growth Factor beta/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of subchondral bone remodeling in osteoarthritis: reduction of cartilage degeneration and prevention of osteophyte formation by alendronate in the rat anterior cruciate ligament transection model.
**Authors:** Hayami T, Pickarski M, Wesolowski GA, McLane J, Bone A, Destefano J, Rodan GA, Duong LT
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheum (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1002/art.20124](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.20124)

## Content

1. Arthritis Rheum. 2004 Apr;50(4):1193-206. doi: 10.1002/art.20124.

The role of subchondral bone remodeling in osteoarthritis: reduction of
cartilage degeneration and prevention of osteophyte formation by alendronate in
the rat anterior cruciate ligament transection model.

Hayami T(1), Pickarski M, Wesolowski GA, McLane J, Bone A, Destefano J, Rodan
GA, Duong LT.

Author information:
(1)Merck Research Laboratories, West Point, Pennsylvania 19486, USA.

OBJECTIVE: It has been suggested that subchondral bone remodeling plays a role
in the progression of osteoarthritis (OA). To test this hypothesis, we
characterized the changes in the rat anterior cruciate ligament transection
(ACLT) model of OA and evaluated the effects of alendronate (ALN), a potent
inhibitor of bone resorption, on cartilage degradation and on osteophyte
formation.
METHODS: Male Sprague-Dawley rats underwent ACLT or sham operation of the right
knee. Animals were then treated with ALN (0.03 and 0.24 microg/kg/week
subcutaneously) and necropsied at 2 or 10 weeks postsurgery. OA changes were
evaluated. Subchondral bone volume and osteophyte area were measured by
histomorphometric analysis. Coimmunostaining for transforming growth factor beta
(TGF beta), matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP-9), and MMP-13 was performed to
investigate the effect of ALN on local activation of TGF beta.
RESULTS: ALN was chondroprotective at both dosages, as determined by histologic
criteria and collagen degradation markers. ALN suppressed subchondral bone
resorption, which was markedly increased 2 weeks postsurgery, and prevented the
subsequent increase in bone formation 10 weeks postsurgery, in the untreated
tibial plateau of ACLT joints. Furthermore, ALN reduced the incidence and area
of osteophytes in a dose-dependent manner. ALN also inhibited vascular invasion
into the calcified cartilage in rats with OA and blocked osteoclast recruitment
to subchondral bone and osteophytes. ALN treatment reduced the local release of
active TGF beta, possibly via inhibition of MMP-13 expression in articular
cartilage and MMP-9 expression in subchondral bone.
CONCLUSION: Subchondral bone remodeling plays an important role in the
pathogenesis of OA. ALN or other inhibitors of bone resorption could potentially
be used as disease-modifying agents in the treatment of OA.

DOI: 10.1002/art.20124
PMID: 15077302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
