---
reference_id: "PMID:35278300"
title: Astma jako choroba psychosomatyczna.
authors:
- Witusik A
- Mokros Ł
- Kamecki K
- Pietras T
- Bąk B
journal: Pol Merkur Lekarski
year: '2022'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Astma jako choroba psychosomatyczna.
**Authors:** Witusik A, Mokros Ł, Kamecki K, Pietras T, Bąk B
**Journal:** Pol Merkur Lekarski (2022)

## Content

1. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 2022 Feb 22;50(295):51-53.

Astma jako choroba psychosomatyczna.

[Article in Polish]

Witusik A(1), Mokros Ł(2), Kamecki K(3), Pietras T(3), Bąk B(3).

Author information:
(1)Grażyna and Kiejstut Bacewicz Memorial Academy of Music in Łódź, Faculty of 
Composition, Theory of Music, Conducting, Eurhythmics and Music Education, Music 
Therapy Course, Łódź, Poland.
(2)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, 1st Chair of Internal Medicine, Medical 
University of Łódź, Poland.
(3)2nd Department of Psychiatry, Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology in 
Warsaw, Poland.

In psychosomatic diseases, the damage to organs is overlaid with symptoms 
induced by a mental factor. Bronchial asthma is a chronic bronchitis, often of 
an allergic etiology, accompanied by attacks of dyspnea, which can be induced by 
severe stress. The mechanism involves induction of a bronchospasm, dependent on 
the cholinergic system, by cold air. Another aspect is the relationship of 
bronchial asthma with the development of mood disorders. The mechanism of such 
depression is the product of the psychogenic factor and the effect of 
inflammatory mediators on the central nervous system. The mental factor plays an 
important role in the clinical picture of bronchial asthma. However, this issue 
requires further research, especially regarding the use of psychotherapy in the 
management of a patient suffering from bronchial asthma.

© 2022 MEDPRESS.

PMID: 35278300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]