---
reference_id: "PMID:23628726"
title: "The HER2 amplicon in breast cancer: Topoisomerase IIA and beyond."
authors:
- Jacot W
- Fiche M
- Zaman K
- Wolfer A
- Lamy PJ
journal: Biochim Biophys Acta
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2013.04.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The HER2 amplicon in breast cancer: Topoisomerase IIA and beyond.
**Authors:** Jacot W, Fiche M, Zaman K, Wolfer A, Lamy PJ
**Journal:** Biochim Biophys Acta (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbcan.2013.04.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbcan.2013.04.004)

## Content

1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Aug;1836(1):146-57. doi:
10.1016/j.bbcan.2013.04.004.  Epub 2013 Apr 26.

The HER2 amplicon in breast cancer: Topoisomerase IIA and beyond.

Jacot W(1), Fiche M, Zaman K, Wolfer A, Lamy PJ.

Author information:
(1)Service d'Oncologie Médicale, CRLC Val d'Aurelle-Paul Lamarque, Montpellier, 
F-34298, France. William.Jacot@montpellier.unicancer.fr

HER2 gene amplification is observed in about 15% of breast cancers. The subgroup 
of HER2-positive breast cancers appears to be heterogeneous and presents complex 
patterns of gene amplification at the locus on chromosome 17q12-21. The 
molecular variations within the chromosome 17q amplicon and their clinical 
implications remain largely unknown. Besides the well-known TOP2A gene encoding 
Topoisomerase IIA, other genes might also be amplified and could play functional 
roles in breast cancer development and progression. This review will focus on 
the current knowledge concerning the HER2 amplicon heterogeneity, its clinical 
and biological impact and the pitfalls associated with the evaluation of gene 
amplifications at this locus, with particular attention to TOP2A and the link 
between TOP2A and anthracycline benefit. In addition it will discuss the 
clinical and biological implications of the amplification of ten other genes at 
this locus (MED1, STARD3, GRB7, THRA, RARA, IGFPB4, CCR7, KRT20, KRT19 and GAST) 
in breast cancer.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2013.04.004
PMID: 23628726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]