---
reference_id: "PMID:20675197"
title: "Impact of trough IgG on pneumonia incidence in primary immunodeficiency: A meta-analysis of clinical studies."
authors:
- Orange JS
- Grossman WJ
- Navickis RJ
- Wilkes MM
journal: Clin Immunol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2010.06.012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of trough IgG on pneumonia incidence in primary immunodeficiency: A meta-analysis of clinical studies.
**Authors:** Orange JS, Grossman WJ, Navickis RJ, Wilkes MM
**Journal:** Clin Immunol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clim.2010.06.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clim.2010.06.012)

## Content

1. Clin Immunol. 2010 Oct;137(1):21-30. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2010.06.012. Epub
2010  Aug 1.

Impact of trough IgG on pneumonia incidence in primary immunodeficiency: A 
meta-analysis of clinical studies.

Orange JS(1), Grossman WJ, Navickis RJ, Wilkes MM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. 
Orange@mail.med.upenn.edu

Primary immunodeficiency disease (PIDD) associated with hypogammaglobulinemia is 
typically treated with immunoglobulin replacement therapy. When administered as 
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), an IgG trough occurs prior to the next 
replacement dose. While frequently measured, IgG trough levels required to 
minimize infection risk are not established. To address this question, all 
available studies evaluating trough IgG and pneumonia incidence in PIDD patients 
with hypogammaglobulinemia receiving IVIG were quantitatively combined by 
meta-analysis. Seventeen studies with 676 total patients and 2,127 patient-years 
of follow-up were included. Pneumonia incidence declined by 27% with each 
100mg/dL increment in trough IgG (incidence rate ratio, 0.726; 95% confidence 
interval, 0.658-0.801). Pneumonia incidence with maintenance of 500 mg/dL IgG 
trough levels (0.113 cases per patient-year) was 5-fold that with 1000 mg/dL 
(0.023 cases per patient-year). This meta-analysis provides evidence that 
pneumonia risk can be progressively reduced by higher trough IgG levels up to at 
least 1000 mg/dL.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clim.2010.06.012
PMID: 20675197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]