---
reference_id: "PMID:35274365"
title: "Association between sensorineural hearing loss and vitiligo: a nationwide population-based cohort study."
authors:
- Li CL
- Ma SH
- Wu CY
- Chang PH
- Chang YT
- Wu CY
journal: J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/jdv.18047
keywords:
- Cohort Studies
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/complications, diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Humans
- Male
- Proportional Hazards Models
- Retrospective Studies
- "Vitiligo/complications, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association between sensorineural hearing loss and vitiligo: a nationwide population-based cohort study.
**Authors:** Li CL, Ma SH, Wu CY, Chang PH, Chang YT, Wu CY
**Journal:** J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jdv.18047](https://doi.org/10.1111/jdv.18047)

## Content

1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2022 Jul;36(7):1097-1103. doi:
10.1111/jdv.18047.  Epub 2022 Mar 19.

Association between sensorineural hearing loss and vitiligo: a nationwide 
population-based cohort study.

Li CL(1)(2), Ma SH(1)(2), Wu CY(2)(3)(4)(5)(6)(7), Chang PH(3), Chang 
YT(1)(2)(8), Wu CY(1)(2)(5)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, School of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Biomedical Informatics, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Institute of Clinical Medicine, School of Medicine, National Yang Ming Chiao 
Tung University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Institute of Public Health and Department of Public Health, National Yang 
Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Division of Translational Research and Center of Excellence for Cancer 
Research, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Public Health, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(8)Department of Dermatology, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taipei, 
Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Vitiligo is an acquired depigmentation disease of the skin due to 
melanocyte destruction. A shared pathogenesis affecting melanocytes in the 
cochlea has been postulated. However, the association between vitiligo and 
sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) is unclear.
OBJECTIVE: To identify the association between vitiligo and SNHL.
METHODS: This retrospective, nationwide cohort study included patients with 
vitiligo and age-, sex- and comorbidities-matched controls (propensity score 
matching; 1:4 ratio) from the National Health Insurance Research Database in 
Taiwan from 1 January 2000 to 31 December 2013.
RESULTS: In total, 13 048 patients with vitiligo and 52 192 controls were 
included. SNHL developed in 0.61% patients with vitiligo and 0.29% controls. 
After adjusting for sex, age and comorbidities, a significant association 
between vitiligo and SNHL was found (adjusted hazard ratio, 2.18; 95% CI, 
1.66-2.86). The other risk factors for developing SNHL included increased age, 
male sex, hyperlipidaemia, coronary artery disease and diffuse connective tissue 
diseases. In subgroup analysis, the association between vitiligo and SNHL 
remained significant in almost all the subgroups.
CONCLUSION: A 2.2-fold increased risk of developing SNHL was found in patients 
with vitiligo. Proper referral to otologists for early screening and closer 
follow-up of SNHL should be considered for patients with vitiligo, especially 
for patients with older age.

© 2022 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

DOI: 10.1111/jdv.18047
PMID: 35274365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]