---
reference_id: "PMID:20233789"
title: "Number of electrocardiogram leads displaying the diagnostic coved-type pattern in Brugada syndrome: a diagnostic consensus criterion to be revised."
authors:
- Richter S
- Sarkozy A
- Paparella G
- Henkens S
- Boussy T
- Chierchia GB
- Brugada R
- Brugada J
- Brugada P
journal: Eur Heart J
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehq049
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Brugada Syndrome/diagnosis
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Consensus
- "Electrocardiography/drug effects, methods"
- "Electrophysiologic Techniques, Cardiac/instrumentation, methods"
- Female
- Humans
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prospective Studies
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Number of electrocardiogram leads displaying the diagnostic coved-type pattern in Brugada syndrome: a diagnostic consensus criterion to be revised.
**Authors:** Richter S, Sarkozy A, Paparella G, Henkens S, Boussy T, Chierchia GB, Brugada R, Brugada J, Brugada P
**Journal:** Eur Heart J (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/eurheartj/ehq049](https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehq049)

## Content

1. Eur Heart J. 2010 Jun;31(11):1357-64. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehq049. Epub 2010
 Mar 16.

Number of electrocardiogram leads displaying the diagnostic coved-type pattern
in Brugada syndrome: a diagnostic consensus criterion to be revised.

Richter S(1), Sarkozy A, Paparella G, Henkens S, Boussy T, Chierchia GB, Brugada
R, Brugada J, Brugada P.

Author information:
(1)Heart Rhythm Management Centre, Cardiovascular Centre, Free University of
Brussels (UZ Brussel) VUB, Laarbeeklaan 101, Brussels 1090, Belgium.

AIMS: According to the diagnostic consensus criteria, the electrocardiographic
(ECG) diagnosis of Brugada syndrome requires coved-type > or =2 mm ST-segment
elevation in >1 right precordial lead (RPL) V1-V3 in the presence or absence of
a sodium-channel blocker. However, this consensus has not been evaluated. We
aimed to assess the distribution of coved-type ST-segment elevation on RPLs in a
large patient cohort to reevaluate the appropriateness of the diagnostic
consensus criteria.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We included 186 individuals with spontaneous and/or
drug-induced ECGs of coved-type > or =2 mm ST-segment elevation in at least one
RPL. A total of 376 ECGs were analysed for the number, distribution and maximal
J-point elevation of diagnostic RPLs. Among all ECGs, 27 (7%) showed a
coved-type pattern in 3 RPLs, 205 (55%) in 2 RPLs, and 144 (38%) in only 1 RPL.
Leads V1 and V2 were diagnostic in 99% of all ECGs with two diagnostic RPLs.
Lead V3 alone was not diagnostic in any ECG. Maximal J-point elevation was
significantly higher in lead V2 than V1. Sixty case subjects (32%) had only ECGs
with one RPL displaying a coved-type ST-segment elevation. There was no
significant difference in clinical presentation and outcome compared with the
126 Brugada patients with ECGs displaying >1 diagnostic RPL. Major arrhythmic
events occurred with the same rate (8%) in both groups during a follow-up >5
years.
CONCLUSION: Lead V3 does not yield diagnostic information in Brugada syndrome.
Individuals with ECGs displaying only one diagnostic RPL have a similar clinical
profile and arrhythmic risk as Brugada patients with ECGs displaying >1
diagnostic RPL. Revision of the consensus criteria should be considered.

DOI: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehq049
PMID: 20233789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
