---
reference_id: "PMID:30215968"
title: "Bone Cancer: Diagnosis and Treatment Principles."
authors:
- Ferguson JL
- Turner SP
journal: Am Fam Physician
year: '2018'
keywords:
- Age Factors
- "Bone Neoplasms/diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
- "Chondrosarcoma/diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
- Early Detection of Cancer/methods
- Humans
- Neoplasm Staging
- "Osteosarcoma/diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
- Patient Care Management/methods
- Patient Selection
- Prognosis
- "Sarcoma, Ewing/diagnosis, pathology, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bone Cancer: Diagnosis and Treatment Principles.
**Authors:** Ferguson JL, Turner SP
**Journal:** Am Fam Physician (2018)

## Content

1. Am Fam Physician. 2018 Aug 15;98(4):205-213.

Bone Cancer: Diagnosis and Treatment Principles.

Ferguson JL(1), Turner SP(2).

Author information:
(1)Tripler Army Medical Center, Honolulu, HI, USA.
(2)Schofield Barracks, Honolulu, HI, USA.

Primary bone cancers include osteosarcoma, Ewing sarcoma, and chondrosarcoma.
They account for less than 1% of diagnosed cancers each year and are associated
with significant morbidity and mortality. Timely diagnosis is challenging
because of late patient presentation, nonspecific symptoms that mimic common
musculoskeletal injuries, and low suspicion by physicians. Plain radiography is
the preferred diagnostic test. Radiographic suspicion of a bone malignancy
should prompt quick referral to a cancer center for multidisciplinary care.
Osteosarcoma, the most common bone cancer, most often occurs in children and
adolescents. It typically develops in the metaphysis of long bones, specifically
the distal femur, proximal tibia, and proximal humerus. Metastasis to the lungs
is common. Use of neoadjuvant and adjuvant chemotherapy, in combination with
surgery, has improved survival rates to nearly 80% for patients with localized
disease, and 90% to 95% of patients do not require limb amputation. Ewing
sarcoma is the second most common bone cancer and is similar to osteosarcoma in
terms of presenting symptoms, age at occurrence, and treatment. Prognosis for
osteosarcoma and Ewing sarcoma depends on the presence of metastasis, which
lowers the five-year survival rate to 20% to 30%. Chondrosarcoma is the rarest
bone cancer, primarily affecting adults older than 40 years. Survival rates are
higher because most of these tumors are low-grade lesions.

PMID: 30215968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
