---
reference_id: "PMID:35148830"
title: The CGG repeat expansion in RILPL1 is associated with oculopharyngodistal myopathy type 4.
authors:
- Yu J
- Shan J
- Yu M
- Di L
- Xie Z
- Zhang W
- Lv H
- Meng L
- Zheng Y
- Zhao Y
- Gang Q
- Guo X
- Wang Y
- Xi J
- Zhu W
- Da Y
- Hong D
- Yuan Y
- Yan C
- Wang Z
- Deng J
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.01.012
keywords:
- "5' Untranslated Regions"
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
- Humans
- Intranuclear Inclusion Bodies/genetics
- Muscular Dystrophies/genetics
- Trinucleotide Repeat Expansion/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The CGG repeat expansion in RILPL1 is associated with oculopharyngodistal myopathy type 4.
**Authors:** Yu J, Shan J, Yu M, Di L, Xie Z, Zhang W, Lv H, Meng L, Zheng Y, Zhao Y, Gang Q, Guo X, Wang Y, Xi J, Zhu W, Da Y, Hong D, Yuan Y, Yan C, Wang Z, Deng J
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.01.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.01.012)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2022 Mar 3;109(3):533-541. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.01.012.
Epub  2022 Feb 10.

The CGG repeat expansion in RILPL1 is associated with oculopharyngodistal 
myopathy type 4.

Yu J(1), Shan J(2), Yu M(3), Di L(4), Xie Z(3), Zhang W(3), Lv H(3), Meng L(3), 
Zheng Y(3), Zhao Y(3), Gang Q(3), Guo X(5), Wang Y(5), Xi J(6), Zhu W(6), Da 
Y(4), Hong D(7), Yuan Y(3), Yan C(2), Wang Z(8), Deng J(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, 100034, 
China; Beijing Key Laboratory of Neurovascular Disease Discovery, Beijing, 
100034, China.
(2)Research Institute of Neuromuscular and Neurodegenerative Diseases and 
Department of Neurology, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, 250012, 
China, Mitochondrial Medicine Laboratory, Qilu Hospital (Qingdao), Shandong 
University, Qingdao, China, Brain Science Research Institute, Shandong 
University, Jinan, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, 100034, 
China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
Beijing, 100053, China.
(5)Grandomics Biosciences, Beijing, 100000, China.
(6)Department of Neurology, Huashan Hospital Fudan University, Shanghai, 200040, 
China.
(7)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang 
University, Nanchang, 330006, China.
(8)Department of Neurology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, 100034, 
China; Beijing Key Laboratory of Neurovascular Disease Discovery, Beijing, 
100034, China. Electronic address: drwangzx@163.com.
(9)Department of Neurology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, 100034, 
China; Beijing Key Laboratory of Neurovascular Disease Discovery, Beijing, 
100034, China. Electronic address: jianwendeng@pkufh.com.

Comment in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2022 Nov 3;109(11):2088-2089. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.10.005.

Recent studies indicate that CGG repeat expansions in LRP12, GIPC1, and 
NOTCH2NLC are associated with oculopharyngodistal myopathy (OPDM) types 1, 2, 
and 3, respectively. However, some clinicopathologically confirmed OPDM cases 
continue to have unknown genetic causes. Here, through a combination of 
long-read whole-genome sequencing (LRS), repeat-primed polymerase chain reaction 
(RP-PCR), and fluorescence amplicon length analysis PCR (AL-PCR), we found that 
a CGG repeat expansion in the 5' UTR of RILPL1 is associated with familial and 
simplex OPDM type 4 (OPDM4). The number of repeats ranged from 139 to 197. 
Methylation analysis indicates that the methylation levels in RILPL1 were 
unaltered in OPDM4 individuals. Analyses of muscle biopsies suggested that the 
expanded CGG repeat might be translated into a toxic poly-glycine protein that 
co-localizes with p62 in intranuclear inclusions. Moreover, analyses suggest 
that the toxic RNA gain-of-function effects also contributed to the pathogenesis 
of this disease. Intriguingly, all four types of OPDM have been found to be 
associated with the CGG repeat expansions located in 5' UTRs. This finding 
suggests that a common pathogenic mechanism, driven by the CGG repeat expansion, 
might underlie all cases of OPDM.

Copyright © 2022 American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2022.01.012
PMCID: PMC8948162
PMID: 35148830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.