---
reference_id: "PMID:35530323"
title: "Acceptability of Drugs in the Treatment of Unresectable/Metastatic BRAF V600-Mutant Melanoma: A Systematic Review and Network Meta-Analysis."
authors:
- Hong L
- Huang P
- Zheng X
- Ye X
- Zhao H
- Wang J
- Shao Y
journal: Front Oncol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.865656
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acceptability of Drugs in the Treatment of Unresectable/Metastatic BRAF V600-Mutant Melanoma: A Systematic Review and Network Meta-Analysis.
**Authors:** Hong L, Huang P, Zheng X, Ye X, Zhao H, Wang J, Shao Y
**Journal:** Front Oncol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fonc.2022.865656](https://doi.org/10.3389/fonc.2022.865656)

## Content

1. Front Oncol. 2022 Apr 21;12:865656. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2022.865656. eCollection
 2022.

Acceptability of Drugs in the Treatment of Unresectable/Metastatic BRAF
V600-Mutant Melanoma: A Systematic Review and Network Meta-Analysis.

Hong L(1)(2), Huang P(2), Zheng X(2), Ye X(2), Zhao H(2), Wang J(1), Shao
Y(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Pharmaceutical Science, Zhejiang University of Technology,
Hangzhou, China.
(2)Center for Clinical Pharmacy, Cancer Center, Department of Pharmacy, Zhejiang
Provincial People's Hospital (Affiliated People's Hospital, Hangzhou Medical
College), Hangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Although many novel regimens have entered the treatment paradigm for
unresectable/metastatic BRAF V600-mutant melanoma, there is still a lack of
head-to-head comparison in terms of security. We conducted a network
meta-analysis to compare the risk of adverse events (AEs) across different
treatments and to provide an acceptability ranking for patients.
METHODS: A systematic literature review was conducted in Embase, PubMed, WHO
International Clinical Trials Registry Platform, and Clinical Trials.gov with a
time frame from database inception to December 24, 2021. We retrieved evidence
on the cumulative incidence of any-grade AEs means grades 1-5 AEs (regardless of
severity) and severe AEs based on the pooled risk ratios (RRs) and 95% credible
intervals (95% CrI).
RESULTS: Twelve publications and thirteen treatments enrolling 5,803 patients
were included. For any-grade AEs, the acceptability of combined dabrafenib and
trametinib is superior to the combination of vemurafenib and cobimetinib (RR:
0.94; Crl: 0.89, 0.98). Furthermore, nivolumab combined with ipilimumab
increases any-grade AEs than single-agent ipilimumab (RR: 0.90; Crl: 0.83, 0.96)
or nivolumab (RR: 0.90; Crl: 0.84, 0.97). For severe AEs, dabrafenib has the
best acceptability than single-agent vemurafenib (RR: 0.66; Crl: 0.50, 0.87) or
encorafenib (RR: 0.64; Crl: 0.43, 0.94). In addition, ipilimumab (SUCRA: 0.87)
ranks first in the acceptability for any-grade AEs, and nivolumab (SUCRA: 0.95)
ranks first in the acceptability for severe AEs. The ranking of the combination
of vemurafenib and cobimetinib (SUCRA: 0.66) is superior to encorafenib in
combination with binimetinib (SUCRA: 0.39) and combination of vemurafenib and
cobimetinib (SUCRA: 0.18).
CONCLUSIONS: We identified the lowest AE risk treatment options for BRAF
V600-mutant melanoma patients. In general, immunotherapy (ipilimumab or
nivolumab) has better acceptability than most targeted therapies, and triplet
therapies are related with the worst acceptability. Moreover, single-agent
dabrafenib can be used as the first choice in monotherapy, and the combination
of dabrafenib and trametinib is the preferred combination therapy. Overall, the
combination of immunotherapy drugs increases any-grade and severe AEs than a
single agent, whereas the condition of targeted therapy drugs cannot be simply
generalized. Therefore, this information can facilitate evidence-based
decision-making and support optimizing treatment and outcomes in
clinical practice.

Copyright © 2022 Hong, Huang, Zheng, Ye, Zhao, Wang and Shao.

DOI: 10.3389/fonc.2022.865656
PMCID: PMC9068943
PMID: 35530323

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
