---
reference_id: "PMID:37120689"
title: "AML classification in the year 2023: How to avoid a Babylonian confusion of languages."
authors:
- Huber S
- Baer C
- Hutter S
- Dicker F
- Meggendorfer M
- Pohlkamp C
- Kern W
- Haferlach T
- Haferlach C
- Hoermann G
journal: Leukemia
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41375-023-01909-w
keywords:
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute/pathology"
- Nucleophosmin
- "Myelodysplastic Syndromes/genetics, diagnosis"
- World Health Organization
- Language
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# AML classification in the year 2023: How to avoid a Babylonian confusion of languages.
**Authors:** Huber S, Baer C, Hutter S, Dicker F, Meggendorfer M, Pohlkamp C, Kern W, Haferlach T, Haferlach C, Hoermann G
**Journal:** Leukemia (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41375-023-01909-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41375-023-01909-w)

## Content

1. Leukemia. 2023 Jul;37(7):1413-1420. doi: 10.1038/s41375-023-01909-w. Epub 2023
 Apr 29.

AML classification in the year 2023: How to avoid a Babylonian confusion of 
languages.

Huber S(1), Baer C(1), Hutter S(1), Dicker F(1), Meggendorfer M(1), Pohlkamp 
C(1), Kern W(1), Haferlach T(1), Haferlach C(1), Hoermann G(2).

Author information:
(1)MLL Munich Leukemia Laboratory, Max-Lebsche-Platz 31, 81377, Munich, Germany.
(2)MLL Munich Leukemia Laboratory, Max-Lebsche-Platz 31, 81377, Munich, Germany. 
gregor.hoermann@mll.com.

In parallel to the 5th edition of the World Health Organization Classification 
of Haematolymphoid Tumours (WHO 2022), an alternative International Consensus 
Classification (ICC) has been proposed. To evaluate the impact of the new 
classifications on AML diagnoses and ELN-based risk classification, we analyzed 
717 MDS and 734 AML non-therapy-related patients diagnosed according to the 
revised 4th WHO edition (WHO 2017) by whole genome and transcriptome sequencing. 
In both new classifications, the purely morphologically defined AML entities 
decreased from 13% to 5%. Myelodysplasia-related (MR) AML increased from 22% to 
28% (WHO 2022) and 26% (ICC). Other genetically-defined AML remained the largest 
group, and the abandoned AML-RUNX1 was mainly reclassified as AML-MR (WHO 2022: 
77%; ICC: 96%). Different inclusion criteria of AML-CEBPA and AML-MR (i.a. 
exclusion of TP53 mutated cases according to ICC) were associated with 
differences in overall survival. In conclusion, both classifications focus on 
more genetics-based definitions with similar basic concepts and a large degree 
of agreement. The remaining non-comparability (e.g., TP53 mutated AML) needs 
additional studies to definitely answer open questions on disease categorization 
in an unbiased way.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41375-023-01909-w
PMCID: PMC10317829
PMID: 37120689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CH, WK and TH declare part ownership of Munich 
Leukemia Laboratory (MLL). SH, CB, StH, FD, MM, CP, and GH are employed by the 
MLL.