---
reference_id: "PMID:36751956"
title: Differential diagnosis of familial adult myoclonic epilepsy.
authors:
- Baykan B
- Franceschetti S
- Canafoglia L
- Cavalleri GL
- Michelucci R
- Scheffer IE
journal: Epilepsia
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/epi.17536
keywords:
- Humans
- Adult
- Aged
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Myoclonus/diagnosis
- "Epilepsies, Myoclonic/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Epilepsy, Generalized/diagnosis"
- Electroencephalography
- "Myoclonic Epilepsies, Progressive/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Myoclonic Epilepsy, Juvenile/diagnosis, genetics"
- Seizures/diagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Differential diagnosis of familial adult myoclonic epilepsy.
**Authors:** Baykan B, Franceschetti S, Canafoglia L, Cavalleri GL, Michelucci R, Scheffer IE
**Journal:** Epilepsia (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/epi.17536](https://doi.org/10.1111/epi.17536)

## Content

1. Epilepsia. 2023 Jun;64 Suppl 1:S52-S57. doi: 10.1111/epi.17536. Epub 2023 Feb 
21.

Differential diagnosis of familial adult myoclonic epilepsy.

Baykan B(1)(2), Franceschetti S(3), Canafoglia L(3), Cavalleri GL(4)(5), 
Michelucci R(6), Scheffer IE(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, 
Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)EMAR Medical Center, Istanbul, Turkey.
(3)Department of Diagnostic and Technology, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto 
Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy.
(4)The School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Sciences, The Royal College of 
Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.
(5)The Science Foundation Ireland, FutureNeuro Centre of Excellence, Dublin, 
Ireland.
(6)Unit of Neurology and Epileptology, Bellaria Hospital, IRCCS - Istituto delle 
Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(7)Austin and Royal Children's Hospital, Florey and Murdoch Children's Research 
Institute, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: Familial adult myoclonic epilepsy (FAME) is an under-recognized 
disorder characterized by cortical myoclonus, generalized tonic-clonic seizures, 
and additional clinical symptoms, which vary depending on the FAME subtype. FAME 
is caused by pentanucleotide repeat expansions of intronic TTTCA/TTTTA in 
different genes. FAME should be distinguished from a range of differential 
diagnoses.
METHODS: The differential diagnoses and frequent presentations leading to 
misdiagnosis of FAME were investigated from the available literature and reported based on an expert opinion survey.
RESULTS: The phenotypic features of FAME, including generalized tonic-clonic and 
myoclonic seizures, are also seen in other epilepsy syndromes, such as juvenile 
myoclonic epilepsy, with a resultant risk of misdiagnosis and lack of 
identification of the underlying cause. Cortical myoclonus may mimic essential 
tremor or drug-induced tremor. In younger individuals, the differential 
diagnosis includes progressive myoclonus epilepsies (PMEs), such as 
Unverricht-Lundborg disease, whereas, in adulthood, late-onset variants of PMEs, 
such as sialidoses, myoclonus epilepsy, and ataxia due to potassium channel 
pathogenic variants should be considered. PMEs may also be suggested by 
cognitive impairment, cerebellar signs, or psychiatric disorders. 
Electroencephalography (EEG) may show similarities to other idiopathic 
generalized epilepsies or PMEs, with generalized spike-wave activity. Signs of 
cortical hyperexcitability may be seen, such as an increased amplitude of 
somatosensory evoked potentials or enhanced cortical reflex to sensory stimuli, 
together with the neurophysiological pattern of the movement disorder.
SIGNIFICANCE: Recognition of FAME will inform prognostic and genetic counseling 
and diagnosis of the insidious progression, which may occur in older individuals 
who show mild cognitive deterioration. Distinguishing FAME from other disorders 
in individuals or families with this constellation of symptoms is essential to 
allow the identification of underlying etiology.

© 2023 International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1111/epi.17536
PMID: 36751956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Ingrid Scheffer has served on scientific 
advisory boards for BioMarin, Chiesi, Eisai, Encoded Therapeutics, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Knopp Biosciences, Nutricia, Rogcon, Takeda Pharmaceuticals, 
UCB, and Xenon Pharmaceuticals; has received speaker honoraria from 
GlaxoSmithKline, UCB, BioMarin, Biocodex, Chiesi, Liva Nova, Nutricia, Zuellig 
Pharma, and Eisai; has received funding for travel from UCB, Biocodex, 
GlaxoSmithKline, Biomarin, and Eisai; has served as an investigator for Anavex 
Life Sciences, Cerecin Inc, Cerevel Therapeutics, Eisai, Encoded Therapeutics, 
EpiMinder Inc, Epygenyx, ES-Therapeutics, GW Pharma, Marinus, Neurocrine 
BioSciences, Ovid Therapeutics, Takeda Pharmaceuticals, UCB, Ultragenyx, Xenon 
Pharmaceuticals, Zogenix, and Zynerba; and has consulted for Care Beyond 
Diagnosis, Epilepsy Consortium, Atheneum Partners, Ovid Therapeutics, UCB, 
Zynerba Pharmaceuticals, BioMarin, Encoded Therapeutics, and Biohaven 
Pharmaceuticals; and is a Non-Executive Director of Bellberry Ltd and a Director 
of the Australian Academy of Health and Medical Sciences and the Australian 
Council of Learned Academies Limited. She may accrue future revenue on pending 
patent WO61/010176 (filed: 2008): Therapeutic Compound; has a patent for SCN1A 
testing held by Bionomics Inc and licensed to various diagnostic companies; and 
has a patent molecular diagnostic/theranostic target for benign familial 
infantile epilepsy (BFIE) [PRRT2] 2011904493 & 2012900190 and PCT/AU2012/001321 
(TECH ID:2012-009). All of the other authors have nothing to disclose. We 
confirm that we have read the Journal's position on issues involved in ethical 
publication and affirm that this report is consistent with those guidelines.