---
reference_id: "PMID:22508517"
title: The inflammatory response in acyl-CoA oxidase 1 deficiency (pseudoneonatal adrenoleukodystrophy).
authors:
- El Hajj HI
- Vluggens A
- Andreoletti P
- Ragot K
- Mandard S
- Kersten S
- Waterham HR
- Lizard G
- Wanders RJ
- Reddy JK
- Cherkaoui-Malki M
journal: Endocrinology
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1210/en.2012-1137
keywords:
- "Acyl-CoA Oxidase/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Fatty Acids/pharmacology
- "Fibroblasts/drug effects, metabolism, pathology"
- Gene Expression Regulation/drug effects
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- "Inflammation/genetics, metabolism"
- Inflammation Mediators/metabolism
- "Interleukin-1/genetics, metabolism"
- "Interleukin-6/genetics, metabolism"
- "Interleukin-8/genetics, metabolism"
- Oligonucleotide Array Sequence Analysis
- "Osteopontin/genetics, metabolism"
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Transcriptome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The inflammatory response in acyl-CoA oxidase 1 deficiency (pseudoneonatal adrenoleukodystrophy).
**Authors:** El Hajj HI, Vluggens A, Andreoletti P, Ragot K, Mandard S, Kersten S, Waterham HR, Lizard G, Wanders RJ, Reddy JK, Cherkaoui-Malki M
**Journal:** Endocrinology (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1210/en.2012-1137](https://doi.org/10.1210/en.2012-1137)

## Content

1. Endocrinology. 2012 Jun;153(6):2568-75. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-1137. Epub 2012
Apr  16.

The inflammatory response in acyl-CoA oxidase 1 deficiency (pseudoneonatal 
adrenoleukodystrophy).

El Hajj HI(1), Vluggens A, Andreoletti P, Ragot K, Mandard S, Kersten S, 
Waterham HR, Lizard G, Wanders RJ, Reddy JK, Cherkaoui-Malki M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie du Peroxysome, Inflammation et Métabolisme 
Lipidique, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon F-21000, France.

Among several peroxisomal neurodegenerative disorders, the pseudoneonatal 
adrenoleukodystrophy (P-NALD) is characterized by the acyl-coenzyme A oxidase 1 
(ACOX1) deficiency, which leads to the accumulation of very-long-chain fatty 
acids (VLCFA) and inflammatory demyelination. However, the components of this 
inflammatory process in P-NALD remain elusive. In this study, we used 
transcriptomic profiling and PCR array analyses to explore inflammatory gene 
expression in patient fibroblasts. Our results show the activation of IL-1 
inflammatory pathway accompanied by the increased secretion of two IL-1 target 
genes, IL-6 and IL-8 cytokines. Human fibroblasts exposed to very-long-chain 
fatty acids exhibited increased mRNA expression of IL-1α and IL-1β cytokines. 
Furthermore, expression of IL-6 and IL-8 cytokines in patient fibroblasts was 
down-regulated by MAPK, p38MAPK, and Jun N-terminal kinase inhibitors. Thus, the 
absence of acyl-coenzyme A oxidase 1 activity in P-NALD fibroblasts triggers an 
inflammatory process, in which the IL-1 pathway seems to be central. The use of 
specific kinase inhibitors may permit the modulation of the enhanced 
inflammatory status.

DOI: 10.1210/en.2012-1137
PMCID: PMC3791418
PMID: 22508517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]