---
reference_id: "PMID:38812739"
title: Identification of Molecular Mechanisms of Ameloblastoma and Drug Repositioning by Integration of Bioinformatics Analysis and Molecular Docking Simulation.
authors:
- Chujan S
- Vajeethaveesin N
- Satayavivad J
- Kitkumthorn N
journal: Bioinform Biol Insights
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1177/11779322241256459
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of Molecular Mechanisms of Ameloblastoma and Drug Repositioning by Integration of Bioinformatics Analysis and Molecular Docking Simulation.
**Authors:** Chujan S, Vajeethaveesin N, Satayavivad J, Kitkumthorn N
**Journal:** Bioinform Biol Insights (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1177/11779322241256459](https://doi.org/10.1177/11779322241256459)

## Content

1. Bioinform Biol Insights. 2024 May 28;18:11779322241256459. doi: 
10.1177/11779322241256459. eCollection 2024.

Identification of Molecular Mechanisms of Ameloblastoma and Drug Repositioning 
by Integration of Bioinformatics Analysis and Molecular Docking Simulation.

Chujan S(1)(2), Vajeethaveesin N(3), Satayavivad J(1)(2), Kitkumthorn N(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacology, Chulabhorn Research Institute, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Center of Excellence on Environmental Health and Toxicology (EHT), Office of 
the Permanent Secretary (OPS), Ministry of Higher Education, Science, Research 
and Innovation (MHESI), Bangkok, Thailand.
(3)Environmental Toxicology Program, Chulabhorn Graduate Institute, Bangkok, 
Thailand.
(4)Department of Oral Biology, Faculty of Dentistry, Mahidol University, 
Bangkok, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: Ameloblastoma (AM) is a benign tumor locally originated from 
odontogenic epithelium that is commonly found in the jaw. This tumor makes 
aggressive invasions and has a high recurrence rate. This study aimed to 
investigate the differentially expressed genes (DEGs), biological function 
alterations, disease targets, and existing drugs for AM using bioinformatics 
analysis.
METHODS: The data set of AM was retrieved from the GEO database (GSE132474) and 
identified the DEGs using bioinformatics analysis. The biological alteration 
analysis was applied to Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and 
Genomes (KEGG) pathways. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis and 
hub gene identification were screened through NetworkAnalyst. The transcription 
factor-protein network was constructed via OmicsNet. We also identified 
candidate compounds from L1000CDS2 database. The target of AM and candidate 
compounds were verified using docking simulation.
RESULTS: Totally, 611 DEGs were identified. The biological function enrichment 
analysis revealed glycosaminoglycan and GABA (γ-aminobutyric acid) signaling 
were most significantly up-regulated and down-regulated in AM, respectively. 
Subsequently, hub genes and transcription factors were screened via the network 
and showed FOS protein was found in both networks. Furthermore, we evaluated FOS 
protein to be a therapeutic target in AMs. Candidate compounds were screened and 
verified using docking simulation. Tanespimycin showed the greatest affinity 
binding value to bind FOS protein.
CONCLUSIONS: This study presented the underlying molecular mechanisms of disease 
pathogenesis, biological alteration, and important pathways of AMs and provided 
a candidate compound, Tanespimycin, targeting FOS protein for the treatment of 
AMs.

© The Author(s) 2024.

DOI: 10.1177/11779322241256459
PMCID: PMC11135093
PMID: 38812739

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.