---
reference_id: "PMID:31060581"
title: Embryonic development and egg viability of wMel-infected Aedes aegypti.
authors:
- Farnesi LC
- Belinato TA
- Gesto JSM
- Martins AJ
- Bruno RV
- Moreira LA
journal: Parasit Vectors
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13071-019-3474-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Embryonic development and egg viability of wMel-infected Aedes aegypti.
**Authors:** Farnesi LC, Belinato TA, Gesto JSM, Martins AJ, Bruno RV, Moreira LA
**Journal:** Parasit Vectors (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13071-019-3474-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13071-019-3474-z)

## Content

1. Parasit Vectors. 2019 May 6;12(1):211. doi: 10.1186/s13071-019-3474-z.

Embryonic development and egg viability of wMel-infected Aedes aegypti.

Farnesi LC(1), Belinato TA(2)(3), Gesto JSM(1)(3), Martins AJ(2), Bruno 
RV(1)(4), Moreira LA(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Laboratório de Biologia Molecular de Insetos, Instituto Oswaldo Cruz, 
Fiocruz, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(2)Laboratório de Fisiologia e Controle de Artrópodes Vetores, Instituto Oswaldo 
Cruz, Fiocruz, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil.
(3)Mosquitos Vetores: Endossimbiontes e Interação Patógeno-Vetor, Instituto René 
Rachou, Fiocruz, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil.
(4)Instituto Nacional de Ciência e Tecnologia em Entomologia Molecular 
(INCT-EM)/CNPq, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(5)Mosquitos Vetores: Endossimbiontes e Interação Patógeno-Vetor, Instituto René 
Rachou, Fiocruz, Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil. luciano.andrade@fiocruz.br.
(6)Instituto Nacional de Ciência e Tecnologia em Entomologia Molecular 
(INCT-EM)/CNPq, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. luciano.andrade@fiocruz.br.

BACKGROUND: Aedes aegypti is a major disease vector in urban habitats, involved 
in the transmission of dengue, chikungunya and Zika. Despite innumerous attempts 
to contain disease outbreaks, there are neither efficient vaccines nor definite 
vector control methods nowadays. In recent years, an innovative strategy to 
control arboviruses, which exploits the endosymbiotic bacterium Wolbachia 
pipientis, emerged with great expectations. The success of the method depends on 
many aspects, including Wolbachia's cytoplasmic incompatibility and pathogen 
interference phenotypes, as well as its effect on host fitness. In this work, we 
investigated the influence the Wolbachia strain wMel exerts on embryo 
development and egg viability and speculate on its field release use.
METHODS: Wild-type (Br or Rockefeller) and Wolbachia-harboring specimens 
(wMelBr) were blood-fed and submitted to synchronous egg laying for embryo 
development assays. Samples were analyzed for morphological markers, 
developmental endpoint and egg resistance to desiccation (ERD). Quiescent egg 
viability over time was also assessed.
RESULTS: wMelBr samples completed embryogenesis 2-3 hours later than wild-type. 
This delay was also observed through the onset of both morphological and 
physiological markers, respectively by the moments of germband extension and ERD 
acquisition. Following the end of embryonic development, wMelBr eggs were 
slightly less resistant to desiccation and showed reduced viability levels, 
which rapidly decayed after 40 days into quiescence, from approximately 75% to 
virtually 0% in less than a month.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data revealed that the wMel strain of Wolbachia slightly delays 
embryogenesis and also affects egg quality, both through reduced viability and 
desiccation resistance. These findings suggest that, although embryonic fitness 
is somehow compromised by wMel infection, an efficient host reproductive 
manipulation through cytoplasmic incompatibility seems sufficient to overcome 
these effects in nature and promote bacterial invasion, as shown by successful 
ongoing field implementation.

DOI: 10.1186/s13071-019-3474-z
PMCID: PMC6503365
PMID: 31060581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.