---
reference_id: "PMID:19884660"
title: Munc18-2 deficiency causes familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis type 5 and impairs cytotoxic granule exocytosis in patient NK cells.
authors:
- Côte M
- Ménager MM
- Burgess A
- Mahlaoui N
- Picard C
- Schaffner C
- Al-Manjomi F
- Al-Harbi M
- Alangari A
- Le Deist F
- Gennery AR
- Prince N
- Cariou A
- Nitschke P
- Blank U
- El-Ghazali G
- Ménasché G
- Latour S
- Fischer A
- de Saint Basile G
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1172/JCI40732
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Base Sequence
- Child
- Consanguinity
- "Exocytosis/genetics, physiology"
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Introns
- "Killer Cells, Natural/physiology"
- "Lymphohistiocytosis, Hemophagocytic/classification, genetics, physiopathology"
- Male
- "Models, Molecular"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Munc18 Proteins/chemistry, deficiency, genetics, physiology"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- Qa-SNARE Proteins/physiology
- RNA Splice Sites
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Munc18-2 deficiency causes familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis type 5 and impairs cytotoxic granule exocytosis in patient NK cells.
**Authors:** Côte M, Ménager MM, Burgess A, Mahlaoui N, Picard C, Schaffner C, Al-Manjomi F, Al-Harbi M, Alangari A, Le Deist F, Gennery AR, Prince N, Cariou A, Nitschke P, Blank U, El-Ghazali G, Ménasché G, Latour S, Fischer A, de Saint Basile G
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI40732](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI40732)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2009 Dec;119(12):3765-73. doi: 10.1172/JCI40732. Epub 2009 Nov
2.

Munc18-2 deficiency causes familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis type 5 
and impairs cytotoxic granule exocytosis in patient NK cells.

Côte M(1), Ménager MM, Burgess A, Mahlaoui N, Picard C, Schaffner C, Al-Manjomi 
F, Al-Harbi M, Alangari A, Le Deist F, Gennery AR, Prince N, Cariou A, Nitschke 
P, Blank U, El-Ghazali G, Ménasché G, Latour S, Fischer A, de Saint Basile G.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U768, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.

Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL) is a genetically heterogeneous 
autosomal recessive immune disorder characterized by the occurrence of 
uncontrolled activation of lymphocytes and macrophages infiltrating multiple 
organs. Disease-causing mutations in the perforin (PRF1; also known as FHL2), 
Munc13-4 (UNC13D; also known as FHL3), and syntaxin-11 (STX11; also known as 
FHL4) genes have been identified in individuals with FHL. These genes all encode 
proteins involved in the cytotoxic activity of lymphocytes. Here, we show that 
the gene encoding syntaxin-binding protein 2 (Munc18-2; official gene symbol 
STXBP2) is mutated in another subset of patients with FHL (designated by us as 
"FHL5"). Lymphoblasts isolated from these patients had strongly decreased STXBP2 
protein expression, and NK cells exhibited impaired cytotoxic granule 
exocytosis, a defect that could be overcome by ectopic expression of wild-type 
STXBP2. Furthermore, we provide evidence that syntaxin-11 is the main partner of 
STXBP2 in lymphocytes, as its expression required the presence of STXBP2. Our 
work shows that STXBP2 deficiency causes FHL5. These data indicate that STXBP2 
is required at a late step of the secretory pathway for the release of cytotoxic 
granules by binding syntaxin 11, another component of the intracellular membrane 
fusion machinery.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI40732
PMCID: PMC2786810
PMID: 19884660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]