---
reference_id: "PMID:38904107"
title: An improved synthesis of guanosine TNA phosphoramidite for oligonucleotide synthesis.
authors:
- Majumdar B
- Sarma D
- Lee EM
- Setterholm NA
- Chaput JC
journal: Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1080/15257770.2024.2369688
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An improved synthesis of guanosine TNA phosphoramidite for oligonucleotide synthesis.
**Authors:** Majumdar B, Sarma D, Lee EM, Setterholm NA, Chaput JC
**Journal:** Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15257770.2024.2369688](https://doi.org/10.1080/15257770.2024.2369688)

## Content

1. Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids. 2025;44(6):474-485. doi: 
10.1080/15257770.2024.2369688. Epub 2024 Jun 21.

An improved synthesis of guanosine TNA phosphoramidite for oligonucleotide 
synthesis.

Majumdar B(1), Sarma D(1), Lee EM(1), Setterholm NA(1), Chaput JC(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of California, Irvine, 
California, USA.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University of California, Irvine, California, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California, 
Irvine, California, USA.
(4)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of 
California, Irvine, California, USA.

The chemical synthesis of guanosine nucleosides generates both the N9 and N7 
regioisomers, which require careful separation to obtain the desired N9 isomer. 
To preferentially obtain the N9 isomer, a bulky diphenylcarbamoyl (DPC) group 
can be installed at the O6 position of guanine. However, installation of the DPC 
group presents a challenging task due to low solubility of the N-acetyl 
protected guanine. Here we report the usage of commercially available 
2-amino-6-chloro purine as a new strategy that offers a more efficient route to 
the synthesis of the guanine phosphoramidite of threose nucleic acid (TNA).

DOI: 10.1080/15257770.2024.2369688
PMID: 38904107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]