---
reference_id: "PMID:37437144"
title: BRAF-MEK Inhibition in Newly Diagnosed Papillary Craniopharyngiomas.
authors:
- Brastianos PK
- Twohy E
- Geyer S
- Gerstner ER
- Kaufmann TJ
- Tabrizi S
- Kabat B
- Thierauf J
- Ruff MW
- Bota DA
- Reardon DA
- Cohen AL
- De La Fuente MI
- Lesser GJ
- Campian J
- Agarwalla PK
- Kumthekar P
- Mann B
- Vora S
- Knopp M
- Iafrate AJ
- Curry WT Jr
- Cahill DP
- Shih HA
- Brown PD
- Santagata S
- Barker FG 2nd
- Galanis E
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2213329
keywords:
- Humans
- "Craniopharyngioma/drug therapy, genetics"
- Disease Progression
- "Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- "Pituitary Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- "Vemurafenib/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Antineoplastic Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Remission Induction
- Azetidines
- Piperidines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# BRAF-MEK Inhibition in Newly Diagnosed Papillary Craniopharyngiomas.
**Authors:** Brastianos PK, Twohy E, Geyer S, Gerstner ER, Kaufmann TJ, Tabrizi S, Kabat B, Thierauf J, Ruff MW, Bota DA, Reardon DA, Cohen AL, De La Fuente MI, Lesser GJ, Campian J, Agarwalla PK, Kumthekar P, Mann B, Vora S, Knopp M, Iafrate AJ, Curry WT Jr, Cahill DP, Shih HA, Brown PD, Santagata S, Barker FG 2nd, Galanis E
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2213329](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2213329)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2023 Jul 13;389(2):118-126. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2213329.

BRAF-MEK Inhibition in Newly Diagnosed Papillary Craniopharyngiomas.

Brastianos PK(1), Twohy E(1), Geyer S(1), Gerstner ER(1), Kaufmann TJ(1), 
Tabrizi S(1), Kabat B(1), Thierauf J(1), Ruff MW(1), Bota DA(1), Reardon DA(1), 
Cohen AL(1), De La Fuente MI(1), Lesser GJ(1), Campian J(1), Agarwalla PK(1), 
Kumthekar P(1), Mann B(1), Vora S(1), Knopp M(1), Iafrate AJ(1), Curry WT Jr(1), 
Cahill DP(1), Shih HA(1), Brown PD(1), Santagata S(1), Barker FG 2nd(1), Galanis 
E(1).

Author information:
(1)From Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School 
(P.K.B., E.R.G., S.T., J.T., A.J.I., W.T.C., D.P.C., H.A.S., F.G.B.), 
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute (D.A.R.), and Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard 
Program in Therapeutic Science, Dana-Farber Partners CancerCare (S.S.) - all in 
Boston; Alliance Statistics and Data Management Center (E.T., S.G., B.K.), Mayo 
Clinic (T.J.K., M.W.R., P.D.B., E.G.), Rochester, MN; UC Irvine-Chao Family 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Orange, CA (D.A.B.); Huntsman Cancer Institute, 
University of Utah, Salt Lake City (A.L.C.); Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami (M.I.D.L.F.); Wake 
Forest University School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC (G.J.L.); Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis (J.C.); Rutgers Cancer Institute, New 
Brunswick, NJ (P.K.A.); Northwestern University, Chicago (P.K.); the Cancer 
Therapy Evaluation Program, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD (B.M.); and 
Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus (S.V., M.K.).

Comment in
    Cancer Discov. 2023 Sep 6;13(9):1960. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-RW2023-116.

BACKGROUND: Craniopharyngiomas, primary brain tumors of the 
pituitary-hypothalamic axis, can cause clinically significant sequelae. 
Treatment with the use of surgery, radiation, or both is often associated with 
substantial morbidity related to vision loss, neuroendocrine dysfunction, and 
memory loss. Genotyping has shown that more than 90% of papillary 
craniopharyngiomas carry BRAF V600E mutations, but data are lacking with regard 
to the safety and efficacy of BRAF-MEK inhibition in patients with papillary 
craniopharyngiomas who have not undergone previous radiation therapy.
METHODS: Eligible patients who had papillary craniopharyngiomas that tested 
positive for BRAF mutations, had not undergone radiation therapy previously, and 
had measurable disease received the BRAF-MEK inhibitor combination 
vemurafenib-cobimetinib in 28-day cycles. The primary end point of this 
single-group, phase 2 study was objective response at 4 months as determined 
with the use of centrally determined volumetric data.
RESULTS: Of the 16 patients in the study, 15 (94%; 95% confidence interval [CI], 
70 to 100) had a durable objective partial response or better to therapy. The 
median reduction in the volume of the tumor was 91% (range, 68 to 99). The 
median follow-up was 22 months (95% CI, 19 to 30) and the median number of 
treatment cycles was 8. Progression-free survival was 87% (95% CI, 57 to 98) at 
12 months and 58% (95% CI, 10 to 89) at 24 months. Three patients had disease 
progression during follow-up after therapy had been discontinued; none have 
died. The sole patient who did not have a response stopped treatment after 8 
days owing to toxic effects. Grade 3 adverse events that were at least possibly 
related to treatment occurred in 12 patients, including rash in 6 patients. In 2 
patients, grade 4 adverse events (hyperglycemia in 1 patient and increased 
creatine kinase levels in 1 patient) were reported; 3 patients discontinued 
treatment owing to adverse events.
CONCLUSIONS: In this small, single-group study involving patients with papillary 
craniopharyngiomas, 15 of 16 patients had a partial response or better to the 
BRAF-MEK inhibitor combination vemurafenib-cobimetinib. (Funded by the National 
Cancer Institute and others; ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03224767.).

Copyright © 2023 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2213329
PMCID: PMC10464854
PMID: 37437144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]