---
reference_id: "PMID:30793331"
title: "The cholic acid extension study in Zellweger spectrum disorders: Results and implications for therapy."
authors:
- Klouwer FCC
- Koot BGP
- Berendse K
- Kemper EM
- Ferdinandusse S
- Koelfat KVK
- Lenicek M
- Vaz FM
- Engelen M
- Jansen PLM
- Wanders RJA
- Waterham HR
- Schaap FG
- Poll-The BT
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12042
keywords:
- "Administration, Oral"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Bile Acids and Salts/metabolism
- Biomarkers/blood
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Cholic Acid/blood, therapeutic use"
- Female
- Humans
- Liver/metabolism
- "Liver Diseases/drug therapy, metabolism"
- Male
- Peroxisomes/metabolism
- Young Adult
- "Zellweger Syndrome/blood, drug therapy, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The cholic acid extension study in Zellweger spectrum disorders: Results and implications for therapy.
**Authors:** Klouwer FCC, Koot BGP, Berendse K, Kemper EM, Ferdinandusse S, Koelfat KVK, Lenicek M, Vaz FM, Engelen M, Jansen PLM, Wanders RJA, Waterham HR, Schaap FG, Poll-The BT
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12042](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12042)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2019 Mar;42(2):303-312. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12042. Epub
2019  Feb 21.

The cholic acid extension study in Zellweger spectrum disorders: Results and
implications for therapy.

Klouwer FCC(1)(2), Koot BGP(3), Berendse K(1)(2), Kemper EM(4), Ferdinandusse
S(2), Koelfat KVK(5), Lenicek M(6), Vaz FM(2), Engelen M(1), Jansen PLM(7),
Wanders RJA(2), Waterham HR(2), Schaap FG(5)(8), Poll-The BT(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Emma Children's Hospital, Academic Medical
Center, University of Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.
(2)Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Emma Children's Hospital, Academic
Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pharmacy, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Surgery, Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Laboratory Diagnostics, 1st Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic.
(7)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Academic Medical Center,
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(8)Department of General, Visceral and Transplantation Surgery, RWTH University
Hospital Aachen, Aachen, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Currently, no therapies are available for Zellweger spectrum
disorders (ZSDs), a group of genetic metabolic disorders characterised by a
deficiency of functional peroxisomes. In a previous study, we showed that oral
cholic acid (CA) treatment can suppress bile acid synthesis in ZSD patients and,
thereby, decrease plasma levels of toxic C27 -bile acid intermediates, one of
the biochemical abnormalities in these patients. However, no effect on
clinically relevant outcome measures could be observed after 9 months of CA
treatment. It was noted that, in patients with advanced liver disease, caution
is needed because of possible hepatotoxicity.
METHODS: An extension study of the previously conducted pretest-posttest design
study was conducted including 17 patients with a ZSD. All patients received oral
CA for an additional period of 12 months, encompassing a total of 21 months of
treatment. Multiple clinically relevant parameters and markers for bile acid
synthesis were assessed after 15 and 21 months of treatment.
RESULTS: Bile acid synthesis was still suppressed after 21 months of CA
treatment, accompanied with reduced levels of C27 -bile acid intermediates in
plasma. These levels significantly increased again after discontinuation of CA.
No significant changes were found in liver tests, liver elasticity, coagulation
parameters, fat-soluble vitamin levels or body weight.
CONCLUSIONS: Although CA treatment did lead to reduced levels of toxic C27 -bile
acid intermediates in ZSD patients without severe liver fibrosis or cirrhosis,
no improvement of clinically relevant parameters was observed after 21 months of
treatment. We discuss the implications for CA therapy in ZSD based on these
results.

© 2018 The Authors. Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12042
PMID: 30793331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
