---
reference_id: "PMID:28687463"
title: Non-asthmatic eosinophilic bronchitis and its relationship with asthma.
authors:
- Lai K
- Chen R
- Peng W
- Zhan W
journal: Pulm Pharmacol Ther
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2017.07.002
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Non-asthmatic eosinophilic bronchitis and its relationship with asthma.
**Authors:** Lai K, Chen R, Peng W, Zhan W
**Journal:** Pulm Pharmacol Ther (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pupt.2017.07.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pupt.2017.07.002)

## Content

1. Pulm Pharmacol Ther. 2017 Dec;47:66-71. doi: 10.1016/j.pupt.2017.07.002. Epub 
2017 Jul 5.

Non-asthmatic eosinophilic bronchitis and its relationship with asthma.

Lai K(1), Chen R(2), Peng W(2), Zhan W(2).

Author information:
(1)Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Disease, State Key Laboratory of 
Respiratory Disease, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, 
Guangzhou 510120, China. Electronic address: klai@163.com.
(2)Guangzhou Institute of Respiratory Disease, State Key Laboratory of 
Respiratory Disease, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, 
Guangzhou 510120, China.

Non-asthmatic eosinophilic bronchitis (NAEB) is an important cause of chronic 
cough. NAEB shares similar eosinophilic inflammation of airway and response to 
corticosteroids with asthma. However, in contrast to asthma, NAEB subjects have 
no airflow obstruction and airway hyperresponsiveness. The pathogenesis of NAEB 
are involved with many inflammatory cells such as eosinophils, lymphocytes, mast 
cells, cytokines and inflammatory mediators, includingTh2 cytokines, histamine, 
leukotrines, prograndins and oxidative stress. The different locations of 
inflammatory cells and the inflammatory mediators level may explain this 
difference between EB and asthma. There is no study on dose and duration of 
treatment. On the prognosis of NAEB, long term follow-up study suggested that 
NAEB should be a distinct entity rather than an early stage of asthma or COPD. 
The relapse rate is high after treatment. Assessing sputum eosinophils after 
treatment is useful to identify those at risk of relapse.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pupt.2017.07.002
PMID: 28687463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]