---
reference_id: "PMID:37674882"
title: Cronkhite-Canada Syndrome Masquerading as Inflammatory Bowel Disease.
authors:
- Leong JWH
- Wang LM
- Li JW
- Ang TL
- Kwek BEA
- Ong JPL
journal: ACG Case Rep J
year: '2023'
doi: 10.14309/crj.0000000000001090
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cronkhite-Canada Syndrome Masquerading as Inflammatory Bowel Disease.
**Authors:** Leong JWH, Wang LM, Li JW, Ang TL, Kwek BEA, Ong JPL
**Journal:** ACG Case Rep J (2023)
**DOI:** [10.14309/crj.0000000000001090](https://doi.org/10.14309/crj.0000000000001090)

## Content

1. ACG Case Rep J. 2023 Sep 5;10(9):e01090. doi: 10.14309/crj.0000000000001090. 
eCollection 2023 Sep.

Cronkhite-Canada Syndrome Masquerading as Inflammatory Bowel Disease.

Leong JWH(1), Wang LM(2), Li JW(1), Ang TL(1), Kwek BEA(1), Ong JPL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Changi General Hospital, 
Singapore.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Changi General Hospital, Singapore.

Cronkhite-Canada syndrome (CCS) is a rare nonhereditary gastrointestinal 
polyposis syndrome. We illustrate a case with clinical presentation of 
dysgeusia, chronic diarrhea and weight loss, and endoscopic features of diffuse 
gastric mucosa nodularity with circumferential nodular pancolitis and a solitary 
colonic polyp initially mimicking inflammatory bowel disease. After 
multidisciplinary discussion, the diagnosis of CCS was made. The patient 
received steroids with resultant clinical, endoscopic, and histological 
improvement. We discuss the treatment and risk of neoplasia in CCS.

© 2023 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on behalf of The 
American College of Gastroenterology.

DOI: 10.14309/crj.0000000000001090
PMCID: PMC10479349
PMID: 37674882