---
reference_id: "PMID:31201068"
title: "Fibrocartilaginous Embolism of the Spinal Cord in Children: A Case Report and Review of Literature."
authors:
- Yamaguchi H
- Nagase H
- Nishiyama M
- Tokumoto S
- Toyoshima D
- Akasaka Y
- Maruyama A
- Iijima K
journal: Pediatr Neurol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2019.04.013
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Cartilage Diseases/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, etiology"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Embolism/diagnosis, diagnostic imaging, etiology"
- "Gait Disorders, Neurologic/etiology"
- Humans
- Intervertebral Disc Displacement/complications
- Lumbar Vertebrae
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Muscle Weakness/etiology
- "Myelitis, Transverse/diagnosis"
- Nucleus Pulposus
- "Reflex, Abnormal"
- "Reflex, Babinski"
- Soccer/injuries
- Spinal Cord Ischemia/etiology
- Urinary Retention/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fibrocartilaginous Embolism of the Spinal Cord in Children: A Case Report and Review of Literature.
**Authors:** Yamaguchi H, Nagase H, Nishiyama M, Tokumoto S, Toyoshima D, Akasaka Y, Maruyama A, Iijima K
**Journal:** Pediatr Neurol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2019.04.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2019.04.013)

## Content

1. Pediatr Neurol. 2019 Oct;99:3-6. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2019.04.013.
Epub  2019 Apr 26.

Fibrocartilaginous Embolism of the Spinal Cord in Children: A Case Report and
Review of Literature.

Yamaguchi H(1), Nagase H(2), Nishiyama M(2), Tokumoto S(3), Toyoshima D(4),
Akasaka Y(5), Maruyama A(4), Iijima K(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hyogo Prefectural Kobe Children's Hospital, Hyogo,
Japan; Department of Pediatrics, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine,
Hyogo, Japan. Electronic address: hiyamagu@med.kobe-u.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Hyogo,
Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology, Hyogo Prefectural Kobe Children's Hospital, Hyogo,
Japan; Department of Pediatrics, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine,
Hyogo, Japan.
(4)Department of Neurology, Hyogo Prefectural Kobe Children's Hospital, Hyogo,
Japan.
(5)Department of Radiology, Hyogo Prefectural Kobe Children's Hospital, Hyogo,
Japan.

Fibrocartilaginous embolism is assumed to be caused by fibrocartilaginous
nucleus pulposus component migration through retrograde embolization to the
spinal cord artery. Fibrocartilaginous embolism is currently not well recognized
among pediatricians because of its rarity. We describe a previously healthy
15-year-old soccer player who, after kicking a ball, developed progressive
weakness in both legs and urinary retention the next day. Magnetic resonance
imaging revealed T2 hyperintensity in the anterior horn of the spinal cord at
the Th12/L1 level with Schmorl node at the level of L1/2. We also review the
previous literature on fibrocartilaginous embolism of the spinal cord in
children (less than18 years age); a total of 25 pediatric patients, including
our patient, were identified. The median age was 14 years, and 64% of the
reviewed patients were female. The most common trigger event was intense
exercise or sports. The neurological symptoms started within one day in most
cases, and the time to symptom peak varied from a few hours to two weeks. The
most common initial neurological symptoms were weakness or plegia (100%),
followed by paresthesia or numbness (48%). Affected areas of the spinal cord
were distributed evenly from the cervical to thoracolumbar regions. Although
steroids and anticoagulants were most commonly used, the prognosis was quite
poor (mild to severe sequelae with three deaths). Although fibrocartilaginous
embolism is a very rare condition, physicians should be aware of the
characteristics and include fibrocartilaginous embolism of the spinal cord in
their differential diagnosis, especially for physically active patients.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2019.04.013
PMID: 31201068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
