---
reference_id: "PMID:22102188"
title: "Platelet-type von Willebrand disease: a rare, often misdiagnosed and underdiagnosed bleeding disorder."
authors:
- Othman M
journal: Semin Thromb Hemost
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1281030
keywords:
- Animals
- "Blood Platelets/metabolism, pathology"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Humans
- Membrane Glycoproteins/genetics
- Mutation
- Platelet Glycoprotein GPIb-IX Complex
- "von Willebrand Diseases/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- von Willebrand Factor/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Platelet-type von Willebrand disease: a rare, often misdiagnosed and underdiagnosed bleeding disorder.
**Authors:** Othman M
**Journal:** Semin Thromb Hemost (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0031-1281030](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0031-1281030)

## Content

1. Semin Thromb Hemost. 2011 Jul;37(5):464-9. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1281030. Epub 
2011 Nov 18.

Platelet-type von Willebrand disease: a rare, often misdiagnosed and 
underdiagnosed bleeding disorder.

Othman M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Queen's University, Kingston, 
Ontario, Canada. Othman@queensu.ca

Platelet-type von Willebrand disease (PT-VWD) is an autosomal dominant rare 
bleeding disorder characterized by hyperresponsive platelets. This inherent 
platelet function defect is due to a gain-of-function mutation within the GP1BA 
gene coding for the platelet surface glycoprotein Ib alpha protein, the receptor 
for the adhesive protein von Willebrand factor (VWF). The defect results in 
excessive and unnecessary platelet-VWF interaction with subsequent removal of 
the hemostatically efficient high molecular weight VWF as well as platelets from 
the circulation, leading to thrombocytopenia and bleeding diathesis. Patients 
with PT-VWD present with mild to moderate mucocutaneous bleeding, which becomes 
more pronounced during pregnancy and following aspirin ingestion or drugs that 
have antiplatelet activity. Laboratory testing shows low VWF:ristocetin cofactor 
and low or normal VWF:antigen and characteristically an enhanced 
ristocetin-induced platelet agglutination (RIPA). These laboratory features are 
also indicators of the closely similar and more common bleeding disorder type 2B 
VWD. Simplified RIPA mixing assays, cryoprecipitate challenge, and flow 
cytometry can differentiate between the two disorders. However, the gold 
standard is to identify mutations within the VWF gene (indicating type 2B VWD) 
or the platelet GP1BA gene (confirming PT-VWD). Treatment is based on making a 
correct diagnosis of PT-VWD where platelet concentrates instead of VWF/factor 
VIII preparations should be administered. A recent fairly large 
retrospective/prospective registry-based international study showed that PT-VWD 
is very rare, likely to be misdiagnosed as type 2B VWD or idiopathic 
thrombocytopenic purpura, and represents 15% of type 2B VWD diagnoses.

© Thieme Medical Publishers.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0031-1281030
PMID: 22102188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]