---
reference_id: "PMID:9817746"
title: Airway smooth muscle as a target of glucocorticoid action in the treatment of asthma.
authors:
- Hirst SJ
- Lee TH
journal: Am J Respir Crit Care Med
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1164/ajrccm.158.supplement_2.13tac190
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Airway smooth muscle as a target of glucocorticoid action in the treatment of asthma.
**Authors:** Hirst SJ, Lee TH
**Journal:** Am J Respir Crit Care Med (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1164/ajrccm.158.supplement_2.13tac190](https://doi.org/10.1164/ajrccm.158.supplement_2.13tac190)

## Content

1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1998 Nov;158(5 Pt 3):S201-6. doi: 
10.1164/ajrccm.158.supplement_2.13tac190.

Airway smooth muscle as a target of glucocorticoid action in the treatment of 
asthma.

Hirst SJ(1), Lee TH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Allergy and Respiratory Medicine, UMDS, Thomas Guy House, Guy's 
Hospital, London, United Kingdom. s.hirst@umds.ac.uk

Glucocorticoids are highly effective in the control of asthma and suppression of 
airway inflammation. The cellular and molecular mechanisms involved in the 
anti-inflammatory actions of glucocorticoids are becoming clearer. Although it 
is apparent that glucocorticoids have effects on many aspects of inflammation, 
it is not certain which actions on which cell types are the most critical in 
controlling asthma. Airway smooth muscle cells represent a significant 
proportion of all cells present in the airways and might therefore be expected 
to be a prominent cellular target for inhaled steroids. Despite this, little is 
known of the action of glucocorticoids on airway smooth muscle. It is becoming 
clear that in addition to its contractile properties, airway smooth muscle can 
potentially contribute to the pathogenesis of asthma by increased proliferation 
and by expression and secretion of pro-inflammatory cytokines and mediators, 
which in turn may lead to the activation and recruitment of key inflammatory 
cells in the airways. This review examines the action of glucocorticoids on some 
of the diverse functions of airway smooth muscle that are implicated in 
remodeling of the airways in asthma. Glucocorticoids either directly or 
indirectly modulate contraction of airway smooth muscle by suppressing 
agonist-induced increases in intracellular calcium levels or by downregulating 
or uncoupling receptors linked to contraction (e.g., muscarinic M2 or M3, 
histamine H1 receptors). In addition, glucocorticoids may augment relaxation of 
airway smooth muscle by increasing activation of either cyclic AMP-dependent 
(e.g., increased expression of beta2-adrenoceptors, reduced homologous 
desensitization of beta2-adrenoceptors) or AMP-independent mechanisms (e.g., 
increased Na+/K+ electrogenic pump activity). In addition to their effects on 
contraction, glucocorticoids are also effective antiproliferative agents in 
airway smooth muscle, but under some circumstances may also contribute to 
proliferation by inhibiting the antiproliferative effect of high concentrations 
of tumor necrosis factor alpha in these cells. Glucocorticoids also suppress 
induction of cyclooxygenase-2 in human airway smooth muscle cells and the 
subsequent synthesis and release of arachidonic acid metabolites, particularly 
prostaglandin E2. The potential of airway smooth muscle to recruit and activate 
pro-inflammatory cells such as the eosinophil may also be reduced by 
glucocorticoids, as they are effective in preventing the release of several 
cytokines (e.g., RANTES, interleukin-8, and granulocyte macrophage 
colony-stimulating factor). The possibility exists that as we begin to 
understand and speculate more about the likely role of airway smooth muscle in 
the pathogenesis of asthma, it may be necessary to reconsider airway smooth 
muscle as an important cellular target for the action of glucocorticoids in the 
treatment of asthma.

DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.158.supplement_2.13tac190
PMID: 9817746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]