---
reference_id: "PMID:38760634"
title: "An Update on the Adult-Onset Hereditary Cerebellar Ataxias: Novel Genetic Causes and New Diagnostic Approaches."
authors:
- Rudaks LI
- Yeow D
- Ng K
- Deveson IW
- Kennerson ML
- Kumar KR
journal: Cerebellum
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s12311-024-01703-z
keywords:
- Humans
- "Cerebellar Ataxia/genetics, diagnosis"
- Age of Onset
- Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An Update on the Adult-Onset Hereditary Cerebellar Ataxias: Novel Genetic Causes and New Diagnostic Approaches.
**Authors:** Rudaks LI, Yeow D, Ng K, Deveson IW, Kennerson ML, Kumar KR
**Journal:** Cerebellum (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12311-024-01703-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12311-024-01703-z)

## Content

1. Cerebellum. 2024 Oct;23(5):2152-2168. doi: 10.1007/s12311-024-01703-z. Epub
2024  May 18.

An Update on the Adult-Onset Hereditary Cerebellar Ataxias: Novel Genetic Causes 
and New Diagnostic Approaches.

Rudaks LI(1)(2)(3)(4), Yeow D(5)(6)(7)(8)(9), Ng K(6)(10), Deveson IW(7)(11), 
Kennerson ML(5)(6)(12), Kumar KR(5)(6)(7)(11)(13).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Medicine Laboratory and Neurology Department, Concord Repatriation 
General Hospital, Sydney, Australia. laura.rudaks@gmail.com.
(2)Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia. 
laura.rudaks@gmail.com.
(3)Genomics and Inherited Disease Program, The Garvan Institute of Medical 
Research, Sydney, Australia. laura.rudaks@gmail.com.
(4)Clinical Genetics Unit, Royal North Shore Hospital, Sydney, Australia. 
laura.rudaks@gmail.com.
(5)Molecular Medicine Laboratory and Neurology Department, Concord Repatriation 
General Hospital, Sydney, Australia.
(6)Faculty of Medicine and Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.
(7)Genomics and Inherited Disease Program, The Garvan Institute of Medical 
Research, Sydney, Australia.
(8)Neurodegenerative Service, Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, Australia.
(9)Neuroscience Research Australia, Sydney, Australia.
(10)Neurology Department, Royal North Shore Hospital, Sydney, Australia.
(11)Faculty of Medicine, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.
(12)The Northcott Neuroscience Laboratory, ANZAC Research Institute, Sydney 
Local Health District, Sydney, Australia.
(13)Faculty of Medicine, St Vincent's Healthcare Campus, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, 
Australia.

The hereditary cerebellar ataxias (HCAs) are rare, progressive neurologic 
disorders caused by variants in many different genes. Inheritance may follow 
autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, X-linked or mitochondrial patterns. The 
list of genes associated with adult-onset cerebellar ataxia is continuously 
growing, with several new genes discovered in the last few years. This includes 
short-tandem repeat (STR) expansions in RFC1, causing cerebellar ataxia, 
neuropathy, vestibular areflexia syndrome (CANVAS), FGF14-GAA causing 
spinocerebellar ataxia type 27B (SCA27B), and THAP11. In addition, the genetic 
basis for SCA4, has recently been identified as a STR expansion in ZFHX3. Given 
the large and growing number of genes, and different gene variant types, the 
approach to diagnostic testing for adult-onset HCA can be complex. Testing 
methods include targeted evaluation of STR expansions (e.g. SCAs, Friedreich 
ataxia, fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome, 
dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy), next generation sequencing for 
conventional variants, which may include targeted gene panels, whole exome, or 
whole genome sequencing, followed by various potential additional tests. This 
review proposes a diagnostic approach for clinical testing, highlights the 
challenges with current testing technologies, and discusses future advances 
which may overcome these limitations. Implementing long-read sequencing has the 
potential to transform the diagnostic approach in HCA, with the overall aim to 
improve the diagnostic yield.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12311-024-01703-z
PMCID: PMC11489183
PMID: 38760634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors do not have any financial or 
personal disclosures, or any competing interests to declare. The authors declare 
no competing interests.