---
reference_id: "PMID:30858092"
title: "LC-MS/MS measurements of urinary guanidinoacetic acid and creatine: Method optimization by deleting derivatization step."
authors:
- Benoit R
- Samir M
- Boutin J
- Samuel A
- Brigitte C
- Dominique D
- Isabelle RV
journal: Clin Chim Acta
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2019.03.007
keywords:
- "Chromatography, High Pressure Liquid"
- "Clinical Laboratory Techniques/methods, standards"
- Creatine/urine
- "Glycine/analogs & derivatives, urine"
- "Guanidinoacetate N-Methyltransferase/deficiency, urine"
- Humans
- "Language Development Disorders/diagnosis, urine"
- "Movement Disorders/congenital, diagnosis, urine"
- Tandem Mass Spectrometry
content_type: abstract_only
---

# LC-MS/MS measurements of urinary guanidinoacetic acid and creatine: Method optimization by deleting derivatization step.
**Authors:** Benoit R, Samir M, Boutin J, Samuel A, Brigitte C, Dominique D, Isabelle RV
**Journal:** Clin Chim Acta (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cca.2019.03.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cca.2019.03.007)

## Content

1. Clin Chim Acta. 2019 Jun;493:148-155. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2019.03.007. Epub
2019  Mar 9.

LC-MS/MS measurements of urinary guanidinoacetic acid and creatine: Method
optimization by deleting derivatization step.

Benoit R(1), Samir M(2), Boutin J(2), Samuel A(2), Brigitte C(2), Dominique
D(2), Isabelle RV(3).

Author information:
(1)Metabolic Biochemistry Department, Pitié Salpêtrière University Hospital,
AP-HP, Paris, France. Electronic address: benoit.rucheton@aphp.fr.
(2)Clinical Chemistry Department, Inherited Metabolic Diseases, CHU Bordeaux,
33076 Bordeaux, France.
(3)Clinical Chemistry Department, Inherited Metabolic Diseases, CHU Bordeaux,
33076 Bordeaux, France; INSERM U 1211: MRGM Rare diseases, genetic and
metabolism, Bordeaux University, 33000 Bordeaux, France.

BACKGROUND: Cerebral Creatine deficiency syndromes (CCDS) include three
hereditary diseases affecting the metabolism of creatine (Cr): arginine glycine
amidinotransferase deficiency, guanidinoacetate methyltransferase deficiency and
disorders of creatine transporter. These pathologies cause a brain creatine
deficiency responsible of non-specific neurological impairments with mental
retardation. LC-MS/MS measurements of guanidinoacetic acid (GAA) and creatine in
urine and plasma are an important screening test to identify the deficit.
Analysis of this polar and basic molecules not hold on standard column requires
a derivatization step to butyl-esters. To overcome this long and fastidious
derivatization, an ion pairing (IP) method was chosen in this study.
METHOD: IP method was validated using Comité francais d'accréditation (COFRAC)
recommendations. Then, urine GAA and creatine of 15 patients with a CDS
deficiency suspected were tested y LC-MS/MS using IP technique, and performances
were assessed with reference laboratory method (butylation method). Moreover,
references values were suggested y the study of 100 urines samples of healthy
patients.
RESULTS: The method developed provided a good accuracy and precision with intra
and inter-day coefficients of variation (CVs) <15%. The curve was linear for the
biological and pathological concentrations. The comparison with the reference
method did not reveal any significant difference for analytical performances but
showed a simplification of the preparation of samples.
CONCLUSION: The use of IP technique that we have developed demonstrated a good
correlation with the butylation method. Moreover, this new method not only
allows a simplification of the technique, but also decreases in run time.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2019.03.007
PMID: 30858092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
