---
reference_id: "PMID:34340878"
title: A review of treatment modalities in gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina (GACR).
authors:
- Balfoort BM
- Buijs MJN
- Ten Asbroek ALMA
- Bergen AAB
- Boon CJF
- Ferreira EA
- Houtkooper RH
- Wagenmakers MAEM
- Wanders RJA
- Waterham HR
- Timmer C
- van Karnebeek CD
- Brands MM
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.07.010
keywords:
- "Choroid/drug effects, pathology"
- Gyrate Atrophy/drug therapy
- Humans
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/drug therapy"
- Mutation
- "Retina/drug effects, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A review of treatment modalities in gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina (GACR).
**Authors:** Balfoort BM, Buijs MJN, Ten Asbroek ALMA, Bergen AAB, Boon CJF, Ferreira EA, Houtkooper RH, Wagenmakers MAEM, Wanders RJA, Waterham HR, Timmer C, van Karnebeek CD, Brands MM
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.07.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.07.010)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2021 Sep-Oct;134(1-2):96-116. doi:
10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.07.010.  Epub 2021 Jul 26.

A review of treatment modalities in gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina
(GACR).

Balfoort BM(1), Buijs MJN(2), Ten Asbroek ALMA(2), Bergen AAB(3), Boon CJF(4),
Ferreira EA(1), Houtkooper RH(5), Wagenmakers MAEM(6), Wanders RJA(5), Waterham
HR(5), Timmer C(7), van Karnebeek CD(8), Brands MM(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam UMC,
University of Amsterdam, 1105, AZ, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam,
1105, AZ, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam,
1105, AZ, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Department of Ophthalmology, Amsterdam
UMC, University of Amsterdam, 1105, AZ, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, 1105,
AZ, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Department of Ophthalmology, Leiden University
Medical Centre, 2333, ZA, Leiden, the Netherlands.
(5)Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Amsterdam Gastroenterology,
Endocrinology, and Metabolism, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, 1105, AZ,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Internal Medicine, Centre for Lysosomal and Metabolic Diseases,
Erasmus MC, University Medical Centre Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(7)Department Endocrinology and Metabolism Amsterdam UMC, University of
Amsterdam, 1105, AZ, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(8)Department of Paediatrics, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam UMC,
University of Amsterdam, 1105, AZ, Amsterdam, the Netherlands; Department of
Paediatrics, Radboud Centre for Mitochondrial Medicine, Radboud University
Medical Centre, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(9)Department of Paediatrics, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam UMC,
University of Amsterdam, 1105, AZ, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Electronic
address: m.m.brands@amsterdamumc.nl.

Gyrate atrophy of the choroid and retina (GACR) is a rare inborn error of amino
acid metabolism caused by bi-allelic variations in OAT. GACR is characterised by
vision decline in early life eventually leading to complete blindness, and high
plasma ornithine levels. There is no curative treatment for GACR, although
several therapeutic modalities aim to slow progression of the disease by
targeting different steps within the ornithine pathway. No international
treatment protocol is available. We systematically collected all international
literature on therapeutic interventions in GACR to provide an overview of
published treatment effects.
METHODS: Following the PRISMA guidelines, we conducted a systematic review of
the English literature until December 22nd 2020. PubMed and Embase databases
were searched for studies related to therapeutic interventions in patients with
GACR.
RESULTS: A total of 33 studies (n = 107 patients) met the inclusion criteria.
Most studies were designed as case reports (n = 27) or case series (n = 4). No
randomised controlled trials or large cohort studies were found. Treatments
applied were protein-restricted diets, pyridoxine supplementation, creatine or
creatine precursor supplementation, l-lysine supplementation, and proline
supplementation. Protein-restricted diets lowered ornithine levels ranging from
16.0-91.2%. Pyridoxine responsiveness was reported in 30% of included mutations.
Lysine supplementation decreased ornithine levels with 21-34%. Quality
assessment showed low to moderate quality of the articles.
CONCLUSIONS: Based primarily on case reports ornithine levels can be reduced by
using a protein restricted diet, pyridoxine supplementation
(variation-dependent) and/or lysine supplementation. The lack of pre-defined
clinical outcome measures and structural follow-up in all included studies
impeded conclusions on clinical effectiveness. Future research should be aimed
at 1) Unravelling the OAT biochemical pathway to identify other possible
pathologic metabolites besides ornithine, 2) Pre-defining GACR specific clinical
outcome measures, and 3) Establishing an international historical cohort.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.07.010
PMID: 34340878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors
report no conflict of interest.
