---
reference_id: "PMID:37158761"
title: Patterns of Involvement of the Hand Joints in Classical Rheumatoid Arthritis.
authors:
- Anderson RJ
- Cui J
- Weinblatt ME
- Solomon DH
- Naik C
- Shadick NA
journal: J Clin Rheumatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000001971
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Patterns of Involvement of the Hand Joints in Classical Rheumatoid Arthritis.
**Authors:** Anderson RJ, Cui J, Weinblatt ME, Solomon DH, Naik C, Shadick NA
**Journal:** J Clin Rheumatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1097/RHU.0000000000001971](https://doi.org/10.1097/RHU.0000000000001971)

## Content

1. J Clin Rheumatol. 2023 Aug 1;29(5):230-234. doi: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000001971.
 Epub 2023 May 9.

Patterns of Involvement of the Hand Joints in Classical Rheumatoid Arthritis.

Anderson RJ(1), Cui J, Weinblatt ME, Solomon DH, Naik C, Shadick NA.

Author information:
(1)From the Division of Rheumatology, Inflammation, and Immunity, Brigham and 
Women's Hospital, Boston, MA.

BACKGROUND: Symmetrical involvement of the hand joints is described as 
characteristic of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Quantitative data on specific 
patterns of involvement are lacking.
OBJECTIVE: The Brigham Rheumatoid Arthritis Sequential Study was created for 
observational studies of patients with RA and afforded a unique opportunity to 
answer these questions.
METHODS: Of 1598 subjects in the Brigham Rheumatoid Arthritis Sequential Study 
cohort, 535 met the following criteria: (1) disease duration of 7 years or 
greater, (2) seropositive, and (3) hand radiographs available. Patterns in 
specific hand joints based on physical examination and radiographic findings 
obtained at entry were identified. The level of symmetry of involvement of the 
metacarpophalangeal (MCP) and wrist joints was determined, as was the 
correlation between findings on physical examination and radiographic changes in 
the hand joints.
RESULTS: The prevalence of joint space narrowing and/or erosions in each 
proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joints ranged between 11% and 18%. Joint space 
narrowing and/or erosions in the MCPs increased radially from the fifth to the 
second finger. Swelling and tenderness on physical examination of both the PIPs 
and MCPs also increased radially although the positive predictive value of 
physical examination as an indicator of joint damage decreased radially. The 
wrist was the most common joint involved both by physical examination (67%) and 
radiographically (70%). The right side was more involved radiographically. 
Analysis of radiographic changes in individual patients revealed that 
symmetrical findings in the wrists and MCPs occurred in only 67% of patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The study describes the pattern of involvement of the hand joints 
in patients with long standing RA. Findings of interest include symmetrical 
involvement in only 67% of patients and a discordancy between physical findings 
and radiographic changes most marked in the more radial PIP joints.

Copyright © 2023 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/RHU.0000000000001971
PMID: 37158761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: D.H.S. receives salary support from P30 
AR072577; D.H.S. receives salary support from research contracts with Brigham 
and Women's Hospital from Abbvie, Amgen, CorEvitas, Janssen, and Moderna. N.A.S. 
receives grant support from Mallinckrodt, AMGEN, Bristol Myers Squibb, and 
Aqtual. N.A.S. receives salary support from research contracts with Brigham and 
Women's Hospital from Abbvie, Amgen, Aqtual, Eli Lilly, Bristol Myers Squibb, 
and Jannsen. M.E.W. has the following potential conflicts of interest: research 
grants from Bristol Myers Squibb, Aqtual, Amgen, and Janssen; consultant for 
Abbvie, Aclaris, Amgen, Aqtual, Bayer, Bristol Myers Squibb, CorEvitas, Eli 
Lilly, EQRx, Genosco, GlaxoSmithKline, Gilead, Horizon, Johnson and Johnson, 
Kyvrena, Pfizer, Rani, Revolo, Scipher, Sci Rhom, Set Point, and Tremeau; and 
options for Canfite, Inmedix, and Scipher. The other authors declare no conflict 
of interest.