---
reference_id: PMID:37834407
title: Consequences of Disturbing Manganese Homeostasis.
authors:
- Baj J
- Flieger W
- Barbachowska A
- Kowalska B
- Flieger M
- Forma A
- Teresiński G
- Portincasa P
- Buszewicz G
- Radzikowska-Büchner E
- Flieger J
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms241914959
keywords:
- Humans
- "Manganese/toxicity, metabolism"
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2"
- Manganese Poisoning/metabolism
- Homeostasis
- Neurodegenerative Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Consequences of Disturbing Manganese Homeostasis.
**Authors:** Baj J, Flieger W, Barbachowska A, Kowalska B, Flieger M, Forma A, Teresiński G, Portincasa P, Buszewicz G, Radzikowska-Büchner E, Flieger J
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms241914959](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms241914959)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Oct 6;24(19):14959. doi: 10.3390/ijms241914959.

Consequences of Disturbing Manganese Homeostasis.

Baj J(1), Flieger W(1), Barbachowska A(2), Kowalska B(3), Flieger M(4), Forma 
A(1), Teresiński G(4), Portincasa P(5), Buszewicz G(4), Radzikowska-Büchner 
E(6), Flieger J(7).

Author information:
(1)Chair and Department of Anatomy, Medical University of Lublin, 20-090 Lublin, 
Poland.
(2)Department of Plastic, Reconstructive and Burn Surgery, Medical University of 
Lublin, 21-010 Łęczna, Poland.
(3)Department of Water Supply and Wastewater Disposal, Lublin University of 
Technology, 20-618 Lublin, Poland.
(4)Chair and Department of Forensic Medicine, Medical University of Lublin, 
20-090 Lublin, Poland.
(5)Clinica Medica A. Murri, Department of Biomedical Sciences & Human Oncology, 
Medical School, University of Bari, 70124 Bari, Italy.
(6)Department of Plastic, Reconstructive and Maxillary Surgery, CSK MSWiA, 
02-507 Warszawa, Poland.
(7)Department of Analytical Chemistry, Medical University of Lublin, 20-093 
Lublin, Poland.

Manganese (Mn) is an essential trace element with unique functions in the body; 
it acts as a cofactor for many enzymes involved in energy metabolism, the 
endogenous antioxidant enzyme systems, neurotransmitter production, and the 
regulation of reproductive hormones. However, overexposure to Mn is toxic, 
particularly to the central nervous system (CNS) due to it causing the 
progressive destruction of nerve cells. Exposure to manganese is widespread and 
occurs by inhalation, ingestion, or dermal contact. Associations have been 
observed between Mn accumulation and neurodegenerative diseases such as 
manganism, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, and 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. People with genetic diseases associated with a 
mutation in the gene associated with impaired Mn excretion, kidney disease, iron 
deficiency, or a vegetarian diet are at particular risk of excessive exposure to 
Mn. This review has collected data on the current knowledge of the source of Mn 
exposure, the experimental data supporting the dispersive accumulation of Mn in 
the brain, the controversies surrounding the reference values of biomarkers 
related to Mn status in different matrices, and the competitiveness of Mn with 
other metals, such as iron (Fe), magnesium (Mg), zinc (Zn), copper (Cu), lead 
(Pb), calcium (Ca). The disturbed homeostasis of Mn in the body has been 
connected with susceptibility to neurodegenerative diseases, fertility, and 
infectious diseases. The current evidence on the involvement of Mn in metabolic 
diseases, such as type 2 diabetes mellitus/insulin resistance, osteoporosis, 
obesity, atherosclerosis, and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, was collected 
and discussed.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms241914959
PMCID: PMC10573482
PMID: 37834407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.