---
reference_id: "PMID:39194148"
title: "Successful combination therapy of trichloroacetic acid, podophyllin, and electrocautery on giant condylomata acuminata."
authors:
- Yusuf H
- Purwoko MIH
journal: Int J STD AIDS
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1177/09564624241276574
keywords:
- Humans
- Trichloroacetic Acid/therapeutic use
- Male
- Electrocoagulation/methods
- "Condylomata Acuminata/drug therapy, therapy"
- Podophyllin/therapeutic use
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Caustics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Successful combination therapy of trichloroacetic acid, podophyllin, and electrocautery on giant condylomata acuminata.
**Authors:** Yusuf H, Purwoko MIH
**Journal:** Int J STD AIDS (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1177/09564624241276574](https://doi.org/10.1177/09564624241276574)

## Content

1. Int J STD AIDS. 2024 Nov;35(13):1079-1083. doi: 10.1177/09564624241276574.
Epub  2024 Aug 28.

Successful combination therapy of trichloroacetic acid, podophyllin, and 
electrocautery on giant condylomata acuminata.

Yusuf H(1), Purwoko MIH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Venereology, and Aesthetics, Dr Mohammad Hoesin 
General Hospital, Faculty of Medicine Universitas Sriwijaya, Palembang, 
Indonesia.

Introduction: Giant condylomata acuminata (GCA) is a rare presentation of 
anogenital wart (AGW), invasive locally but does not metastasize. Combination 
therapy for GCA is suggested based on modalities and experiences. The 
combination of TCA and podophyllin has showed good efficacy, followed by 
electrocautery to eradicate warts. Case: A 24-year-old male had a chief 
complaint of large warts on the base of the penis that had started to bleed for 
4 weeks. The initial lesion appeared 8 months prior as a small varucose papule. 
The patient is unmarried and has history of sexual contact with sex workers. 
Physical examination showed multiple verrucous papules, flesh-coloured, 
cauliflower-like shaped, 5 × 2 × 1 cm in size. The patient tested negative for 
HIV infection. Histopathological examination showed acanthosis, exophytic 
growth, parakeratosis, and koilocytosis with no signs of malignancy. This 
patient received a combination of TCA 90% and podophyllin 25% to initially 
reduce the tumor size, followed by electrocautery to eradicate the remaining 
lesions. The tumor showed complete clearance. Discussion: There is no definitive 
evidence that one therapy is superior to completely eliminating warts. 
Combination therapy of TCA and podophyllin leads to complete wart clearance, 
followed by electrocautery to destroy smaller warts.

DOI: 10.1177/09564624241276574
PMID: 39194148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of conflicting interestsThe 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.