---
reference_id: "PMID:26504182"
title: "Sirolimus is effective in relapsed/refractory autoimmune cytopenias: results of a prospective multi-institutional trial."
authors:
- Bride KL
- Vincent T
- Smith-Whitley K
- Lambert MP
- Bleesing JJ
- Seif AE
- Manno CS
- Casper J
- Grupp SA
- Teachey DT
journal: Blood
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-07-657981
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Autoimmune Diseases/drug therapy, mortality, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/drug effects"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Hematologic Diseases/drug therapy, mortality, pathology"
- Humans
- "Immunosuppressive Agents/pharmacokinetics, therapeutic use"
- Infant
- Male
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/drug therapy, mortality, pathology"
- Neoplasm Staging
- Prognosis
- Prospective Studies
- Salvage Therapy
- "Sirolimus/pharmacokinetics, therapeutic use"
- Survival Rate
- Tissue Distribution
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sirolimus is effective in relapsed/refractory autoimmune cytopenias: results of a prospective multi-institutional trial.
**Authors:** Bride KL, Vincent T, Smith-Whitley K, Lambert MP, Bleesing JJ, Seif AE, Manno CS, Casper J, Grupp SA, Teachey DT
**Journal:** Blood (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2015-07-657981](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2015-07-657981)

## Content

1. Blood. 2016 Jan 7;127(1):17-28. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-07-657981. Epub 2015
Oct  26.

Sirolimus is effective in relapsed/refractory autoimmune cytopenias: results of
a prospective multi-institutional trial.

Bride KL(1), Vincent T(1), Smith-Whitley K(2), Lambert MP(2), Bleesing JJ(3),
Seif AE(1), Manno CS(4), Casper J(5), Grupp SA(1), Teachey DT(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Oncology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
PA; Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA;
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA; Division of Hematology, The Children's Hospital
of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA;
(3)Division of Bone Marrow Transplantation and Immune Deficiency, Department of
Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH;
(4)Department of Pediatrics, New York University Langone Medical Center, New
York, NY; and.
(5)Division of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Bone Marrow Transplant,
Medical College of Wisconsin, Children's Hospital of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI.

Comment in
    Blood. 2016 Jan 7;127(1):5-6. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-11-679829.

Patients with autoimmune multilineage cytopenias are often refractory to
standard therapies requiring chronic immunosuppression with medications with
limited efficacy and high toxicity. We present data on 30 patients treated on a
multicenter prospective clinical trial using sirolimus as monotherapy. All
children (N = 12) with autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS) achieved a
durable complete response (CR), including rapid improvement in autoimmune
disease, lymphadenopathy, and splenomegaly within 1 to 3 months of starting
sirolimus. Double-negative T cells were no longer detectable in most, yet other
lymphocyte populations were spared, suggesting a targeted effect of sirolimus.
We also treated 12 patients with multilineage cytopenias secondary to common
variable immunodeficiency (CVID), Evans syndrome (ES), or systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE), and most achieved a CR (N = 8), although the time to CR was
often slower than was seen in ALPS. Six children with single-lineage autoimmune
cytopenias were treated and only 2 responded. Sirolimus was well tolerated with
very few side effects. All of the responding patients have remained on therapy
for over 1 year (median, 2 years; range, 1 to 4.5 years). In summary, sirolimus
led to CR and durable responses in a majority of children with refractory
multilineage autoimmune cytopenias. The responses seen in ALPS patients were
profound, suggesting that sirolimus should be considered as a first-line,
steroid-sparing treatment of patients needing chronic therapy. The results in
other multilineage autoimmune cytopenia cohorts were encouraging, and sirolimus
should be considered in children with SLE, ES, and CVID. This trial was
registered at www.clinicaltrials.gov as #NCT00392951.

© 2016 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2015-07-657981
PMCID: PMC4705607
PMID: 26504182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
