---
reference_id: "PMID:27472900"
title: Trisomy 21 consistently activates the interferon response.
authors:
- Sullivan KD
- Lewis HC
- Hill AA
- Pandey A
- Jackson LP
- Cabral JM
- Smith KP
- Liggett LA
- Gomez EB
- Galbraith MD
- DeGregori J
- Espinosa JM
journal: Elife
year: '2016'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.16220
keywords:
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Down Syndrome/pathology
- Fibroblasts/physiology
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Humans
- "Immunity, Innate"
- Interferons/metabolism
- Monocytes/immunology
- T-Lymphocytes/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Trisomy 21 consistently activates the interferon response.
**Authors:** Sullivan KD, Lewis HC, Hill AA, Pandey A, Jackson LP, Cabral JM, Smith KP, Liggett LA, Gomez EB, Galbraith MD, DeGregori J, Espinosa JM
**Journal:** Elife (2016)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.16220](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.16220)

## Content

1. Elife. 2016 Jul 29;5:e16220. doi: 10.7554/eLife.16220.

Trisomy 21 consistently activates the interferon response.

Sullivan KD(1)(2)(3)(4), Lewis HC(1)(2), Hill AA(1)(2), Pandey A(1)(2)(3)(4),
Jackson LP(1)(3)(4), Cabral JM(1)(3)(4), Smith KP(1), Liggett LA(1)(5), Gomez
EB(1)(3)(4), Galbraith MD(1)(2)(3)(4), DeGregori J(1)(5)(6)(7)(8)(9), Espinosa
JM(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Linda Crnic Institute for Down Syndrome, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Aurora, United States.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado School of Medicine,
Aurora, United States.
(3)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of
Colorado Boulder, Boulder, United States.
(4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, United States.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado
School of Medicine, Aurora, United States.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
United States.
(7)Integrated Department of Immunology, University of Colorado School of
Medicine, Aurora, United States.
(8)Section of Hematology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
United States.
(9)Department of Medicine, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
United States.

Comment in
    Elife. 2016 Sep 06;5:e20196. doi: 10.7554/eLife.20196.

Although it is clear that trisomy 21 causes Down syndrome, the molecular events
acting downstream of the trisomy remain ill defined. Using complementary
genomics analyses, we identified the interferon pathway as the major signaling
cascade consistently activated by trisomy 21 in human cells. Transcriptome
analysis revealed that trisomy 21 activates the interferon transcriptional
response in fibroblast and lymphoblastoid cell lines, as well as circulating
monocytes and T cells. Trisomy 21 cells show increased induction of
interferon-stimulated genes and decreased expression of ribosomal proteins and
translation factors. An shRNA screen determined that the interferon-activated
kinases JAK1 and TYK2 suppress proliferation of trisomy 21 fibroblasts, and this
defect is rescued by pharmacological JAK inhibition. Therefore, we propose that
interferon activation, likely via increased gene dosage of the four interferon
receptors encoded on chromosome 21, contributes to many of the clinical impacts
of trisomy 21, and that interferon antagonists could have therapeutic benefits.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.16220
PMCID: PMC5012864
PMID: 27472900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JME: Reviewing editor, eLife. The other authors
declare that no competing interests exist.
