---
reference_id: "PMID:37481827"
title: Restraint stress promotes monobenzone-induced depigmentation in mice via the activation of glucocorticoid receptor/macrophage migration inhibitory factor signaling pathway.
authors:
- Tang N
- Liu XT
- Wen WL
- Liang TS
- Lv XT
- Li QL
- Wang GE
- Wu YH
journal: Mol Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2023.07.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Restraint stress promotes monobenzone-induced depigmentation in mice via the activation of glucocorticoid receptor/macrophage migration inhibitory factor signaling pathway.
**Authors:** Tang N, Liu XT, Wen WL, Liang TS, Lv XT, Li QL, Wang GE, Wu YH
**Journal:** Mol Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molimm.2023.07.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molimm.2023.07.007)

## Content

1. Mol Immunol. 2023 Sep;161:33-43. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2023.07.007. Epub 2023 
Jul 21.

Restraint stress promotes monobenzone-induced depigmentation in mice via the 
activation of glucocorticoid receptor/macrophage migration inhibitory factor 
signaling pathway.

Tang N(1), Liu XT(2), Wen WL(1), Liang TS(1), Lv XT(2), Li QL(3), Wang GE(4), Wu 
YH(5).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou Red Cross Hospital, 
Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)School of Chinese Materia Medica, Guangdong Pharmaceutical University, 
Guangzhou, China.
(3)Departments of Dermatology, Guangzhou Red Cross Hospital, Jinan University, 
Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: qlli_cn@163.com.
(4)School of Chinese Materia Medica, Guangdong Pharmaceutical University, 
Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: wangge07@126.com.
(5)Departments of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Guangzhou Red Cross Hospital, 
Jinan University, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address: wuyanhua368@163.com.

Psychological stress triggers onset and development of vitiligo in humans. 
However, the mechanism of psychological stress on vitiligo remains unclear. The 
study aims to investigate whether psychological stress promotes vitiligo and 
explore the underlying mechanism. A depigmentation mouse model induced by 
applying a skin-bleaching reagent monobenzone to dorsal skin and an in vitro 
HaCaT keratinocyte death model induced by monobenzone were employed to explore 
the effect of restraint stress, which mimics psychological stress, on 
depigmentation. The results indicated that restraint stress promoted 
vitiligo-related depigmentation, vacuolisation, spongiosis, CD8+ T lymphocyte 
infiltration, and loss of melanocytes in the skin. Restraint stress activated 
cutaneous NLR family containing pyrin domain protein 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome. In 
addition, restraint stress aggravated anxiety-like behaviors and increased 
levels of macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF) and corticosterone in the 
circulation, accompanied with decreasing the expression of cutaneous 
8-oxoguanine DNA glycosylase (OGG1) in depigmentation mice. In vitro experiments 
demonstrated that activation of glucocorticoid receptor (GR) by cortisol 
upregulated NLRP3 expression dependent on MIF, and directly decreased the 
transcription of OGG1. Blockade of MIF reversed the NLRP3 signal in restraint 
stress-induced depigmentation mice. In conclusion, restraint stress promotes 
vitiligo-related depigmentation in mice via the activation of GR/MIF signaling 
pathway. The findings provide a theoretical basis for prevention and treatments 
of vitiligo with therapies of targeting GR, MIF, and OGG1.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molimm.2023.07.007
PMID: 37481827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.