---
reference_id: "PMID:38791054"
title: Polymerase I as a Target for Treating Neurodegenerative Disorders.
authors:
- LeDoux MS
journal: Biomedicines
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/biomedicines12051092
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Polymerase I as a Target for Treating Neurodegenerative Disorders.
**Authors:** LeDoux MS
**Journal:** Biomedicines (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biomedicines12051092](https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines12051092)

## Content

1. Biomedicines. 2024 May 15;12(5):1092. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines12051092.

Polymerase I as a Target for Treating Neurodegenerative Disorders.

LeDoux MS(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and College of Health Sciences, University of 
Memphis, Memphis, TN 38152, USA.
(2)Veracity Neuroscience LLC, Memphis, TN 38157, USA.

Polymerase I (Pol I) is at the epicenter of ribosomal RNA (rRNA) synthesis. Pol 
I is a target for the treatment of cancer. Given the many cellular commonalities 
between cancer and neurodegeneration (i.e., different faces of the same coin), 
it seems rational to consider targeting Pol I or, more generally, rRNA synthesis 
for the treatment of disorders associated with the death of terminally 
differentiated neurons. Principally, ribosomes synthesize proteins, and, 
accordingly, Pol I can be considered the starting point for protein synthesis. 
Given that cellular accumulation of abnormal proteins such as α-synuclein and 
tau is an essential feature of neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson 
disease and fronto-temporal dementia, reduction of protein production is now 
considered a viable target for treatment of these and closely related 
neurodegenerative disorders. Abnormalities in polymerase I activity and rRNA 
production may also be associated with nuclear and nucleolar stress, DNA damage, 
and childhood-onset neuronal death, as is the case for the UBTF E210K 
neuroregression syndrome. Moreover, restraining the activity of Pol I may be a 
viable strategy to slow aging. Before starting down the road of Pol I inhibition 
for treating non-cancerous disorders of the nervous system, many questions must 
be answered. First, how much Pol I inhibition can neurons tolerate, and for how 
long? Should inhibition of Pol I be continuous or pulsed? Will cells compensate 
for Pol I inhibition by upregulating the number of active rDNAs? At present, we 
have no effective and safe disease modulatory treatments for Alzheimer disease, 
α-synucleinopathies, or tauopathies, and novel therapeutic targets and 
approaches must be explored.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines12051092
PMCID: PMC11118182
PMID: 38791054

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. LeDoux is the President of Veracity 
Neuroscience LLC.