---
reference_id: "PMID:30266821"
title: Identification of IRF8 as a potent tumor suppressor in murine acute promyelocytic leukemia.
authors:
- Gaillard C
- Surianarayanan S
- Bentley T
- Warr MR
- Fitch B
- Geng H
- Passegué E
- de Thé H
- Kogan SC
journal: Blood Adv
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2018018929
keywords:
- Animals
- "Biomarkers, Tumor"
- Bone Marrow/pathology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Flow Cytometry
- "Genes, Tumor Suppressor"
- Humans
- "Interferon Regulatory Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- "Leukemia, Promyelocytic, Acute/genetics, mortality, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics, metabolism"
- Interferon Regulatory Factor-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of IRF8 as a potent tumor suppressor in murine acute promyelocytic leukemia.
**Authors:** Gaillard C, Surianarayanan S, Bentley T, Warr MR, Fitch B, Geng H, Passegué E, de Thé H, Kogan SC
**Journal:** Blood Adv (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1182/bloodadvances.2018018929](https://doi.org/10.1182/bloodadvances.2018018929)

## Content

1. Blood Adv. 2018 Oct 9;2(19):2462-2466. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2018018929.

Identification of IRF8 as a potent tumor suppressor in murine acute
promyelocytic leukemia.

Gaillard C(1), Surianarayanan S(1), Bentley T(1), Warr MR(2), Fitch B(1), Geng
H(1), Passegué E(2), de Thé H(3), Kogan SC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Helen Diller Family Comprehensive
Cancer Center and.
(2)Department of Medicine and Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration
Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA; and.
(3)Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie, Université Paris Diderot, Unité mixte
de recherche 944/7212, Paris, France.

Although the role of promyelocytic leukemia/retinoic acid receptor α (PML/RARA)
fusion protein is well recognized in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), its
contribution to initiation and maintenance of leukemogenesis is not completely
understood. Transcriptome analysis in the murine MRP8-PML/RARA APL model has
demonstrated modest alterations in gene expression accompanied by expansion of
the promyelocyte compartment. Of particular interest, mice expressing PML/RARA
showed downregulation of the transcription factor Irf8 mRNA. Interferon
regulatory factor 8 (IRF8) is a known regulator of hematopoiesis. Previous
research had implicated IRF8 as a tumor suppressor for myeloid neoplasia, and
mice lacking IRF8 develop a well-differentiated myeloproliferative neoplasm
characterized by expansion of neutrophilic lineage cells. We hypothesized that
PML/RARA-mediated downregulation of Irf8 transcript levels contributes to the
initiation of APL. We observed significant downregulation of IRF8 protein levels
in highly purified promyelocyte populations of PML/RARA transgenic mice. We also
found that loss of IRF8 results in expansion of promyelocytes in vivo, partially
phenocopying the impact of PML/RARA expression. Moreover, survival experiments
showed that complete loss of IRF8 leads to acceleration of APL onset in our
PML/RARA mice. Collectively, these data identify IRF8 downregulation as an
important factor in APL initiation and highlight a tumor-suppressor role for
IRF8 in this acute leukemia.

© 2018 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2018018929
PMCID: PMC6177650
PMID: 30266821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: The authors
declare no competing financial interests.
