---
reference_id: "PMID:20848817"
title: Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome.
authors:
- Saigal R
- Kansal A
- Mittal M
- Singh Y
- Ram H
journal: J Assoc Physicians India
year: '2010'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome.
**Authors:** Saigal R, Kansal A, Mittal M, Singh Y, Ram H
**Journal:** J Assoc Physicians India (2010)

## Content

1. J Assoc Physicians India. 2010 Mar;58:176-84.

Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome.

Saigal R(1), Kansal A, Mittal M, Singh Y, Ram H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Sawai Man Singh Medical College and Hospital, Jaipur, 
India.

The 2006 International Consensus Statement on an Update of the Classification 
Criteria for Definite Antiphospholipid Syndrome has increased the time between 
the two laboratory studies required for diagnosis from 6 to 12 weeks. Antibody 
to beta2 glycoprotein 1 has been included as a criterion. Various non-criteria 
diagnostic clues such as livedo reticularis, heart valve disease, 
thrombocytopenia, renal thrombotic microangiopathy, neurological manifestations, 
non-criteria antibodies (IgA aCL, IgA anti-beta2 glycoprotein I) and some 
research laboratory-identified antibodies (antiphosphatidylserine antibodies, 
antiphosphatidylethanolamine antibodies, antibodies against prothrombin alone 
and antibodies to the phosphatidylserine-prothrombin complex) have been 
recognised. New concepts of pathogenesis now implicate complement activation and 
participation of the innate immune system upstream to thrombosis. Warfarin 
remains the treatment of choice for patients who have suffered thrombosis, but 
antiplatelet agents and heparin are other options. Target INR is 2.0-3.0. The 
other drugs which are used in resistant cases are: rituximab, 
hydroxychloroquine, thrombin inhibitors and statins.

PMID: 20848817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]