---
reference_id: "PMID:34600407"
title: "Programmed death-ligand 1 expression and its associations with clinicopathological features, prognosis, and driver oncogene alterations in surgically resected lung adenocarcinoma."
authors:
- Takamochi K
- Hara K
- Hayashi T
- Kohsaka S
- Takahashi F
- Suehara Y
- Suzuki K
journal: Lung Cancer
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2021.09.011
keywords:
- Adenocarcinoma of Lung/genetics
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase/genetics
- "B7-H1 Antigen/genetics, metabolism"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor"
- Humans
- "Lung Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics, surgery"
- Male
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local"
- Oncogenes
- Prognosis
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Programmed death-ligand 1 expression and its associations with clinicopathological features, prognosis, and driver oncogene alterations in surgically resected lung adenocarcinoma.
**Authors:** Takamochi K, Hara K, Hayashi T, Kohsaka S, Takahashi F, Suehara Y, Suzuki K
**Journal:** Lung Cancer (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.lungcan.2021.09.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lungcan.2021.09.011)

## Content

1. Lung Cancer. 2021 Nov;161:163-170. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2021.09.011. Epub
2021  Sep 20.

Programmed death-ligand 1 expression and its associations with
clinicopathological features, prognosis, and driver oncogene alterations in
surgically resected lung adenocarcinoma.

Takamochi K(1), Hara K(2), Hayashi T(2), Kohsaka S(3), Takahashi F(4), Suehara
Y(5), Suzuki K(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Thoracic Surgery, Juntendo University School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: ktakamo@juntendo.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Human Pathology, Juntendo University Graduate School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Division of Cellular Signaling, National Cancer Center Research Institute,
Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Juntendo University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Juntendo University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.
(6)Department of General Thoracic Surgery, Juntendo University School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: Programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression is a predictive
biomarker of response to immunotherapies targeting programmed death-1/PD-L1 in
advanced-stage lung adenocarcinoma. The aim of this study was to investigate the
associations between PD-L1 expression and clinicopathological features,
prognosis, and driver oncogene alterations in patients with lung adenocarcinoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We evaluated PD-L1 expression in 1,005 surgically
resected lung adenocarcinoma specimens, by immunohistochemistry using the 22C3
antibody. PD-L1 positivity was defined based on the proportion of stained tumor
cells (TPS) on tissue microarrays: <1% (negative), 1-49% (weakly positive),
and ≥ 50% (strongly positive). Correlations between PD-L1 expression and
clinicopathological features, prognosis, and driver oncogene (EGFR, KRAS, ALK,
ROS1, and RET) alterations in lung adenocarcinoma were analyzed.
RESULTS: PD-L1 expression was negative in 726 (72%) of 1,005 tumors, weakly
positive in 161 (16%), and strongly positive in 118 (12%). Male sex, smoking,
elevated serum carcinoembryonic antigen levels, advanced pathological stages,
high-grade tumors, predominantly solid tumors, tumors with lymphatic permeation
or vascular or pleural invasion, tumors without EGFR mutations, and tumors with
KRAS mutations were more common in patients with PD-L1-positive tumors
(TPS ≥ 1%) than in those with PD-L1-negative tumors (TPS < 1%). PD-L1 positivity
was not associated with ALK, ROS1, or RET fusion status. Although PD-L1
positivity was associated with poor overall survival and poor relapse-free
survival in all patients, this was not statistically significant after adjusting
for prognostic factors in the multivariate analysis. In the subgroup analysis
according to driver oncogene alterations, PD-L1 positivity was associated with
poor relapse-free survival only in patients with EGFR-mutated tumors.
CONCLUSION: Surgically resected lung adenocarcinomas with increased PD-L1
expression were biologically aggressive tumors that frequently occurred in male
smokers. PD-L1 expression and its prognostic significance differed according to
driver oncogene alterations.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2021.09.011
PMID: 34600407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
