---
reference_id: "PMID:10951229"
title: "SCORTEN: a severity-of-illness score for toxic epidermal necrolysis."
authors:
- Bastuji-Garin S
- Fouchard N
- Bertocchi M
- Roujeau JC
- Revuz J
- Wolkenstein P
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1046/j.1523-1747.2000.00061.x
keywords:
- Aged
- Burns/physiopathology
- Evaluation Studies as Topic
- Female
- Hospital Mortality
- Humans
- Logistic Models
- Male
- Multivariate Analysis
- "Outcome Assessment, Health Care/methods"
- Prognosis
- Severity of Illness Index
- "Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/mortality, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SCORTEN: a severity-of-illness score for toxic epidermal necrolysis.
**Authors:** Bastuji-Garin S, Fouchard N, Bertocchi M, Roujeau JC, Revuz J, Wolkenstein P
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1523-1747.2000.00061.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1523-1747.2000.00061.x)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 2000 Aug;115(2):149-53. doi: 
10.1046/j.1523-1747.2000.00061.x.

SCORTEN: a severity-of-illness score for toxic epidermal necrolysis.

Bastuji-Garin S(1), Fouchard N, Bertocchi M, Roujeau JC, Revuz J, Wolkenstein P.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Public Health and Dermatology, Hôpital Henri-Mondor (AP-HP), 
Université Paris XII, Créteil, France.

The mortality of toxic epidermal necrolysis is about 30%. Our purpose was to 
develop and validate a specific severity-of-illness score for cases of toxic 
epidermal necrolysis admitted to a specialized unit and to compare it with the 
Simplified Acute Physiology Score and a burn scoring system. A sample of 165 
patients was used to develop the toxic epidermal necrolysis-specific 
severity-of-illness score and evaluate the other scores, a sample of 75 for 
validation. Model development used logistic regression equations that were 
translated into probability of hospital mortality; validation used measures of 
calibration and discrimination. We identified seven independent risk factors for 
death and constituted the toxic epidermal necrolysis-specific 
severity-of-illness score: age above 40 y, malignancy, tachycardia above 120 per 
min, initial percentage of epidermal detachment above 10%, serum urea above 10 
mmol per liter, serum glucose above 14 mmol per liter, and bicarbonate below 20 
mmol per liter. For each toxic epidermal necrolysis-specific severity-of-illness 
score point the odds ratio was 3.45 (confidence interval 2.26-5.25). Probability 
of death was: P(death) = elogit/1 + elogit with logit = -4.448 + 1.237 (toxic 
epidermal nec-rolysis-specific severity-of-illness score). Calibration 
demonstrated excellent agreement between expected (19. 6%) and actual (20%) 
mortality; discrimination was also excellent with a receiver operating 
characteristic area of 82%. The Simplified Acute Physiology Score and the burn 
score were also associated with mortality. The discriminatory powers were poorer 
(receiver operating characteristic area: 72 and 75%) and calibration of the 
Simplified Acute Physiology Score indicated a poor agreement between expected 
(9.1%) and actual (26.7%) mortality. This study demonstrates that the risk of 
death of toxic epidermal necrolysis patients can be accurately predicted by the 
toxic epidermal necrolysis-specific severity-of-illness score. The Simplified 
Acute Physiology Score and burn score appear to be less adequate.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1523-1747.2000.00061.x
PMID: 10951229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]