---
reference_id: "PMID:17716100"
title: "Cognitive approaches to schizophrenia: theory and therapy."
authors:
- Beck AT
- Rector NA
journal: Annu Rev Clin Psychol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1146/annurev.clinpsy.1.102803.144205
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cognitive approaches to schizophrenia: theory and therapy.
**Authors:** Beck AT, Rector NA
**Journal:** Annu Rev Clin Psychol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev.clinpsy.1.102803.144205](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.clinpsy.1.102803.144205)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Clin Psychol. 2005;1:577-606. doi: 
10.1146/annurev.clinpsy.1.102803.144205.

Cognitive approaches to schizophrenia: theory and therapy.

Beck AT(1), Rector NA.

Author information:
(1)Psychopathology Research Unit, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania 19104-3309, USA. abeck@mail.med.upenn.edu

A theoretical analysis of schizophrenia based on a cognitive model integrates 
the complex interaction of predisposing neurobiological, environmental, 
cognitive, and behavioral factors with the diverse symptomatology. The impaired 
integrative function of the brain, as well as the domain-specific cognitive 
deficits, increases the vulnerability to aversive life experiences, which lead 
to dysfunctional beliefs and behaviors. Symptoms of disorganization result not 
only from specific neurocognitive deficits but also from the relative paucity of 
resources available for maintaining a set, adhering to rules of communication, 
and inhibiting intrusion of inappropriate ideas. Delusions are analyzed in terms 
of the interplay between active cognitive biases, such as external attributions, 
and resource-sparing strategies such as jumping to conclusions. Similarly, the 
content of hallucinations and the delusions regarding their origin and 
characteristics may be understood in terms of biased information processing. The 
interaction of neurocognitive deficits, personality, and life events leads to 
the negative symptoms characterized by negative social and performance beliefs, 
low expectancies for pleasure and success, and a resource-sparing strategy to 
conserve limited psychological resources. The comprehensive conceptualization 
creates the context for targeted psychological treatments.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.clinpsy.1.102803.144205
PMID: 17716100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]