---
reference_id: "PMID:17416611"
title: Molecular basis for PP2A regulatory subunit B56alpha targeting in cardiomyocytes.
authors:
- Bhasin N
- Cunha SR
- Mudannayake M
- Gigena MS
- Rogers TB
- Mohler PJ
journal: Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1152/ajpheart.00059.2007
keywords:
- Animals
- Ankyrins/metabolism
- Binding Sites
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Drug Delivery Systems/methods
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/metabolism"
- Phosphoprotein Phosphatases/metabolism
- Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases/chemistry
- Protein Binding
- Protein Phosphatase 2
- Rats
- "Rats, Sprague-Dawley"
- Subcellular Fractions/metabolism
- Substrate Specificity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular basis for PP2A regulatory subunit B56alpha targeting in cardiomyocytes.
**Authors:** Bhasin N, Cunha SR, Mudannayake M, Gigena MS, Rogers TB, Mohler PJ
**Journal:** Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1152/ajpheart.00059.2007](https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00059.2007)

## Content

1. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2007 Jul;293(1):H109-19. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00059.2007. Epub 2007 Apr 6.

Molecular basis for PP2A regulatory subunit B56alpha targeting in
cardiomyocytes.

Bhasin N(1), Cunha SR, Mudannayake M, Gigena MS, Rogers TB, Mohler PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiology, University of Iowa
Carver College of Medicine, 285 Newton Road, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
naina-bhasin@uiowa.edu

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2007 Jul;293(1):H15-6. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00467.2007.

Protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A) is a multifunctional protein phosphatase with
critical roles in excitable cell signaling. In the heart, PP2A function is
linked with modulation of beta-adrenergic signaling and has been suggested to
regulate key ion channels and transporters including Na/Ca exchanger, ryanodine
receptor, inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor, and Na/K ATPase. Although many
of the functional roles and molecular targets for PP2A in heart are known,
little is established regarding the cellular pathways that localize specific
PP2A isoform activities to subcellular sites. We report that the PP2A regulatory
subunit B56alpha is an in vivo binding partner for ankyrin-B, an adapter protein
required for normal subcellular localization of the Na/Ca exchanger, Na/K
ATPase, and inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptor. Ankyrin-B and B56alpha are
colocalized and coimmunoprecipitate in primary cardiomyocytes. Using multiple
strategies, we identified the structural requirements on B56alpha for ankyrin-B
association as a 13 residue motif in the B56alpha COOH terminus not present in
other B56 family polypeptides. Finally, we report that reduced ankyrin-B
expression in primary ankyrin-B(+/-) cardiomyocytes results in disorganized
distribution of B56alpha that can be rescued by exogenous expression of
ankyrin-B. These new data implicate ankyrin-B as a critical targeting component
for PP2A in heart and identify a new class of signaling proteins targeted by
ankyrin polypeptides.

DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.00059.2007
PMID: 17416611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
