---
reference_id: "PMID:14636651"
title: Mutations in GATA1 in both transient myeloproliferative disorder and acute megakaryoblastic leukemia of Down syndrome.
authors:
- Greene ME
- Mundschau G
- Wechsler J
- McDevitt M
- Gamis A
- Karp J
- Gurbuxani S
- Arceci R
- Crispino JD
journal: Blood Cells Mol Dis
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2003.08.001
keywords:
- Bone Marrow/pathology
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Disease Progression
- "Down Syndrome/complications, genetics"
- Erythroid-Specific DNA-Binding Factors
- GATA1 Transcription Factor
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Megakaryoblastic, Acute/complications, genetics"
- Mutation/genetics
- "Myeloproliferative Disorders/complications, genetics"
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in GATA1 in both transient myeloproliferative disorder and acute megakaryoblastic leukemia of Down syndrome.
**Authors:** Greene ME, Mundschau G, Wechsler J, McDevitt M, Gamis A, Karp J, Gurbuxani S, Arceci R, Crispino JD
**Journal:** Blood Cells Mol Dis (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bcmd.2003.08.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bcmd.2003.08.001)

## Content

1. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2003 Nov-Dec;31(3):351-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bcmd.2003.08.001.

Mutations in GATA1 in both transient myeloproliferative disorder and acute 
megakaryoblastic leukemia of Down syndrome.

Greene ME(1), Mundschau G, Wechsler J, McDevitt M, Gamis A, Karp J, Gurbuxani S, 
Arceci R, Crispino JD.

Author information:
(1)Ben May Institute for Cancer Research, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, 
USA.

Mutations in transcription factors often contribute to human leukemias by 
providing a block to normal differentiation. To determine whether mutations in 
the hematopoietic transcription factor GATA1 are associated with leukemia, we 
assayed for alterations in the GATA1 gene in bone marrow samples from patients 
with various subtypes of acute leukemia. Here we summarize our findings that 
GATA1 is mutated in the leukemic blasts of patients with Down syndrome acute 
megakaryoblastic leukemia (DS-AMKL). We did not find mutations in GATA1 in 
leukemic cells of DS patients with other types of acute leukemia, or in other 
patients with AMKL who did not have DS. Furthermore, we did not detect GATA1 
mutations in DNAs from over 75 other patients with acute leukemia or from 21 
healthy individuals. Since the GATA1 mutations were restricted to DS-AMKL, we 
also investigated whether GATA1 was altered in the "preleukemia" of DS, 
transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD). TMD is a common myeloid disorder 
that affects 10% of DS newborns and evolves to AMKL in nearly 30% patients. We 
detected GATA1 mutations in TMD blasts from every infant examined. Together, 
these results demonstrate that GATA1 is likely to play a critical role in the 
etiology of TMD and DS-AMKL, and that mutagenesis of GATA1 represents a very 
early event in DS myeloid leukemogenesis. We hypothesize that disruption of 
normal GATA-1 function is an essential step in the initiation of 
megakaryoblastic leukemia in DS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2003.08.001
PMID: 14636651 [Indexed for MEDLINE]