---
reference_id: "PMID:18257094"
title: Expanded clinical spectrum of spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome and possible manifestation in a heterozygous father.
authors:
- Mitter D
- Krakow D
- Farrington-Rock C
- Meinecke P
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32230
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanded clinical spectrum of spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome and possible manifestation in a heterozygous father.
**Authors:** Mitter D, Krakow D, Farrington-Rock C, Meinecke P
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.32230](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.32230)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Mar 15;146A(6):779-83. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32230.

Expanded clinical spectrum of spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome and 
possible manifestation in a heterozygous father.

Mitter D(1), Krakow D, Farrington-Rock C, Meinecke P.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany. 
diana.mitter@uni-due.de

We report on a 5-year-old boy with spondylocarpotarsal synostosis (SCT) syndrome 
who presents with disproportionate short stature, thoracic scoliosis, pes 
planus, dental enamel hypoplasia, unilateral conductive hearing loss and mild 
facial dysmorphisms. Radiographs showed abnormal segmentation of the spine with 
block vertebrae and carpal synostosis. In addition to the typical phenotype of 
SCT syndrome, he showed pronounced delay of carpal bone age and bilateral 
epiphyseal dysplasia of the proximal femora. The patient's father has mild short 
stature and unilateral hip dysplasia. Molecular studies of the filamin B gene 
(FLNB) revealed a homozygous mutation in the index patient while both parents 
were heterozygous for the mutation. In this report we expand the phenotype of 
SCT syndrome in a patient with a causal FLNB mutation.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32230
PMID: 18257094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]