---
reference_id: "PMID:2532916"
title: Myocardial collagen remodeling in pressure overload hypertrophy. A case for interstitial heart disease.
authors:
- Weber KT
- Jalil JE
- Janicki JS
- Pick R
journal: Am J Hypertens
year: '1989'
doi: 10.1093/ajh/2.12.931
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myocardial collagen remodeling in pressure overload hypertrophy. A case for interstitial heart disease.
**Authors:** Weber KT, Jalil JE, Janicki JS, Pick R
**Journal:** Am J Hypertens (1989)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ajh/2.12.931](https://doi.org/10.1093/ajh/2.12.931)

## Content

1. Am J Hypertens. 1989 Dec;2(12 Pt 1):931-40. doi: 10.1093/ajh/2.12.931.

Myocardial collagen remodeling in pressure overload hypertrophy. A case for 
interstitial heart disease.

Weber KT(1), Jalil JE, Janicki JS, Pick R.

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, Michael Reese Hospital, University of Chicago 
Pritzker School of Medicine, Illinois 60616.

The accumulation of collagen within the myocardium is termed fibrosis. In left 
ventricular pressure overload a reactive interstitial fibrosis, having 
distinctive biochemical and structural features, is seen. This reactive fibrosis 
occurs in the absence of myocyte necrosis, is progressive in nature, and 
initially is an adaptive response that preserves the force generating capacity, 
or active (systolic) stiffness, of the hypertrophied myocardium. Later in 
hypertrophy a reparative (or replacement) fibrosis occurs in response to cell 
loss, the pathogenesis of which is not clear. Nevertheless, independently of 
cell loss, interstitial fibrosis can have a detrimental influence on the 
diastolic and systolic stiffness of the myocardium and can result in pathologic 
hypertrophy with heart failure. In established hypertrophy with disproportionate 
collagen matrix remodeling (ie, interstitial heart disease), it would be 
desirable to retard the continued formation of collagen and, if necessary, 
degrade collagen fibers that are responsible for impeding the stretching and 
shortening of muscle fibers. Prevention of interstitial fibrosis in pressure 
overload hypertrophy with pharmacologic agents with both antihypertensive and 
antifibrotic properties must also be considered. Future research should address 
these issues with a view toward developing corrective and preventative forms of 
therapy. Such advances will require a better understanding of cardiac fibroblast 
growth, collagen synthesis and the regulation of collagen gene expression in the 
heart.

DOI: 10.1093/ajh/2.12.931
PMID: 2532916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]