---
reference_id: "PMID:28145611"
title: "Hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (a.k.a. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome Type III and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome hypermobility type): Clinical description and natural history."
authors:
- Tinkle B
- Castori M
- Berglund B
- Cohen H
- Grahame R
- Kazkaz H
- Levy H
journal: Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31538
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (a.k.a. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome Type III and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome hypermobility type): Clinical description and natural history.
**Authors:** Tinkle B, Castori M, Berglund B, Cohen H, Grahame R, Kazkaz H, Levy H
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.c.31538](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.c.31538)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2017 Mar;175(1):48-69. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.c.31538. Epub 2017 Feb 1.

Hypermobile Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (a.k.a. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome Type III and 
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome hypermobility type): Clinical description and natural 
history.

Tinkle B, Castori M, Berglund B, Cohen H, Grahame R, Kazkaz H, Levy H.

The hypermobile type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (hEDS) is likely the most common 
hereditary disorder of connective tissue. It has been described largely in those 
with musculoskeletal complaints including joint hypermobility, joint 
subluxations/dislocations, as well as skin and soft tissue manifestations. Many 
patients report activity-related pain and some go on to have daily pain. Two 
undifferentiated syndromes have been used to describe these manifestations-joint 
hypermobility syndrome and hEDS. Both are clinical diagnoses in the absence of 
other causation. Current medical literature further complicates differentiation 
and describes multiple associated symptoms and disorders. The current EDS 
nosology combines these two entities into the hypermobile type of EDS. Herein, 
we review and summarize the literature as a better clinical description of this 
type of connective tissue disorder. © 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.c.31538
PMID: 28145611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]