---
reference_id: "PMID:36939460"
title: Volumetric Analysis of the Sinus and Orbit in Silent Sinus Syndrome After Endoscopic Sinus Surgery.
authors:
- Amin D
- Chitguppi C
- Xu V
- Haghshenas C
- Gorniak R
- Rabinowitz M
- Toskala E
- Rosen M
- Nyquist G
journal: Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ohn.259
keywords:
- Humans
- "Orbit/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- "Enophthalmos/diagnostic imaging, etiology, surgery"
- "Maxillary Sinus/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- "Paranasal Sinus Diseases/diagnostic imaging, surgery"
- Pulmonary Atelectasis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Volumetric Analysis of the Sinus and Orbit in Silent Sinus Syndrome After Endoscopic Sinus Surgery.
**Authors:** Amin D, Chitguppi C, Xu V, Haghshenas C, Gorniak R, Rabinowitz M, Toskala E, Rosen M, Nyquist G
**Journal:** Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ohn.259](https://doi.org/10.1002/ohn.259)

## Content

1. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2023 Jul;169(1):151-156. doi: 10.1002/ohn.259.
Epub  2023 Jan 30.

Volumetric Analysis of the Sinus and Orbit in Silent Sinus Syndrome After 
Endoscopic Sinus Surgery.

Amin D(1), Chitguppi C(1), Xu V(1), Haghshenas C(1), Gorniak R(2), Rabinowitz 
M(1), Toskala E(1), Rosen M(1), Nyquist G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, Thomas Jefferson 
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)Department of Radiology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The term "silent sinus syndrome" (SSS) describes spontaneous 
enophthalmos secondary to subclinical maxillary sinus atelectasis. Debate 
remains on whether treatment with endoscopic maxillary antrostomy alone is 
adequate in reversing atelectasis and globe displacement. This study aims to 
determine the degree of volume change of the diseased sinus and orbit as well as 
the change in orbital height in patients treated with endoscopic antrostomy 
without orbital floor augmentation.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective review with image analysis.
SETTING: Single tertiary care institution.
METHODS: Three-dimensional (3D) analysis of computed tomographic imaging data 
was performed using 3D Slicer. 3D models of the maxillary sinus and orbit of the 
diseased and normal sides were created, and volume measurements were calculated 
using the segmentation program.
RESULTS: Thirteen patients with SSS who underwent endoscopic sinus surgery (ESS) 
and had follow-up computed tomographic imaging were analyzed. After endoscopic 
antrostomy, the mean volume of the diseased maxillary sinus significantly 
increased by 9.82%, from 6.37 to 7.00 cm3 (p = .0302). There was no significant 
change in mean orbital volume; however, the mean orbital height decreased by 
5.67%, from 38.09 to 35.93 mm from pretreatment to posttreatment samples 
(p = .0101). All patients had resolution of clinical or radiographic 
enophthalmos and orbital displacement with ESS alone.
CONCLUSION: Endoscopic maxillary antrostomy alone in the treatment of SSS 
significantly increased maxillary sinus volume and decreased diseased orbital 
height. These changes were associated with clinical and radiographic improvement 
in globe displacement. These findings support performing ESS alone, reserving 
orbital augmentation for patients who do not exhibit adequate clinical 
improvement.

© 2023 American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery Foundation.

DOI: 10.1002/ohn.259
PMID: 36939460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]