---
reference_id: "PMID:38372058"
title: "The emerging perioperative treatment paradigm for non-small cell lung cancer: a narrative review."
authors:
- Christopoulos P
journal: Chin Clin Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.21037/cco-23-137
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Non-Small-Cell Lung/drug therapy"
- Lung Neoplasms/drug therapy
- Neoadjuvant Therapy
- Immunotherapy
- "Chemotherapy, Adjuvant"
- "Clinical Trials, Phase II as Topic"
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The emerging perioperative treatment paradigm for non-small cell lung cancer: a narrative review.
**Authors:** Christopoulos P
**Journal:** Chin Clin Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.21037/cco-23-137](https://doi.org/10.21037/cco-23-137)

## Content

1. Chin Clin Oncol. 2024 Feb;13(1):12. doi: 10.21037/cco-23-137. Epub 2024 Feb 5.

The emerging perioperative treatment paradigm for non-small cell lung cancer: a
narrative review.

Christopoulos P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology, Thoraxklinik and National Center for Tumor Diseases
(NCT) at Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany; Translational Lung
Research Center Heidelberg, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL),
Heidelberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The management of resectable non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) has relied on surgery and adjuvant chemotherapy for the past two
decades, but is now radically changing through the introduction of immunotherapy
and targeted drugs. This review was conducted to summarize recent developments
and highlight future directions.
METHODS: A literature search for randomized phase 2/3 trials on the treatment of
early-stage NSCLC was performed based on PubMed and the content on major
oncology congresses during the last 3 years.
KEY CONTENT AND FINDINGS: Perioperative strategies with 3-4 cycles of
neoadjuvant chemoimmunotherapy and 1 year of adjuvant programmed cell death
(ligand) 1 [PD-(L)1] blockade combine the efficacy of purely adjuvant [effective
for both stage II and stage III tumors with event-free survival hazard ratios
(HR) of approximately 0.70] and the purely neoadjuvant strategies (effective
only for stage III with a lower EFS HR of approximately 0.50), show benefit
across the entire spectrum of PD-L1 tumor expression levels, and significantly
improve overall survival, as the NADIM-2 and Keynote-671 studies recently
showed. Once approved, they will probably dominate the landscape of management
for resectable NCSLC based on two main advantages: first, compared to purely
adjuvant treatments, like those of the IMpower010 and Keynote-091 trials, they
allow for evaluation of response in the surgical specimen and permit adjustment
of the postoperative management accordingly; second, compared to the purely
neoadjuvant treatment of Checkmate-816, their postoperative component appears to
additionally improve the outcome of patients failing to achieve a pathologic
complete remission (pCR). Further improvements in the near future will likely
include intensified postoperative therapy for non-pCR patients, e.g., with
addition of chemotherapy, antibody-drug conjugates, or next-generation
immunotherapeutics; broader use of circulating tumor DNA assays for improved
monitoring of minimal residual disease; as well as routine availability of
further tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) against oncogenic drivers beyond
classic EGFR mutations, like adjuvant alectinib for tumors with ALK fusions,
whose approval is expected soon based on the recent success of the ALINA trial,
and adjuvant selpercatinib for tumors with RET fusions, if the ongoing
LIBRETTO-432 trial is also positive. The availability of both TKI and
neoadjuvant chemoimmunotherapy in the routine setting renders molecular tumor
profiling imperative for potentially resectable tumors already at initial
diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Perioperative immunotherapy is becoming the dominant treatment
paradigm for resectable NSCLC, while increasing use of targeted drugs for
actionable alterations necessitates upfront molecular profiling of early tumors
for patient selection.

DOI: 10.21037/cco-23-137
PMID: 38372058 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
