---
reference_id: "PMID:8644703"
title: Rapid detection of regionally clustered germ-line BRCA1 mutations by multiplex heteroduplex analysis. UKCCCR Familial Ovarian Cancer Study Group.
authors:
- Gayther SA
- Harrington P
- Russell P
- Kharkevich G
- Garkavtseva RF
- Ponder BA
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1996'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rapid detection of regionally clustered germ-line BRCA1 mutations by multiplex heteroduplex analysis. UKCCCR Familial Ovarian Cancer Study Group.
**Authors:** Gayther SA, Harrington P, Russell P, Kharkevich G, Garkavtseva RF, Ponder BA
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1996)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1996 Mar;58(3):451-6.

Rapid detection of regionally clustered germ-line BRCA1 mutations by multiplex 
heteroduplex analysis. UKCCCR Familial Ovarian Cancer Study Group.

Gayther SA(1), Harrington P, Russell P, Kharkevich G, Garkavtseva RF, Ponder BA.

Author information:
(1)CRC Human Cancer Genetics Research Group, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom.

Germ-line mutations of the BRCA1 gene are responsible for a substantial 
proportion of families with multiple cases of early-onset breast and/or ovarian 
cancer. Since the isolation of BRCA1 last year, >65 distinct mutations scattered 
throughout the coding region have been detected, making analysis of the gene 
time consuming and technically challenging. We have developed a multiplex 
heteroduplex analysis that is designed to analyze one-quarter of the coding 
sequence in a single-step screening procedure and that will detect approximately 
50% of all BRCA1 mutations so far reported in breast/ovarian cancer families. We 
have used this technique to analyze BRCA1 in 162 families with a history of 
breast and/or ovarian cancer and identified 12 distinct mutations in 35 
families.

PMCID: PMC1914578
PMID: 8644703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]