---
reference_id: "PMID:25772897"
title: Pathological mechanisms in progressive multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Mahad DH
- Trapp BD
- Lassmann H
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(14)70256-X
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathological mechanisms in progressive multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Mahad DH, Trapp BD, Lassmann H
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(14)70256-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(14)70256-X)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2015 Feb;14(2):183-93. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(14)70256-X.

Pathological mechanisms in progressive multiple sclerosis.

Mahad DH(1), Trapp BD(2), Lassmann H(3).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Neuroregeneration, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, 
Cleveland, OH, USA.
(3)Center for Brain Research, Medical University of Vienna, Austria. Electronic 
address: hans.lassmann@meduniwien.ac.at.

A better understanding of the pathological mechanisms that drive 
neurodegeneration in individuals with multiple sclerosis is needed to develop 
therapies that will effectively treat patients in the primary and secondary 
progressive stages of the disease. We propose that the inflammatory 
demyelinating disease process in early multiple sclerosis triggers a cascade of 
events that lead to neurodegeneration and are amplified by pathogenic mechanisms 
related to brain ageing and accumulated disease burden. Key elements driving 
neurodegeneration include microglia activation, chronic oxidative injury, 
accumulation of mitochondrial damage in axons, and age-related iron accumulation 
in the human brain. Altered mitochondrial function in axons might be of 
particular importance. This process leads to chronic cell stress and imbalance 
of ionic homoeostasis, resulting in axonal and neuronal death. The evidence 
suggests that treatment of progressive multiple sclerosis should be based on a 
combination of anti-inflammatory, regenerative, and neuroprotective strategies.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(14)70256-X
PMID: 25772897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]