---
reference_id: "PMID:21162649"
title: Protection against or triggering of Type 1 diabetes? Different roles for viral infections.
authors:
- Boettler T
- von Herrath M
journal: Expert Rev Clin Immunol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1586/eci.10.91
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Protection against or triggering of Type 1 diabetes? Different roles for viral infections.
**Authors:** Boettler T, von Herrath M
**Journal:** Expert Rev Clin Immunol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1586/eci.10.91](https://doi.org/10.1586/eci.10.91)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2011 Jan;7(1):45-53. doi: 10.1586/eci.10.91.

Protection against or triggering of Type 1 diabetes? Different roles for viral 
infections.

Boettler T(1), von Herrath M.

Author information:
(1)La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology - LIAI, 9420 Athena Circle, La 
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The emergence of autoreactivity that ultimately destroys insulin-producing 
β-cells and causes Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is a result of genetic susceptibility 
and environmental factors, such as viral infections. The ability to induce 
strong cellular immune responses and to cause inflammation in the target organ 
makes viral infections prime candidates for the initiation of islet 
autoreactivity. Indeed, certain viruses have been linked to the occurrence of 
T1D based on epidemiological, serological and histological findings; and several 
rodent studies clearly demonstrate that viral infections can trigger 
autoimmunity. However, viruses have also been shown to efficiently prevent 
autoimmunity, which underlines the beneficial aspects of exposure to microbial 
agents as suggested by the hygiene hypothesis. Here, we will try to untangle 
some aspects of the complex interplay between viruses and the immune system and 
we will recapitulate by what rationale certain viruses have been associated with 
T1D.

DOI: 10.1586/eci.10.91
PMCID: PMC3077770
PMID: 21162649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]