---
reference_id: "PMID:38177402"
title: "Pathophysiology of gastro-oesophageal reflux disease: implications for diagnosis and management."
authors:
- Argüero J
- Sifrim D
journal: Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41575-023-00883-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology of gastro-oesophageal reflux disease: implications for diagnosis and management.
**Authors:** Argüero J, Sifrim D
**Journal:** Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41575-023-00883-z](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41575-023-00883-z)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2024 Apr;21(4):282-293. doi: 
10.1038/s41575-023-00883-z. Epub 2024 Jan 4.

Pathophysiology of gastro-oesophageal reflux disease: implications for diagnosis 
and management.

Argüero J(1), Sifrim D(2).

Author information:
(1)Neurogastroenterology section of Gastroenterology Department, Hospital 
Italiano de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Wingate Institute of Neurogastroenterology, Queen Mary University of London, 
London, UK. d.sifrim@qmul.ac.uk.

Gastro-oesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is a common gastrointestinal disorder 
in which retrograde flow of gastric content into the oesophagus causes 
uncomfortable symptoms and/or complications. It has a multifactorial and 
partially understood pathophysiology. GERD starts in the stomach, where the 
refluxate material is produced. Following the trajectory of reflux, the failure 
of the antireflux barrier, primarily the lower oesophageal sphincter and the 
crural diaphragm, enables the refluxate to reach the oesophageal lumen, 
triggering oesophageal or extra-oesophageal symptoms. Reflux clearance 
mechanisms such as primary and secondary peristalsis and the arrival of 
bicarbonate-rich saliva are critical to prevent mucosal damage. Alterations of 
the oesophageal mucosal integrity, such as macroscopic oesophagitis or 
microscopic changes, determine the perception of symptoms. The intensity of the 
symptoms is affected by peripheral and central neural and psychological 
mechanisms. In this Review, we describe an updated understanding of the complex 
and multifactorial pathophysiology of GERD. It is now recognized that different 
GERD phenotypes have different degrees of reflux, severity of mucosal integrity 
damage and type, and severity of symptoms. These variations are probably due to 
the occurrence of a predominant pathophysiological mechanism in each patient. We 
also describe the main pathophysiological mechanisms of GERD and their 
implications for personalized diagnosis and management.

© 2024. Springer Nature Limited.

DOI: 10.1038/s41575-023-00883-z
PMID: 38177402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]