---
reference_id: "PMID:33591973"
title: "Ulcerative skin lesions among children in Cameroon: It is not always Yaws."
authors:
- Ndzomo Ngono JP
- Tchatchouang S
- Noah Tsanga MV
- Njih Tabah E
- Tchualeu A
- Asiedu K
- Giacani L
- Eyangoh S
- Crucitti T
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0009180
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Cameroon/epidemiology
- "Chancroid/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "DNA, Bacterial/analysis"
- Disease Outbreaks
- Female
- "Haemophilus ducreyi/genetics, isolation & purification"
- Humans
- Male
- "Skin Ulcer/diagnosis, epidemiology, microbiology"
- "Treponema pallidum/genetics, isolation & purification"
- "Yaws/diagnosis, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ulcerative skin lesions among children in Cameroon: It is not always Yaws.
**Authors:** Ndzomo Ngono JP, Tchatchouang S, Noah Tsanga MV, Njih Tabah E, Tchualeu A, Asiedu K, Giacani L, Eyangoh S, Crucitti T
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0009180](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0009180)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2021 Feb 16;15(2):e0009180. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0009180. eCollection 2021 Feb.

Ulcerative skin lesions among children in Cameroon: It is not always Yaws.

Ndzomo Ngono JP(1), Tchatchouang S(1), Noah Tsanga MV(1), Njih Tabah E(2)(3),
Tchualeu A(4), Asiedu K(5), Giacani L(6), Eyangoh S(1), Crucitti T(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre Pasteur du Cameroun, Yaounde, Cameroon.
(2)National Yaws, Leishmaniasis, Leprosy and Buruli ulcer Control Programme,
Ministry of Public Health, Yaounde, Cameroon.
(3)Faculty of Medicine and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Dschang, West
Region, Cameroon.
(4)National Laboratory of Public Health, Yaounde, Cameroon.
(5)Department of Control of Neglected Tropical Diseases, WHO, Geneva,
Switzerland.
(6)Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, and
Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
United States of America.

Outbreaks of yaws-like ulcerative skin lesions in children are frequently
reported in tropical and sub-tropical countries. The origin of these lesions
might be primarily traumatic or infectious; in the latter case, Treponema
pallidum subspecies pertenue, the yaws agent, and Haemophilus ducreyi, the agent
of chancroid, are two of the pathogens commonly associated with the aetiology of
skin ulcers. In this work, we investigated the presence of T. p. pertenue and H.
ducreyi DNA in skin ulcers in children living in yaws-endemic regions in
Cameroon. Skin lesion swabs were collected from children presenting with
yaws-suspected skin lesions during three outbreaks, two of which occurred in
2017 and one in 2019. DNA extracted from the swabs was used to amplify three
target genes: the human β2-microglobulin gene to confirm proper sample
collection and DNA extraction, the polA gene, highly conserved among all
subspecies of T. pallidum, and the hddA gene of H. ducreyi. A fourth target, the
tprL gene was used to differentiate T. p. pertenue from the other agents of
human treponematoses in polA-positive samples. A total of 112 samples were
analysed in this study. One sample, negative for β2-microglobulin, was excluded
from further analysis. T. p. pertenue was only detected in the samples collected
during the first 2017 outbreak (12/74, 16.2%). In contrast, H. ducreyi DNA could
be amplified from samples from all three outbreaks (outbreak 1: 27/74, 36.5%;
outbreak 2: 17/24, 70.8%; outbreak 3: 11/13, 84.6%). Our results show that H.
ducreyi was more frequently associated to skin lesions in the examined children
than T. p. pertenue, but also that yaws is still present in Cameroon. These
findings strongly advocate for a continuous effort to determine the aetiology of
ulcerative skin lesions during these recurring outbreaks, and to inform the
planned mass treatment campaigns to eliminate yaws in Cameroon.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0009180
PMCID: PMC7909670
PMID: 33591973 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
