---
reference_id: "PMID:27032097"
title: Hepatitis B Infection, Viral Load and Resistance in HIV-Infected Patients in Mozambique and Zambia.
authors:
- Wandeler G
- Musukuma K
- Zürcher S
- Vinikoor MJ
- Llenas-García J
- Aly MM
- Mulenga L
- Chi BH
- Ehmer J
- Hobbins MA
- Bolton-Moore C
- Hoffmann CJ
- Egger M
- IeDEA-Southern Africa
journal: PLoS One
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152043
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis B Infection, Viral Load and Resistance in HIV-Infected Patients in Mozambique and Zambia.
**Authors:** Wandeler G, Musukuma K, Zürcher S, Vinikoor MJ, Llenas-García J, Aly MM, Mulenga L, Chi BH, Ehmer J, Hobbins MA, Bolton-Moore C, Hoffmann CJ, Egger M, IeDEA-Southern Africa
**Journal:** PLoS One (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0152043](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0152043)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 31;11(3):e0152043. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152043. 
eCollection 2016.

Hepatitis B Infection, Viral Load and Resistance in HIV-Infected Patients in 
Mozambique and Zambia.

Wandeler G(1)(2)(3), Musukuma K(4), Zürcher S(5), Vinikoor MJ(4)(6), 
Llenas-García J(7), Aly MM(8), Mulenga L(4), Chi BH(9), Ehmer J(10), Hobbins 
MA(10), Bolton-Moore C(4)(6), Hoffmann CJ(11), Egger M(2)(12); IeDEA-Southern 
Africa.

Collaborators: Egger M, Davies MA, Tanser F, Vinikoor M, Macete E, Wood R, 
Stinson K, Fatti G, Phiri S, Chimbetete C, Malisita K, Eley B, Ehmer J, Fritz C, 
Hobbins M, Kamenova K, Fox M, Prozesky H, Technau K, Sawry S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Bern University Hospital, University of 
Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(2)Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine, University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland.
(3)Department of Infectious diseases, University of Dakar, Dakar, Senegal.
(4)Centre for Infectious Disease Research in Zambia, Lusaka, Zambia.
(5)Institute for Infectious Diseases, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(6)Department of Medicine at University of Alabama, Birmingham, United States of 
America.
(7)SolidarMed, Ancuabe, Mozambique.
(8)Nucleo do investigacão Operational de Pemba, Pemba, Mozambique.
(9)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of North Carolina, Chapel 
Hill, United States of America.
(10)SolidarMed, Lucerne, Switzerland.
(11)Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, United States of 
America.
(12)Centre for Infectious Disease Epidemiology and Research, University of Cape 
Town, Cape Town, South Africa.

BACKGROUND: Few data on the virological determinants of hepatitis B virus (HBV) 
infection are available from southern Africa.
METHODS: We enrolled consecutive HIV-infected adult patients initiating 
antiretroviral therapy (ART) at two urban clinics in Zambia and four rural 
clinics in Northern Mozambique between May 2013 and August 2014. HBsAg screening 
was performed using the Determine® rapid test. Quantitative real-time PCR and 
HBV sequencing were performed in HBsAg-positive patients. Risk factors for HBV 
infection were evaluated using Chi-square and Mann-Whitney tests and 
associations between baseline characteristics and high level HBV replication 
explored in multivariable logistic regression.
RESULTS: Seventy-eight of 1,032 participants in Mozambique (7.6%, 95% confidence 
interval [CI]: 6.1-9.3) and 90 of 797 in Zambia (11.3%, 95% CI: 9.3-13.4) were 
HBsAg-positive. HBsAg-positive individuals were less likely to be female 
compared to HBsAg-negative ones (52.3% vs. 66.1%, p<0.001). Among 156 (92.9%) 
HBsAg-positive patients with an available measurement, median HBV viral load was 
13,645 IU/mL (interquartile range: 192-8,617,488 IU/mL) and 77 (49.4%) had high 
values (>20,000 UI/mL). HBsAg-positive individuals had higher levels of ALT and 
AST compared to HBsAg-negative ones (both p<0.001). In multivariable analyses, 
male sex (adjusted odds ratio: 2.59, 95% CI: 1.22-5.53) and CD4 cell count below 
200/μl (2.58, 1.20-5.54) were associated with high HBV DNA. HBV genotypes A1 
(58.8%) and E (38.2%) were most prevalent. Four patients had probable resistance 
to lamivudine and/or entecavir.
CONCLUSION: One half of HBsAg-positive patients demonstrated high HBV viremia, 
supporting the early initiation of tenofovir-containing ART in 
HIV/HBV-coinfected adults.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152043
PMCID: PMC4816321
PMID: 27032097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.