---
reference_id: "PMID:39963868"
title: "Incidence of optic neuritis among Afro-descendant, a cohort study."
authors:
- Bobelna B
- Lobjois Q
- Croitoru S
- Jalkh E
- Ventura E
- Merle H
journal: Mult Scler
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1177/13524585251317339
keywords:
- Humans
- "Optic Neuritis/epidemiology, ethnology"
- Female
- Male
- Incidence
- Adult
- Martinique/epidemiology
- Retrospective Studies
- Middle Aged
- Young Adult
- "Black People/statistics & numerical data"
- Multiple Sclerosis/epidemiology
- "Neuromyelitis Optica/epidemiology, ethnology"
- Cohort Studies
- Adolescent
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence of optic neuritis among Afro-descendant, a cohort study.
**Authors:** Bobelna B, Lobjois Q, Croitoru S, Jalkh E, Ventura E, Merle H
**Journal:** Mult Scler (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1177/13524585251317339](https://doi.org/10.1177/13524585251317339)

## Content

1. Mult Scler. 2025 Apr;31(5):529-538. doi: 10.1177/13524585251317339. Epub 2025 
Feb 18.

Incidence of optic neuritis among Afro-descendant, a cohort study.

Bobelna B(1), Lobjois Q(2), Croitoru S(1), Jalkh E(3), Ventura E(1), Merle H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital of Martinique, 
Fort-de-France, Martinique.
(2)Department of Neurology, University Hospital of Martinique, Fort-de-France, 
Martinique.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Hopital Fondation Rothschild, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Optic neuritis (ON) is a multifactorial condition with a strong 
association with ethnicity.
OBJECTIVES: We conducted a retrospective cohort study in a Caribbean Island, 
Martinique, French West Indies to assess the incidence and characteristics of ON 
among an Afro-descendant (AD) population.
METHODS: We reviewed medical records of all patients presenting ON at the Fort 
de France University Hospital, Martinique between 2018 and 2022. We analysed 
clinical, paraclinical, and biological examinations at onset and during 
follow-up (6 months, 1, 2 and 3 years). ON was confirmed after a 
neuro-ophthalmological evaluation according to the latest criteria defined in 
the Lancet, 2022.
RESULTS: Overall, 44 patients with a condition suggestive of ON were evaluated, 
out of which 29 fulfilled the criteria for ON. The overall incidence was 1.61 
(95% CI: 1.12-2.08) per 100,000 person-years. The final diagnosis was 
distributed as follows: neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD) (10%), 
myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) ON (20%), multiple sclerosis (35%), 
single isolated ON (24%), relapsing isolated ON (7%) and (4%) unclassified 
diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: This is the first cohort study assessing the incidence of ON and its 
characteristics among AD. We found a high proportion of severe disease, such as 
NMOSD and MOG-associated disease.

DOI: 10.1177/13524585251317339
PMID: 39963868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting InterestsThe 
author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.