---
reference_id: "PMID:40684266"
title: Clinical syndromes linked to biallelic germline variants in MCM8 and MCM9.
authors:
- Helderman NC
- Yang T
- Palles C
- Terlouw D
- Mei H
- Vorderman RHP
- Cats D
- Díaz-Gay M
- Jongmans MCJ
- Ramdien A
- van de Beek I
- Eleveld TF
- Green A
- Hes FJ
- van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM
- Van Der Kelen A
- Kliesch S
- Kuiper RP
- Lakeman IMM
- Lashley LEELO
- Looijenga LHJ
- Oud MS
- Steingröver J
- Tenenbaum-Rakover Y
- Tops CM
- Tüttelmann F
- de Voer RM
- Westra D
- Wyrwoll MJ
- Golubicki M
- Antelo M
- Bonjoch L
- Terradas M
- Valle L
- Alexandrov LB
- Morreau H
- van Wezel T
- Castellví-Bel S
- Goldberg Y
- Nielsen M
journal: HGG Adv
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2025.100480
keywords:
- Humans
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Minichromosome Maintenance Proteins/genetics
- Male
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Alleles
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- Stomach Neoplasms/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical syndromes linked to biallelic germline variants in MCM8 and MCM9.
**Authors:** Helderman NC, Yang T, Palles C, Terlouw D, Mei H, Vorderman RHP, Cats D, Díaz-Gay M, Jongmans MCJ, Ramdien A, van de Beek I, Eleveld TF, Green A, Hes FJ, van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM, Van Der Kelen A, Kliesch S, Kuiper RP, Lakeman IMM, Lashley LEELO, Looijenga LHJ, Oud MS, Steingröver J, Tenenbaum-Rakover Y, Tops CM, Tüttelmann F, de Voer RM, Westra D, Wyrwoll MJ, Golubicki M, Antelo M, Bonjoch L, Terradas M, Valle L, Alexandrov LB, Morreau H, van Wezel T, Castellví-Bel S, Goldberg Y, Nielsen M
**Journal:** HGG Adv (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.xhgg.2025.100480](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xhgg.2025.100480)

## Content

1. HGG Adv. 2025 Oct 9;6(4):100480. doi: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2025.100480. Epub 2025
Jul  18.

Clinical syndromes linked to biallelic germline variants in MCM8 and MCM9.

Helderman NC(1), Yang T(2), Palles C(3), Terlouw D(4), Mei H(5), Vorderman 
RHP(5), Cats D(5), Díaz-Gay M(6), Jongmans MCJ(7), Ramdien A(1), van de Beek 
I(8), Eleveld TF(9), Green A(10), Hes FJ(11), van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM(12), Van 
Der Kelen A(11), Kliesch S(13), Kuiper RP(9), Lakeman IMM(1), Lashley LEELO(14), 
Looijenga LHJ(15), Oud MS(16), Steingröver J(17), Tenenbaum-Rakover Y(18), Tops 
CM(1), Tüttelmann F(17), de Voer RM(19), Westra D(19), Wyrwoll MJ(20), Golubicki 
M(21), Antelo M(21), Bonjoch L(22), Terradas M(23), Valle L(23), Alexandrov 
LB(2), Morreau H(4), van Wezel T(4), Castellví-Bel S(22), Goldberg Y(24), 
Nielsen M(25).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA; Department of Bioengineering, University of 
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA; Moores Cancer Center, University 
of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(3)Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, UK.
(4)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the 
Netherlands.
(5)Sequencing Analysis Support Core, Department of Biomedical Data Sciences, 
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA; Department of Bioengineering, University of 
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA; Moores Cancer Center, University 
of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; Digital Genomics Group, 
Structural Biology Program, Spanish National Cancer Research Center (CNIO), 
28029 Madrid, Spain.
(7)Princess Maxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, the Netherlands; 
Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, University of 
Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(8)Department of Clinical Genetics, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, 
the Netherlands.
(9)Princess Maxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(10)Department of Clinical Genetics, Children's Health Ireland (CHI) at Crumlin, 
Dublin, Ireland.
(11)Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel (UZ 
Brussel), Clinical Sciences, Research Group Genetics, Reproduction, and 
Development, Centre for Medical Genetics, Brussels, Belgium.
(12)Princess Maxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, the Netherlands; 
Division of Childhealth, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the 
Netherlands.
(13)Centre of Reproductive Medicine and Andrology, Department of Clinical and 
Surgical Andrology, University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany.
(14)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Leiden, the Netherlands.
(15)Princess Maxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, the Netherlands; 
Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the 
Netherlands.
(16)Department of Human Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and 
Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(17)Centre of Medical Genetics, Institute of Reproductive Genetics, University 
and University Hospital of Münster, Münster, Germany.
(18)Pediatric Endocrinology, Clalit Health Services, Afula, Israel; The Ruth and 
Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel.
(19)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Radboud 
Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(20)Centre for Regenerative Medicine, Institute for Stem Cell Research, School 
of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
(21)Oncology Section and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Hospital of 
Gastroenterology "Dr. C.B. Udaondo", Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(22)Gastroenterology, Fundació de Recerca Clínic Barcelona-Institut 
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi I Sunyer (FRCB-IDIBAPS), CIBEREHD, 
Universitat de Barcelona, Clínic Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(23)Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan Institute of Oncology, Oncobell Program, 
IDIBELL, CIBERONC, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.
(24)Raphael Recanati Genetic Institute, Rabin Medical Center-Beilinson Hospital, 
Petah Tikva, Israel.
(25)Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
the Netherlands. Electronic address: m.nielsen@lumc.nl.

MCM8 and MCM9 are newly proposed cancer predisposition genes, linked to 
polyposis and early-onset cancer, in addition to their previously established 
association with hypogonadism. Given the uncertain range of phenotypic 
manifestations and unclear cancer risk estimates, this study aimed to delineate 
the molecular and clinical characteristics of biallelic germline MCM8/MCM9 
variant carriers. We found significant enrichment of biallelic MCM9 variants in 
individuals with colonic polyps (odds ratio [OR] 6.51, 95% confidence interval 
[CI] 1.24-34.11, p = 0.03), rectal polyps (OR 8.40, 95% CI 1.28-55.35, p = 
0.03), and gastric cancer (OR 27.03, 95% CI 2.93-248.5; p = 0.004) in data from 
the 100000 Genomes Project, compared to controls. No similar enrichment was 
found for biallelic MCM8 variants or in the 200000 UK Biobank. Likewise, in our 
case series, which included 26 MCM8 and 28 MCM9 variant carriers, we documented 
polyposis, gastric cancer, and early-onset colorectal cancer (CRC) in MCM9 
carriers but not in MCM8 carriers. Moreover, our case series indicates that 
beyond hypogonadism, biallelic MCM8 and MCM9 variants are associated with 
early-onset germ cell tumors (occurring before age 15). Tumors from MCM8/MCM9 
variant carriers predominantly displayed clock-like mutational processes, 
without evidence of DNA repair deficiency-associated signatures. Collectively, 
our data indicate that biallelic MCM9 variants are associated with polyposis, 
gastric cancer, and early-onset CRC, while both biallelic MCM8 and MCM9 variants 
are linked to hypogonadism and the early development of germ cell tumors. These 
findings underscore the importance of including MCM8/MCM9 in diagnostic gene 
panels for certain clinical contexts and suggest that biallelic carriers may 
benefit from cancer surveillance.

Copyright © 2025 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2025.100480
PMCID: PMC12361757
PMID: 40684266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.