---
reference_id: "PMID:26700907"
title: "Understanding idiopathic intracranial hypertension: mechanisms, management, and future directions."
authors:
- Markey KA
- Mollan SP
- Jensen RH
- Sinclair AJ
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(15)00298-7
keywords:
- Animals
- Comprehension
- Disease Management
- Forecasting
- Humans
- "Intracranial Hypertension/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- "Obesity/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
- "Pseudotumor Cerebri/complications, diagnosis, therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Understanding idiopathic intracranial hypertension: mechanisms, management, and future directions.
**Authors:** Markey KA, Mollan SP, Jensen RH, Sinclair AJ
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(15)00298-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(15)00298-7)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2016 Jan;15(1):78-91. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(15)00298-7. Epub 
2015 Dec 8.

Understanding idiopathic intracranial hypertension: mechanisms, management, and 
future directions.

Markey KA(1), Mollan SP(2), Jensen RH(3), Sinclair AJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Neurometabolism Institute of Metabolism and Systems Research, College of 
Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, 
UK.
(2)Neurometabolism Institute of Metabolism and Systems Research, College of 
Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, 
UK; Birmingham Neuro-Ophthalmology Unit, Ophthalmology Department, University 
Hospitals Birmingham NHS Trust, Queen Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham, Birmingham, 
UK.
(3)Danish Headache Centre, Department of Neurology, Glostrup Hospital, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Neurometabolism Institute of Metabolism and Systems Research, College of 
Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, 
UK. Electronic address: a.b.sinclair@bham.ac.uk.

Idiopathic intracranial hypertension is a disorder characterised by raised 
intracranial pressure that predominantly affects young, obese women. 
Pathogenesis has not been fully elucidated, but several causal factors have been 
proposed. Symptoms can include headaches, visual loss, pulsatile tinnitus, and 
back and neck pain, but the clinical presentation is highly variable. Although 
few studies have been done to support evidence-based management, several recent 
advances have the potential to enhance understanding of the causes of the 
disease and to guide treatment decisions. Investigators of the Idiopathic 
Intracranial Hypertension Treatment Trial (IIHTT) reported beneficial effects of 
acetazolamide in patients with mild visual loss. Studies have also established 
weight loss as an effective disease-modifying treatment, and further clinical 
trials to investigate new treatments are underway. The incidence of idiopathic 
intracranial hypertension is expected to increase as rates of obesity increase; 
efforts to reduce diagnostic delays and identify new, effective approaches to 
treatment will be key to meeting the needs of a growing number of patients.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(15)00298-7
PMID: 26700907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]