---
reference_id: "PMID:37775826"
title: Detection of Parvovirus B19 genome in human heart tissue samples.
authors:
- Kloc A
- Campbell KS
- Espinoza YAU
journal: BMC Res Notes
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13104-023-06527-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Detection of Parvovirus B19 genome in human heart tissue samples.
**Authors:** Kloc A, Campbell KS, Espinoza YAU
**Journal:** BMC Res Notes (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13104-023-06527-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13104-023-06527-4)

## Content

1. BMC Res Notes. 2023 Sep 29;16(1):239. doi: 10.1186/s13104-023-06527-4.

Detection of Parvovirus B19 genome in human heart tissue samples.

Kloc A(1), Campbell KS(2), Espinoza YAU(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology and Environmental Science, University of New Haven, 
West Haven, CT, USA. akloc@newhaven.edu.
(2)Saha Cardiovascular Research Center, University of Kentucky College of 
Medicine, Lexington, KY, USA.
(3)Department of Biology and Environmental Science, University of New Haven, 
West Haven, CT, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Identifying viral genomes in human heart tissues is critical for 
disease diagnosis and assessment of cardiovascular damage. Human heart tissue 
samples obtained during a biopsy procedure are routinely used to test for the 
presence of viruses, as guided by clinical manifestations and prognosis. 
Furthermore, heart tissue samples obtained post-mortem or during a cardiac 
transplant procedure serve as a valuable research tool, as they allow for an 
in-depth assessment of cardiac pathology that can aid in our understanding of 
molecular pathways associated with disease. Because viral nucleic acid 
constitutes only a small portion of each sample's genetic material, appropriate 
methods are necessary for positive viral genome identification.
RESULTS: Snap-frozen heart tissue samples obtained either post-mortem or during 
a cardiac transplant procedure were used to develop conditions for detection of 
Parvovirus B19. Briefly, total DNA was isolated from the heart tissue under 
varying conditions. A PCR-based assay with Parvovirus B19 specific primers was 
implemented to detect the presence of the viral genome, followed by Sanger 
Sequencing. The mechanical disruption of the heart tissue, as well as the 
cardiac tissue processing methods, had a significant effect on the DNA quality 
and the ability to detect the Parvovirus B19 genome.

© 2023. BioMed Central Ltd., part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1186/s13104-023-06527-4
PMCID: PMC10542668
PMID: 37775826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.