---
reference_id: PMID:38172110
title: "A genome-wide association meta-analysis implicates Hedgehog and Notch signaling in Dupuytren's disease."
authors:
- Riesmeijer SA
- Kamali Z
- Ng M
- Drichel D
- Piersma B
- Becker K
- Layton TB
- Nanchahal J
- Nothnagel M
- Vaez A
- Hennies HC
- Werker PMN
- Furniss D
- Nolte IM
journal: Nat Commun
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-44451-0
keywords:
- Humans
- Animals
- "Dupuytren Contracture/genetics, metabolism"
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Hedgehogs/genetics
- Wnt Signaling Pathway
- Genetic Loci
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A genome-wide association meta-analysis implicates Hedgehog and Notch signaling in Dupuytren's disease.
**Authors:** Riesmeijer SA, Kamali Z, Ng M, Drichel D, Piersma B, Becker K, Layton TB, Nanchahal J, Nothnagel M, Vaez A, Hennies HC, Werker PMN, Furniss D, Nolte IM
**Journal:** Nat Commun (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41467-023-44451-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44451-0)

## Content

1. Nat Commun. 2024 Jan 3;15(1):199. doi: 10.1038/s41467-023-44451-0.

A genome-wide association meta-analysis implicates Hedgehog and Notch signaling 
in Dupuytren's disease.

Riesmeijer SA(1)(2), Kamali Z(3)(4), Ng M(5), Drichel D(6)(7), Piersma B(8), 
Becker K(6), Layton TB(9), Nanchahal J(9), Nothnagel M(6)(7), Vaez A(3)(4), 
Hennies HC(7)(10), Werker PMN(11), Furniss D(5), Nolte IM(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Plastic Surgery, Groningen, The Netherlands. sophieriesmeijer@gmail.com.
(2)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Epidemiology, Groningen, The Netherlands. sophieriesmeijer@gmail.com.
(3)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Epidemiology, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of bioinformatics, School of Advanced Medical Technologies, 
Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
(5)Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology, and Musculoskeletal 
Science, Botnar Research Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(6)Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(7)Faculty of Medicine and the Cologne University Hospital, Cologne, Germany.
(8)University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(9)Kennedy Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(10)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Huddersfield, Huddersfield, 
UK.
(11)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of 
Plastic Surgery, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Dupuytren's disease (DD) is a highly heritable fibrotic disorder of the hand 
with incompletely understood etiology. A number of genetic loci, including Wnt 
signaling members, have been previously identified. Our overall aim was to 
identify novel genetic loci, to prioritize genes within the loci for functional 
studies, and to assess genetic correlation with associated disorders. We 
performed a meta-analysis of six DD genome-wide association studies from three 
European countries and extensive bioinformatic follow-up analyses. Leveraging 
11,320 cases and 47,023 controls, we identified 85 genome-wide significant 
single nucleotide polymorphisms in 56 loci, of which 11 were novel, explaining 
13.3-38.1% of disease variance. Gene prioritization implicated the Hedgehog and 
Notch signaling pathways. We also identified a significant genetic correlation 
with frozen shoulder. The pathways identified highlight the potential for new 
therapeutic targets and provide a basis for additional mechanistic studies for a 
common disorder that can severely impact hand function.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-023-44451-0
PMCID: PMC10764787
PMID: 38172110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have the following to disclose: P.W. 
was science and engineering research board (SERB) member for an industry 
sponsored study on collagenase of Fidia Ltd, Milan, Italy. J.N. consults for and 
holds equity in 180 Life Sciences, which has exclusively licensed IP from the 
University of Oxford on the use of anti-TNF for early-stage Dupuytren’s disease. 
All other authors declare no competing interests.