---
reference_id: PMID:23891402
title: "Epidemiological, demographic, and clinical characteristics of 47 cases of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus disease from Saudi Arabia: a descriptive study."
authors:
- Assiri A
- Al-Tawfiq JA
- Al-Rabeeah AA
- Al-Rabiah FA
- Al-Hajjar S
- Al-Barrak A
- Flemban H
- Al-Nassir WN
- Balkhy HH
- Al-Hakeem RF
- Makhdoom HQ
- Zumla AI
- Memish ZA
journal: Lancet Infect Dis
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(13)70204-4
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Aspartate Aminotransferases/analysis
- Child
- "Community-Acquired Infections/mortality, pathology, virology"
- "Coronavirus/isolation & purification"
- "Coronavirus Infections/epidemiology, mortality"
- "Cross Infection/mortality, pathology, virology"
- Diarrhea/virology
- Female
- Fever/pathology
- Humans
- L-Lactate Dehydrogenase/analysis
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Odds Ratio
- Saudi Arabia/epidemiology
- Thrombocytopenia/pathology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiological, demographic, and clinical characteristics of 47 cases of Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus disease from Saudi Arabia: a descriptive study.
**Authors:** Assiri A, Al-Tawfiq JA, Al-Rabeeah AA, Al-Rabiah FA, Al-Hajjar S, Al-Barrak A, Flemban H, Al-Nassir WN, Balkhy HH, Al-Hakeem RF, Makhdoom HQ, Zumla AI, Memish ZA
**Journal:** Lancet Infect Dis (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1473-3099(13)70204-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(13)70204-4)

## Content

1. Lancet Infect Dis. 2013 Sep;13(9):752-61. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(13)70204-4. 
Epub 2013 Jul 26.

Epidemiological, demographic, and clinical characteristics of 47 cases of Middle 
East respiratory syndrome coronavirus disease from Saudi Arabia: a descriptive 
study.

Assiri A(1), Al-Tawfiq JA, Al-Rabeeah AA, Al-Rabiah FA, Al-Hajjar S, Al-Barrak 
A, Flemban H, Al-Nassir WN, Balkhy HH, Al-Hakeem RF, Makhdoom HQ, Zumla AI, 
Memish ZA.

Author information:
(1)Global Centre for Mass Gatherings Medicine, Ministry of Health, Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia.

Comment in
    Lancet Infect Dis. 2013 Sep;13(9):727-8. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(13)70159-2.
    Lancet Infect Dis. 2014 Feb;14(2):99. doi: 10.1016/S1473-3099(13)70358-X.

BACKGROUND: Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS) is a new human disease 
caused by a novel coronavirus (CoV). Clinical data on MERS-CoV infections are 
scarce. We report epidemiological, demographic, clinical, and laboratory 
characteristics of 47 cases of MERS-CoV infections, identify knowledge gaps, and 
define research priorities.
METHODS: We abstracted and analysed epidemiological, demographic, clinical, and 
laboratory data from confirmed cases of sporadic, household, community, and 
health-care-associated MERS-CoV infections reported from Saudi Arabia between 
Sept 1, 2012, and June 15, 2013. Cases were confirmed as having MERS-CoV by 
real-time RT-PCR.
FINDINGS: 47 individuals (46 adults, one child) with laboratory-confirmed 
MERS-CoV disease were identified; 36 (77%) were male (male:female ratio 3·3:1). 
28 patients died, a 60% case-fatality rate. The case-fatality rate rose with 
increasing age. Only two of the 47 cases were previously healthy; most patients 
(45 [96%]) had underlying comorbid medical disorders, including diabetes (32 
[68%]), hypertension (16 [34%]), chronic cardiac disease (13 [28%]), and chronic 
renal disease (23 [49%]). Common symptoms at presentation were fever (46 [98%]), 
fever with chills or rigors (41 [87%]), cough (39 [83%]), shortness of breath 
(34 [72%]), and myalgia (15 [32%]). Gastrointestinal symptoms were also 
frequent, including diarrhoea (12 [26%]), vomiting (ten [21%]), and abdominal 
pain (eight [17%]). All patients had abnormal findings on chest radiography, 
ranging from subtle to extensive unilateral and bilateral abnormalities. 
Laboratory analyses showed raised concentrations of lactate dehydrogenase (23 
[49%]) and aspartate aminotransferase (seven [15%]) and thrombocytopenia (17 
[36%]) and lymphopenia (16 [34%]).
INTERPRETATION: Disease caused by MERS-CoV presents with a wide range of 
clinical manifestations and is associated with substantial mortality in admitted 
patients who have medical comorbidities. Major gaps in our knowledge of the 
epidemiology, community prevalence, and clinical spectrum of infection and 
disease need urgent definition.
FUNDING: None.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1473-3099(13)70204-4
PMCID: PMC7185445
PMID: 23891402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]