---
reference_id: "PMID:40567260"
title: "Patient-Reported Outcomes From LIBRETTO-431: First-Line Selpercatinib Versus Chemotherapy With Pembrolizumab in RET Fusion-Positive NSCLC."
authors:
- Zhou C
- Novello S
- Garrido P
- Dooms C
- Alatorre-Alexander J
- Reinmuth N
- Worthy G
- Cocks K
- Williams J
- Han H
- Uh MK
- Payakachat N
- Gilligan AM
- Goto K
journal: JTO Clin Res Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.jtocrr.2025.100814
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Patient-Reported Outcomes From LIBRETTO-431: First-Line Selpercatinib Versus Chemotherapy With Pembrolizumab in RET Fusion-Positive NSCLC.
**Authors:** Zhou C, Novello S, Garrido P, Dooms C, Alatorre-Alexander J, Reinmuth N, Worthy G, Cocks K, Williams J, Han H, Uh MK, Payakachat N, Gilligan AM, Goto K
**Journal:** JTO Clin Res Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jtocrr.2025.100814](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtocrr.2025.100814)

## Content

1. JTO Clin Res Rep. 2025 Feb 19;6(7):100814. doi: 10.1016/j.jtocrr.2025.100814.
eCollection 2025 Jul.

Patient-Reported Outcomes From LIBRETTO-431: First-Line Selpercatinib Versus
Chemotherapy With Pembrolizumab in RET Fusion-Positive NSCLC.

Zhou C(1), Novello S(2), Garrido P(3), Dooms C(4), Alatorre-Alexander J(5),
Reinmuth N(6), Worthy G(7), Cocks K(7), Williams J(8), Han H(8), Uh MK(8),
Payakachat N(8), Gilligan AM(8), Goto K(9).

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai,
People's Republic of China.
(2)University of Turin, AOU San Luigi-Orbassano, Italy.
(3)Ramón y Cajal Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
(4)UZ Leuven, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Instituto Nacional de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Mexico City, Mexico.
(6)Asklepios Lungenklinik, München, Germany.
(7)Adelphi Values, Bollington, Cheshire, United Kingdom.
(8)Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, Indiana.
(9)National Cancer Center Hospital East, Kashiwa, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: The benefit of first-line selpercatinib versus platinum-based
chemotherapy with or without pembrolizumab in patients with advanced RET
fusion-positive NSCLC has been previously reported. The patient-reported
outcomes (PROs) from the LIBRETTO-431 trial presented here further support the
benefit of first-line selpercatinib in this patient population.
METHODS: In the intention-to-treat pembrolizumab population, 129 patients
received selpercatinib and 83 patients received platinum chemotherapy with
pembrolizumab (control). Time to confirmed deterioration (TTCD) of the NSCLC
Symptom Assessment Questionnaire (NSCLC-SAQ) total score was a secondary end
point. Additional PROs included changes in the NSCLC-SAQ total and individual
symptom scores, European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer Core
Quality of Life Questionnaire health-related quality of life, functioning and
symptoms, patient-reported tolerability by the Functional Assessment of Cancer
Therapy GP5 item (GP5), and symptomatic adverse events by PROs version of the
Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events up to 1 year were reported. TTCD
was defined as the time from randomization to first deterioration in score that
met prespecified thresholds, confirmed at next assessment. Patient-reported
tolerability was reported as the proportion of patients with side effect bother
over time.
RESULTS: Selpercatinib delayed TTCD of all individual NSCLC-SAQ symptoms versus
control. A clinically meaningful improvement in the NSCLC-SAQ total score (mean
difference = -2.00, 95% confidence interval [CI]: -2.94 to -1.05) was also
observed at 1 year for selpercatinib versus control. Selpercatinib delayed TTCD
of physical (hazard ratio = 0.54, 95% CI: 0.38-0.76) and role (hazard ratio =
0.59, 95% CI: 0.37-0.93) functioning measured by European Organization for
Research and Treatment of Cancer Core Quality of Life Questionnaire, with
significantly improved physical functioning at 1 year versus control (mean
difference = 8.09, 95% CI: 2.82-13.37; p = 0.003). The selpercatinib group
reported better tolerability, as measured by GP5, with a lower proportion
bothered by side effects compared with control (22.6% versus 39.7%, OR = 0.58,
95% CI: 0.33-0.99).
CONCLUSIONS: These PROs, combined with the established efficacy and safety
profile of selpercatinib, further support the use of first-line selpercatinib as
a standard of care and highlight the importance of early and comprehensive
genomic testing in patients with RET fusion-positive NSCLC.

© 2025 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtocrr.2025.100814
PMCID: PMC12192610
PMID: 40567260

Conflict of interest statement: Dr. Zhou reports having consultancy role in QiLu
Pharmaceutical and TopAlliance Biosciences Inc.; receiving honoraria from Eli
Lilly and Company, Roche, Merck Sharp & Dohme, QiLu Pharmaceutical, Hengrui
Pharmaceutical, Innovent Biologics, Alice, CStone Pharmaceuticals, LUYE Pharma,
and TopAlliance Biosciences Inc. Dr. Novello reports providing consultancy for
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Eli Lilly and Company, Takeda, Roche, Pfizer, AstraZeneca,
Boehringer Ingelheim, Merck Sharp & Dohme, AbbVie, Sanofi, PharmaMar, and
Beigene; receiving travel support from BeiGene and Sanofi; having advisory board
role for AstraZeneca, Daiichi Sankyo, Eli Lilly, Gilead, AbbVie, and
GlaxoSmithKline; and serving as the President of Women Against Lung Cancer in
Europe. Dr. Garrido reports receiving honoraria from Janssen Pharmaceuticals,
Merck Sharp & Dohme, Novartis, Medscape, Takeda, and TouchTime; receiving travel
support from AstraZeneca, Roche, and Janssen Pharmaceuticals; and having
advisory board roles for AbbVie, Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Bristol-Myers
Squibb, Boehringer Ingelheim, Daiichi Sankyo, GlaxoSmithKline, Janssen, Lilly,
Merck Sharp & Dohme, Novartis, Pfizer, Regeneron, Roche, Sanofi, and Takeda. Dr.
Alatorre-Alexander reports providing consultancy for AstraZeneca, Roche,
Boehringer Ingelheim, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Takeda, Pfizer,
and Janssen; receiving honoraria from Amgen, Adium, AstraZeneca, Roche,
Boehringer Ingelheim, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Takeda, Pfizer,
and Janssen Pharmaceuticals; receiving travel support from AstraZeneca, Roche,
Pfizer, and Janssen Pharmaceuticals; and having advisory board role for
AstraZeneca, Roche, Boehringer Ingelheim, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Bristol-Myers
Squibb, Takeda, Pfizer, and Janssen Pharmaceuticals. Dr. Reinmuth reports
receiving honoraria from AstraZeneca, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Roche, Merck Sharp &
Dohme, Pfizer, Boehringer Ingelheim, Takeda, Amgen, Eli Lilly and Company,
AbbVie, Merck KGaA, Sanofi Aventis GmbH, and Janssen Oncology; receiving travel
support from Janssen and Daiichi Sankyo; and having an advisory board role for
AstraZeneca. Drs. Worthy and Cocks report employment with Adelphi Values and
consultancy with Eli Lilly and Company. Drs. Williams, Han, Uh, Payakachat, and
Gilligan report employment with Eli Lilly and Company. Dr. Goto reports
receiving grants to institutions from Amgen Inc., AstraZeneca, AbbVie, AnHeart
Therapeutics Inc., Bayer Yakuhin, Ltd., Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol-Myers
Squibb, Blueprint Medicines Corporation, Chugai Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., Craif
Inc., Daiichi Sankyo Company, Limited, Eisai Co. Ltd., Eli Lilly and Company,
Guardant Health Asia, Middle East & Africa Inc., Haihe Biopharma Co. Ltd.,
Ignyta Inc., Janssen Pharmaceutical, Kyowa Kirin Co. Ltd., Life Technologies
Japan Ltd., Loxo Oncology, Inc., Lunit Inc., Medical & Biological Laboratories
Co. Ltd., Merck Biopharma Co. Ltd., Merus US Inc., Novartis Pharma, Ono
Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., Pfizer R&D, Precision Medicine Asia Co. Ltd., Riken
Genesis Co. Ltd., Sumitomo Pharma Co. Ltd., Spectrum Pharmaceuticals Inc.,
Sysmex Corporation, Taiho Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., Takeda Pharmaceutical Co.
Ltd., and Turning Point Therapeutics Inc.; receiving honoraria from Amgen Inc.,
Amoy Diagnostics Co. Ltd., AstraZeneca, Bayer, Bristol-Myers Squibb, Chugai
Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., Daiichi Sankyo Company Ltd., Eisai Co. Ltd., Eli Lilly,
Guardant Health Japan Corp., iTeos Therapeutics Inc., Janssen Pharmaceutical,
ThermoFisher Scientific, Merck Biopharma Co. Ltd., Nippon Kayaku Co. Ltd.,
Novartis Pharma, Ono Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., Pharma Mar, Riken Genesis Co.
Ltd., Taiho Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., and Takeda Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd.; having
advisory board role for Amgen Inc., AstraZeneca, Bayer HealthCare
Pharmaceuticals Inc., Bristol-Myers Squibb, Daiichi Sankyo Company, Ltd., Eli
Lilly and Company, GlaxoSmithKline, Haihe Biopharma Co. Ltd., Janssen
Pharmaceuticals, and Syneos Health Clinical. Dr. Dooms declares no conflict of
interest.
