---
reference_id: "PMID:34051065"
title: "Hepatitis C elimination in Sweden: Progress, challenges and opportunities for growth in the time of COVID-19."
authors:
- Blach S
- Blomé M
- Duberg AS
- Jerkeman A
- Kåberg M
- Klasa PE
- Lagging M
- Razavi-Shearer D
- Razavi H
- Aleman S
journal: Liver Int
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/liv.14978
keywords:
- Antiviral Agents/therapeutic use
- COVID-19
- Hepacivirus
- "Hepatitis C/drug therapy, epidemiology, prevention & control"
- Humans
- Pandemics
- SARS-CoV-2
- "Substance Abuse, Intravenous/epidemiology"
- Sweden/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis C elimination in Sweden: Progress, challenges and opportunities for growth in the time of COVID-19.
**Authors:** Blach S, Blomé M, Duberg AS, Jerkeman A, Kåberg M, Klasa PE, Lagging M, Razavi-Shearer D, Razavi H, Aleman S
**Journal:** Liver Int (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/liv.14978](https://doi.org/10.1111/liv.14978)

## Content

1. Liver Int. 2021 Sep;41(9):2024-2031. doi: 10.1111/liv.14978. Epub 2021 Jun 30.

Hepatitis C elimination in Sweden: Progress, challenges and opportunities for
growth in the time of COVID-19.

Blach S(1), Blomé M(2), Duberg AS(3), Jerkeman A(2), Kåberg M(4)(5), Klasa
PE(6), Lagging M(7)(8), Razavi-Shearer D(1), Razavi H(1), Aleman S(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Center for Disease Analysis Foundation,
Lafayette, CO, USA.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Translational Medicine, Clinical Infection
Medicine, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.
(3)Faculty of Medicine and Health, Department of Infectious Diseases, Örebro
University, Örebro, Sweden.
(4)Stockholm Needle Exchange, Stockholm Centre for Dependency Disorders,
Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Division of Infection and Dermatology, Department of Medicine Huddinge,
Karolinska Institute, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm,
Sweden.
(6)Addiction Medicine, PRIMA Maria OST Clinic, Stockholm, Sweden.
(7)Department of Infectious Diseases/Virology, Institute of Biomedicine,
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(8)Department of Clinical Microbiology, Region Västra Götaland, Sahlgrenska
University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(9)Department of Medicine Huddinge, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
(10)Department of Infectious Diseases, Karolinska University Hospital,
Stockholm, Sweden.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: In 2014, the burden of hepatitis C virus (HCV) in Sweden was
evaluated, to establish a baseline and inform public health interventions.
Considering the changing landscape of HCV treatment, prevention, and care, and
in light of the COVID-19 pandemic, this analysis seeks to evaluate Sweden's
progress towards the World Health Organization (WHO) elimination targets and
identify remaining barriers.
METHODS: The data used for modelling HCV transmission and disease burden in
Sweden were obtained through literature review, unpublished sources and expert
input. A dynamic Markov model was employed to forecast population sizes and
incidence of HCV through 2030. Two scenarios ('2019 Base' and 'WHO Targets')
were developed to evaluate Sweden's progress towards HCV elimination.
RESULTS: At the beginning of 2019, there were 29 700 (95% uncertainty interval:
19 300-33 700) viremic infections in Sweden. Under the base scenario, Sweden
would achieve and exceed the WHO targets for diagnosis, treatment and
liver-related death. However, new infections would decrease by less than 10%,
relative to 2015. Achieving all WHO targets by 2030 would require (i) expanding
harm reduction programmes to reach more than 90% of people who inject drugs
(PWID) and (ii) treating 90% of HCV + PWID engaged in harm reduction programmes
and ≥7% of PWID not involved in harm reduction programmes, annually by 2025.
CONCLUSIONS: It is of utmost importance that Sweden, and all countries, find
sustainability in HCV programmes by broadening the setting and base of providers
to provide stability and continuity of care during turbulent times.

© 2021 The Authors. Liver International published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/liv.14978
PMCID: PMC8242794
PMID: 34051065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: S.B. and D.R.‐S. are employees of the Center for
Disease Analysis Foundation (CDAF). Over the past 3 years, CDAF has received
research funding from Gilead, AbbVie and Vaccine Impact Modeling Consortium.
CDAF has also received grants from CDC Foundation, John Martin Foundation,
ASTHO, Zeshan Foundation and private donors. A.‐S.D. has received honoraria for
lectures/consultancy from AbbVie, Gilead and MSD. A.J. has received research
support from AbbVie and honoraria from MSD. M.K. has received honoraria for
lectures from AbbVie, Gilead, MSD, Mundipharma, DnE Pharma and Nordic Drugs and
has received research grants from Gilead and Nordic Drugs. P.‐E.K. has received
honoraria for lectures from Gilead. H.R. has been a member of advisory boards
for Gilead, AbbVie, Merck and VBI Vaccines. All proceeds are donated to CDAF. He
is the managing director of Center for Disease Analysis (CDA) and CDAF. S.A. has
received honoraria for lectures/consultancy from AbbVie, BMS, Gilead, MSD, and
has received research grants from AbbVie and Gilead.
