---
reference_id: "PMID:6481580"
title: Hirschsprung's disease in the newborn.
authors:
- Klein MD
- Coran AG
- Wesley JR
- Drongowski RA
journal: J Pediatr Surg
year: '1984'
doi: 10.1016/s0022-3468(84)80255-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hirschsprung's disease in the newborn.
**Authors:** Klein MD, Coran AG, Wesley JR, Drongowski RA
**Journal:** J Pediatr Surg (1984)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0022-3468(84)80255-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0022-3468(84)80255-9)

## Content

1. J Pediatr Surg. 1984 Aug;19(4):370-4. doi: 10.1016/s0022-3468(84)80255-9.

Hirschsprung's disease in the newborn.

Klein MD, Coran AG, Wesley JR, Drongowski RA.

Hirschsprung's disease has become a more common cause of newborn intestinal 
obstruction in the past 30 years. In a group of 137 newborns with intestinal 
obstruction the most common diagnosis was necrotizing enterocolitis. The second 
most common cause, however, was Hirschsprung's disease. We have reviewed 26 
infants with aganglionosis who presented at 32 days of age or less between 1972 
and 1978. The average age at presentation was 8.3 days. There were 21 males and 
five females. Five infants had long-segment or total colonic disease. There was 
only one premature infant (34 weeks, 1840 g). The mean birthweight in the series 
was 3.6 kg. Six children had a family history of a congenital anomaly (23%). 
Three of these had a family history of Hirschsprung's disease (12%). Nine 
infants (35%) had associated congenital anomalies. Four of these newborns had 
Down's syndrome, and all four had a cardiac anomaly as well. Fifteen newborns 
presented with emesis (58%) which was bilious in nine (35%) cases. Seventeen 
babies (65%) had abdominal distension at the time of presentation. Eleven 
infants passed a meconium stool by 24 hours of age (42%), and 15 had passed 
meconium by 48 hours (58%). Twenty-two of 24 (92%) barium enema examinations 
available prior to diagnosis were diagnostic of Hirschsprung's disease. All of 
the 23 suction rectal biopsies were positive. All 26 patients underwent a 
colostomy or ileostomy following diagnosis. There was no enterocolitis and no 
mortality. All 26 patients have had an endorectal pullthrough performed at a 
mean age of 11.8 months without major complications.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 
WORDS)

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-3468(84)80255-9
PMID: 6481580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]