---
reference_id: "PMID:25941885"
title: "Preventing the spread of Alzheimer's disease neuropathology: a role for calcilytics?"
authors:
- Chiarini A
- Gardenal E
- Whitfield JF
- Chakravarthy B
- Armato U
- Dal Pra I
journal: Curr Pharm Biotechnol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.2174/1389201016666150505123813
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Preventing the spread of Alzheimer's disease neuropathology: a role for calcilytics?
**Authors:** Chiarini A, Gardenal E, Whitfield JF, Chakravarthy B, Armato U, Dal Pra I
**Journal:** Curr Pharm Biotechnol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1389201016666150505123813](https://doi.org/10.2174/1389201016666150505123813)

## Content

1. Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2015;16(8):696-706. doi: 
10.2174/1389201016666150505123813.

Preventing the spread of Alzheimer's disease neuropathology: a role for 
calcilytics?

Chiarini A, Gardenal E, Whitfield JF, Chakravarthy B, Armato U(1), Dal Pra I.

Author information:
(1)Histology & Embryology Unit, Department of Life & Reproduction Sciences, 
University of Verona Medical School, 8 Strada Le Grazie, Verona, Venetia, 37134 
Italy. uarmato@gmail.com.

The "amyloid cascade hypothesis" posits that an extracellular build-up of 
amyloid-β oligomers (Aβ-os) and polymers (fibrils) subsequently inducing toxic 
hyperphosphorylated (p)-Tau oligomers (p-Tau-os) and neurofibrillary tangles 
starts the sporadic late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD) in the aged lateral 
entorhinal cortex. Conversely, mutated genes cause a diffuse cerebral Aβs/Aβ-os 
overproduction promoting early-onset familiar AD (EOFAD). Surplus exogenous 
Aβ-os exert toxic actions at several levels. They reach the nuclei of human 
astrocyte-neurons teams (ANTs) to enhance the transcription of Aβ precursor 
protein (APP) and β-secretase/BACE1 genes. The overexpressed APP and BACE1 
proteins act in concert with γ-secretase to overproduce endogenous Aβs/Aβ-os, of 
which a few enter the nuclei to upkeep Aβs overproduction, while the rest gather 
in the cytoplasm, damage mitochondria, and are oversecreted. Simultaneously, 
extracellular Aβ-os bind the ANTs' calcium-sensing receptors (CaSRs) activating 
signalings that hinder the proteolysis and hence favor the surplus 
hoarding/secretion of Aβs/Aβ-os. Overreleased Aβ-os spread, reach growing 
numbers of adjacent ANTs to recruit them to overproduce/oversecrete further 
Aβ-os amounts via the just mentioned mechanisms. Alongside, Aβ•CaSR signalings 
elicit a noxious overproduction/overrelease of nitric oxide (NO) and vascular 
endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-A from ANTs' astrocytes. While astrocytes 
survive the toxic onslaught, neurons die. Thus, AD progression is driven by 
ceaselessly self-sustaining neurotoxic cycles, which engender first Aβ-os and 
later p-Tau-os that cooperatively destroy increasingly wider cognition-related 
cortical areas. Notably, a highly selective allosteric CaSR antagonist 
(calcilytic), like NPS 2143, does preserve human cortical postnatal HCN-1A 
neurons viability notwithstanding the presence of exogenous Aβ-os by suppressing 
the otherwise elicited oversecretion and spread of newly synthesized Aβ-os. 
Therefore, if given at minimal cognitive impairment or earlier stages, 
calcilytics could halt AD progression and preserve the patients' cortical 
neurons, cognitive abilities, and eventually life.

DOI: 10.2174/1389201016666150505123813
PMID: 25941885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]