---
reference_id: "PMID:39006359"
title: "The clinical characteristics and pathogenic variants of primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease in 210 patients: a systematic review."
authors:
- Sun J
- Ding L
- He L
- Fu H
- Li R
- Feng J
- Dong J
- Liao L
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2024.1356870
keywords:
- Humans
- Mutation
- Cyclic AMP-Dependent Protein Kinase RIalpha Subunit/genetics
- "Adrenal Cortex Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Female
- Adult
- Male
- "Cushing Syndrome/genetics, surgery, diagnosis"
- "Carney Complex/genetics, diagnosis"
- Young Adult
- Osteoporosis/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The clinical characteristics and pathogenic variants of primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease in 210 patients: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Sun J, Ding L, He L, Fu H, Li R, Feng J, Dong J, Liao L
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2024.1356870](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2024.1356870)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2024 Jun 26;15:1356870. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2024.1356870. eCollection 2024.

The clinical characteristics and pathogenic variants of primary pigmented 
nodular adrenocortical disease in 210 patients: a systematic review.

Sun J(#)(1)(2), Ding L(#)(3), He L(1)(2), Fu H(2)(4), Li R(4), Feng J(2)(5), 
Dong J(5)(6), Liao L(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Clinical Medicine, Shandong Second Medical University, Weifang, 
China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology and Metabology, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Shandong First Medical University & Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, 
Jinan, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Metabology, Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan 
Hospital, Jinan, China.
(4)First Clinical Medical College, Shandong University of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, Jinan, China.
(5)Department of Endocrinology, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan, 
China.
(6)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, Qilu Hospital of 
Shandong University, Jinan, China.
(#)Contributed equally

AIMS: Primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease (PPNAD), as a rare kind 
of Cushing's syndrome, is frequently misdiagnosed. To get a better understanding 
of the disease, we analyzed the clinical characteristics and pathogenic variants 
of PPNAD.
METHODS: Databases were searched, and the pathogenic variants and clinical 
manifestations of patients were summarized from the relevant articles.
RESULTS: A total of 210 patients in 86 articles were enrolled with a median age 
of 22 and a female-to-male ratio of 2:1. Sixty-six (31.43%) patients were 
combined with Carney complex (CNC) and 94.29% were combined with 
osteoporosis/osteopenia. Among 151 patients who underwent genetic testing, 
87.42% (132/151) had pathogenic variants. Six gene mutations (PRKAR1A, PDE11A, 
PRKACA, CTNNB1, PDE8B, and ARMC5) were detected in the patients. The most common 
mutation was PKAR1A, accounting for 79.47% (120/151). There was a significant 
correlation between PRKAR1A pathogenic variant and spotty skin pigmentation in 
CNC concurrent with PPNAD (p < 0.05). Among pregnant patients with PPNAD, those 
without surgical treatment and with bilateral adrenalectomy suffered from a 
high-risk perinatal period. However, patients with unilateral adrenalectomy 
presented a safe perinatal period.
CONCLUSIONS: For young patients with Cushing's syndrome, especially female 
patients with spotty skin pigmentation and osteoporosis/osteopenia, PPNAD should 
be considered. Unilateral adrenal resection may be considered as an option for 
women with fertility needs. In view of the difficulty of PPNAD diagnosis, 
genetic testing before surgery might be a reasonable option. Patients with PPNAD 
with spotty skin pigmentation should consider the PRKAR1A pathogenic variant and 
pay attention to CNC.
SYSTEMATIC REVIEW REGISTRATION: https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero, identifier 
CRD42023416988.

Copyright © 2024 Sun, Ding, He, Fu, Li, Feng, Dong and Liao.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2024.1356870
PMCID: PMC11240189
PMID: 39006359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.