---
reference_id: "PMID:27606499"
title: Two locus inheritance of non-syndromic midline craniosynostosis via rare SMAD6 and common BMP2 alleles.
authors:
- Timberlake AT
- Choi J
- Zaidi S
- Lu Q
- Nelson-Williams C
- Brooks ED
- Bilguvar K
- Tikhonova I
- Mane S
- Yang JF
- Sawh-Martinez R
- Persing S
- Zellner EG
- Loring E
- Chuang C
- Galm A
- Hashim PW
- Steinbacher DM
- DiLuna ML
- Duncan CC
- Pelphrey KA
- Zhao H
- Persing JA
- Lifton RP
journal: Elife
year: '2016'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.20125
keywords:
- Alleles
- Bone Morphogenetic Protein 2/genetics
- Craniosynostoses/genetics
- Exome
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- Infant
- Mutation
- Penetrance
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Smad6 Protein/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two locus inheritance of non-syndromic midline craniosynostosis via rare SMAD6 and common BMP2 alleles.
**Authors:** Timberlake AT, Choi J, Zaidi S, Lu Q, Nelson-Williams C, Brooks ED, Bilguvar K, Tikhonova I, Mane S, Yang JF, Sawh-Martinez R, Persing S, Zellner EG, Loring E, Chuang C, Galm A, Hashim PW, Steinbacher DM, DiLuna ML, Duncan CC, Pelphrey KA, Zhao H, Persing JA, Lifton RP
**Journal:** Elife (2016)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.20125](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.20125)

## Content

1. Elife. 2016 Sep 8;5:e20125. doi: 10.7554/eLife.20125.

Two locus inheritance of non-syndromic midline craniosynostosis via rare SMAD6
and common BMP2 alleles.

Timberlake AT(1)(2)(3), Choi J(1)(2), Zaidi S(1)(2), Lu Q(4), Nelson-Williams
C(1)(2), Brooks ED(3), Bilguvar K(1)(5), Tikhonova I(5), Mane S(1)(5), Yang
JF(3), Sawh-Martinez R(3), Persing S(3), Zellner EG(3), Loring E(1)(2)(5),
Chuang C(3), Galm A(6), Hashim PW(3), Steinbacher DM(3), DiLuna ML(7), Duncan
CC(7), Pelphrey KA(8), Zhao H(4), Persing JA(3), Lifton RP(1)(2)(5)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, United
States.
(2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, United States.
(3)Section of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Department of Surgery, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, United States.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
United States.
(5)Yale Center for Genome Analysis, New Haven, United States.
(6)Craniosynostosis and Positional Plagiocephaly Support, New York, United
States.
(7)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
United States.
(8)Child Study Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, United
States.
(9)The Rockefeller University, New York, United States.

Comment in
    doi: 10.7554/eLife.21162.

Premature fusion of the cranial sutures (craniosynostosis), affecting 1 in 2000
newborns, is treated surgically in infancy to prevent adverse neurologic
outcomes. To identify mutations contributing to common non-syndromic midline
(sagittal and metopic) craniosynostosis, we performed exome sequencing of 132
parent-offspring trios and 59 additional probands. Thirteen probands (7%) had
damaging de novo or rare transmitted mutations in SMAD6, an inhibitor of BMP -
induced osteoblast differentiation (p<10-20). SMAD6 mutations nonetheless showed
striking incomplete penetrance (<60%). Genotypes of a common variant near BMP2
that is strongly associated with midline craniosynostosis explained nearly all
the phenotypic variation in these kindreds, with highly significant evidence of
genetic interaction between these loci via both association and analysis of
linkage. This epistatic interaction of rare and common variants defines the most
frequent cause of midline craniosynostosis and has implications for the genetic
basis of other diseases.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.20125
PMCID: PMC5045293
PMID: 27606499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that no competing interests
exist.
