---
reference_id: "PMID:34819907"
title: Clinical and Genetic Features of Biallelic Mutations in SORD in a Series of Chinese Patients With Charcot-Marie-Tooth and Distal Hereditary Motor Neuropathy.
authors:
- Liu X
- He J
- Yilihamu M
- Duan X
- Fan D
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2021.733926
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and Genetic Features of Biallelic Mutations in SORD in a Series of Chinese Patients With Charcot-Marie-Tooth and Distal Hereditary Motor Neuropathy.
**Authors:** Liu X, He J, Yilihamu M, Duan X, Fan D
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2021.733926](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2021.733926)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2021 Nov 8;12:733926. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2021.733926.
eCollection  2021.

Clinical and Genetic Features of Biallelic Mutations in SORD in a Series of 
Chinese Patients With Charcot-Marie-Tooth and Distal Hereditary Motor 
Neuropathy.

Liu X(1), He J(1), Yilihamu M(1), Duan X(2), Fan D(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, China.
(2)China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, China.
(3)Key Laboratory for Neuroscience, Ministry of Education/National Health 
Commission, Peking University, Beijing, China.
(4)Beijing Municipal Key Laboratory of Biomarker and Translational Research in 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, Beijing, China.

Biallelic mutations in the sorbitol dehydrogenase (SORD) gene have recently been 
found to be one of the most frequent causes of autosomal recessive axonal 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT2) and distal hereditary motor neuropathy (dHMN). This 
study was performed to explore the frequency of SORD mutations and correlations 
of the phenotypic-genetic spectrum in a relatively large Chinese cohort. In this 
study, we screened a cohort of 485 unrelated Chinese patients with hereditary 
neuropathy by using Sanger sequencing, next generation sequencing, or whole 
exome sequencing after PMP22 duplication was initially excluded. SORD mutation 
was identified in five out of 78 undiagnosed patients. Two individuals carried 
the previously reported homozygous c.757 delG (p.A253Qfs*27) variant, and three 
individuals carried the heterozygous c.757delG (p.A253Qfs*27) variant together 
with a second novel likely pathogenic variant, including c.731 C>T (p.P244L), 
c.776 C>T (p.A259V), or c.851T>C (p.L284P). The frequency of SORD variants was 
calculated to be 6.4% (5/78) in unclarified CMT2 and dHMN patients. All patients 
presented with distal weakness and atrophy in the lower limb, two of whom had 
minor clinical sensory abnormalities and small fiber neuropathy. Our study 
provides further information on the genotype and phenotype of patients with SORD 
mutations.

Copyright © 2021 Liu, He, Yilihamu, Duan and Fan.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2021.733926
PMCID: PMC8607551
PMID: 34819907

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The reviewer YY declared a 
shared affiliation, with no collaboration, with the authors to the handling 
editor at the time of the review.