---
reference_id: "PMID:33369814"
title: "Distal hereditary motor neuropathies: Mutation spectrum and genotype-phenotype correlation."
authors:
- Frasquet M
- Rojas-García R
- Argente-Escrig H
- Vázquez-Costa JF
- Muelas N
- Vílchez JJ
- Sivera R
- Millet E
- Barreiro M
- Díaz-Manera J
- Turon-Sans J
- Cortés-Vicente E
- Querol L
- Ramírez-Jiménez L
- Martínez-Rubio D
- Sánchez-Monteagudo A
- Espinós C
- Sevilla T
- Lupo V
journal: Eur J Neurol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/ene.14700
keywords:
- Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Testing
- HSP40 Heat-Shock Proteins
- Hereditary Sensory and Motor Neuropathy
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Molecular Chaperones
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Distal hereditary motor neuropathies: Mutation spectrum and genotype-phenotype correlation.
**Authors:** Frasquet M, Rojas-García R, Argente-Escrig H, Vázquez-Costa JF, Muelas N, Vílchez JJ, Sivera R, Millet E, Barreiro M, Díaz-Manera J, Turon-Sans J, Cortés-Vicente E, Querol L, Ramírez-Jiménez L, Martínez-Rubio D, Sánchez-Monteagudo A, Espinós C, Sevilla T, Lupo V
**Journal:** Eur J Neurol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ene.14700](https://doi.org/10.1111/ene.14700)

## Content

1. Eur J Neurol. 2021 Apr;28(4):1334-1343. doi: 10.1111/ene.14700. Epub 2021 Jan 
10.

Distal hereditary motor neuropathies: Mutation spectrum and genotype-phenotype 
correlation.

Frasquet M(1)(2)(3), Rojas-García R(3)(4)(5), Argente-Escrig H(2)(3), 
Vázquez-Costa JF(1)(2)(3)(6), Muelas N(1)(2)(3), Vílchez JJ(2)(3), Sivera R(7), 
Millet E(8), Barreiro M(2), Díaz-Manera J(3)(4)(5), Turon-Sans J(3)(4)(5), 
Cortés-Vicente E(3)(4)(5), Querol L(3)(4)(5), Ramírez-Jiménez L(9), 
Martínez-Rubio D(10)(11), Sánchez-Monteagudo A(10)(11), Espinós C(10)(11), 
Sevilla T(1)(2)(3)(6), Lupo V(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Neuromuscular Diseases Unit, Department of Neurology, Hospital Universitari i 
Politècnic La Fe, Valencia, Spain.
(2)Neuromuscular and Ataxias Research Group, Instituto de Investigación 
Sanitaria La Fe, Valencia, Spain.
(3)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER) 
Spain, Valencia, Spain.
(4)Neuromuscular Diseases Unit, Department of Neurology, Hospital de la Santa 
Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Department of Medicine, Universitat de València, Valencia, Spain.
(7)Department of Neurology, Hospital Francesc de Borja, Gandía, Spain.
(8)Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, Hospital Universitari i Politècnic La 
Fe, Valencia, Spain.
(9)Department of Genomics and Translational Genetics, Centro de Investigación 
Príncipe Felipe (CIPF), Valencia, Spain.
(10)Unit of Genetics and Genomics of Neuromuscular and Neurodegenerative 
Disorders, Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe (CIPF), Valencia, Spain.
(11)Rare Diseases Joint Units, INCLIVA and IIS La Fe-CIPF, Valencia, Spain.

Erratum in
    Eur J Neurol. 2022 Mar;29(3):955. doi: 10.1111/ene.15244.

Comment in
    Eur J Neurol. 2021 Apr;28(4):1104-1105. doi: 10.1111/ene.14734.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Distal hereditary motor neuropathies (dHMNs) are a 
heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by degeneration of the motor 
component of peripheral nerves. Currently, only 15% to 32.5% of patients with 
dHMN are characterized genetically. Additionally, the prevalence of these 
genetic disorders is not well known. Recently, biallelic mutations in the 
sorbitol dehydrogenase gene (SORD) have been identified as a cause of dHMN, with 
an estimated frequency in undiagnosed cases of up to 10%.
METHODS: In the present study, we included 163 patients belonging to 108 
different families who were diagnosed with a dHMN and who underwent a thorough 
genetic screening that included next-generation sequencing and subsequent Sanger 
sequencing of SORD.
RESULTS: Most probands were sporadic cases (62.3%), and the most frequent age of 
onset of symptoms was 2 to 10 years (28.8%). A genetic diagnosis was achieved in 
37/108 (34.2%) families and 78/163 (47.8%) of all patients. The most frequent 
cause of distal hereditary motor neuropathies were mutations in HSPB1 (10.4%), 
GARS1 (9.8%), BICD2 (8.0%), and DNAJB2 (6.7%) genes. In addition, 3.1% of 
patients were found to be carriers of biallelic mutations in SORD. Mutations in 
another seven genes were also identified, although they were much less frequent. 
Eight new pathogenic mutations were detected, and 17 patients without a definite 
genetic diagnosis carried variants of uncertain significance. The calculated 
minimum prevalence of dHMN was 2.3 per 100,000 individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms the genetic heterogeneity of dHMN and that 
biallelic SORD mutations are a cause of dHMN in different populations.

© 2020 European Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1111/ene.14700
PMID: 33369814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]