---
reference_id: "PMID:31311558"
title: "Clinical long-time course, novel mutations and genotype-phenotype correlation in a cohort of 27 families with POMT1-related disorders."
authors:
- Geis T
- Rödl T
- Topaloğlu H
- Balci-Hayta B
- Hinreiner S
- Müller-Felber W
- Schoser B
- Mehraein Y
- Hübner A
- Zirn B
- Hoopmann M
- Reutter H
- Mowat D
- Schuierer G
- Schara U
- Hehr U
- Kölbel H
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-019-1119-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical long-time course, novel mutations and genotype-phenotype correlation in a cohort of 27 families with POMT1-related disorders.
**Authors:** Geis T, Rödl T, Topaloğlu H, Balci-Hayta B, Hinreiner S, Müller-Felber W, Schoser B, Mehraein Y, Hübner A, Zirn B, Hoopmann M, Reutter H, Mowat D, Schuierer G, Schara U, Hehr U, Kölbel H
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-019-1119-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-019-1119-0)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2019 Jul 16;14(1):179. doi: 10.1186/s13023-019-1119-0.

Clinical long-time course, novel mutations and genotype-phenotype correlation in 
a cohort of 27 families with POMT1-related disorders.

Geis T(1), Rödl T(2), Topaloğlu H(3), Balci-Hayta B(4), Hinreiner S(2), 
Müller-Felber W(5), Schoser B(6), Mehraein Y(7), Hübner A(8), Zirn B(9), 
Hoopmann M(10), Reutter H(11), Mowat D(12), Schuierer G(13), Schara U(14), Hehr 
U(2)(15), Kölbel H(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Klinik St. Hedwig, University Children's 
Hospital Regensburg (KUNO), Steinmetzstr. 1-3, 93049, Regensburg, Germany. 
tobias.geis@barmherzige-regensburg.de.
(2)Center for Human Genetics, Regensburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(4)Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe University, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(5)Department of Pediatric Neurology, University Hospital Munich, Munich, 
Germany.
(6)Friedrich-Baur-Institut, Neurologische Klinik, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität 
München, Munich, Germany.
(7)Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany.
(8)Pediatrics, University Hospital, Technical University Dresden, Dresden, 
Germany.
(9)Genetic Counselling and Diagnostic, Genetikum Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany.
(10)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Tuebingen, 
Tuebingen, Germany.
(11)Department of Neonatology, University Hospital of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(12)Department of Clinical Genetics, Sydney Children's Hospital Randwick, 
Sydney, Australia.
(13)Department of Neuroradiology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
(14)Department of Pediatric Neurology, University Hospital Essen, Essen, 
Germany.
(15)Department of Human Genetics, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The protein O-mannosyltransferase 1, encoded by the POMT1 gene, is a 
key enzyme in the glycosylation of α-dystroglycan. POMT1-related disorders 
belong to the group of dystroglycanopathies characterized by a proximally 
pronounced muscular dystrophy with structural or functional involvement of the 
brain and/or the eyes. The phenotypic spectrum ranges from the severe 
Walker-Warburg syndrome (WWS) to milder forms of limb girdle muscular dystrophy 
(LGMD). The phenotypic severity of POMT1-related dystroglycanopathies depends on 
the residual enzyme activity. A genotype-phenotype correlation can be assumed.
RESULTS: The clinical, neuroradiological, and genetic findings of 35 patients 
with biallelic POMT1 mutations (15 WWS, 1 MEB (muscle-eye-brain disease), 19 
LGMD) from 27 independent families are reported. The representative clinical 
course of an infant with WWS and the long-term course of a 32 years old patient 
with LGMD are described in more detail. Specific features of 15 patients with 
the homozygous founder mutation p.Ala200Pro are defined as a distinct and mildly 
affected LGMD subgroup. Ten previously reported and 8 novel POMT1 mutations were 
identified. Type and location of each of the POMT1 mutations are evaluated in 
detail and a list of all POMT1 mutations reported by now is provided. Patients 
with two mutations leading to premature protein termination had a WWS phenotype, 
while the presence of at least one missense mutation was associated with milder 
phenotypes. In the patient with MEB-like phenotype two missense mutations were 
observed within the catalytic active domain of the enzyme.
CONCLUSIONS: Our large cohort confirms the importance of type and location of 
each POMT1 mutation for the individual clinical manifestation and thereby 
expands the knowledge on the genotype-phenotype correlation in POMT1-related 
dystroglycanopathies. This genotype-phenotype correlation is further supported 
by the observation of an intrafamiliar analogous clinical manifestation observed 
in all affected 13 siblings from 5 independent families. Our data confirm the 
progressive nature of the disease also in milder LGMD phenotypes, ultimately 
resulting in loss of ambulation at a variable age. Our data define two major 
clinical POMT1 phenotypes, which should prompt genetic testing including the 
POMT1 gene: patients with a severe WWS manifestation predominantly present with 
profound neonatal muscular hypotonia and a severe and progressive hydrocephalus 
with involvement of brainstem and/or cerebellum. The presence of an occipital 
encephalocele in a WWS patient might point to POMT1 as causative gene within the 
different genes associated with WWS. The milder LGMD phenotypes constantly show 
markedly elevated creatine kinase values in combination with microcephaly and 
cognitive impairment.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-019-1119-0
PMCID: PMC6636095
PMID: 31311558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.