---
reference_id: "PMID:35449524"
title: Juvenile Hemochromatosis due to a Homozygous Variant in the HJV Gene.
authors:
- Moreno-Risco MB
- Méndez M
- Moreno-Carralero MI
- López-Moreno AM
- Vagace-Valero JM
- Morán-Jiménez MJ
journal: Case Rep Pediatr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1155/2022/7743748
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Juvenile Hemochromatosis due to a Homozygous Variant in the HJV Gene.
**Authors:** Moreno-Risco MB, Méndez M, Moreno-Carralero MI, López-Moreno AM, Vagace-Valero JM, Morán-Jiménez MJ
**Journal:** Case Rep Pediatr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2022/7743748](https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/7743748)

## Content

1. Case Rep Pediatr. 2022 Apr 11;2022:7743748. doi: 10.1155/2022/7743748. 
eCollection 2022.

Juvenile Hemochromatosis due to a Homozygous Variant in the HJV Gene.

Moreno-Risco MB(1), Méndez M(2), Moreno-Carralero MI(2), López-Moreno AM(3), 
Vagace-Valero JM(1), Morán-Jiménez MJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Hematología y Hemoterapia, Hospital Materno Infantil de Badajoz, 
Badajoz, Spain.
(2)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria Hospital 12 de Octubre (imas12), Madrid, 
Spain.
(3)Servicio de Radiología, Hospital Universitario de Badajoz, Badajoz, Spain.

Hemochromatosis type 2 or juvenile hemochromatosis has an early onset of severe 
iron overload resulting in organ manifestation such as liver fibrosis, 
cirrhosis, cardiomyopathy, arthropathy, hypogonadism, diabetes, osteopathic 
medicine, and thyroid abnormality, before age of 30. Juvenile hemochromatosis 
type 2a and 2b is an autosomal recessive disease caused by pathogenic variants 
in HJV and HAMP genes, respectively. We report a child with hepatic iron 
overload and family history of hemochromatosis. We aim to raise awareness of 
juvenile hemochromatosis, especially in families with a positive family history, 
as early diagnosis and treatment may prevent organ involvement and end-stage 
disease. The purpose of this study was to identify the gene variant that causes 
the disease. The genetic study was performed with a targeted gene panel: HFE, 
HJV, HAMP, TFR2, SLC40A1, FTL, and FTH1. We identified the variant c.309C > G 
(p.Phe103Leu) in the HJV gene in the homozygous state in the patient.

Copyright © 2022 María-Belén Moreno-Risco et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2022/7743748
PMCID: PMC9017560
PMID: 35449524

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.