---
reference_id: "PMID:36517848"
title: "Health related quality of life, service utilization and costs for patients with Huntington's disease in Norway."
authors:
- van Walsem MR
- Frich JC
- Gómez Castañeda M
- Howe EI
- Pihlstrøm L
- Andelic N
- Aas E
journal: BMC Health Serv Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s12913-022-08881-8
keywords:
- Humans
- Quality of Life
- Cost of Illness
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Surveys and Questionnaires
- Huntington Disease/therapy
- Neurodegenerative Diseases
- Health Care Costs
- Norway/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Health related quality of life, service utilization and costs for patients with Huntington's disease in Norway.
**Authors:** van Walsem MR, Frich JC, Gómez Castañeda M, Howe EI, Pihlstrøm L, Andelic N, Aas E
**Journal:** BMC Health Serv Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12913-022-08881-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-022-08881-8)

## Content

1. BMC Health Serv Res. 2022 Dec 14;22(1):1527. doi: 10.1186/s12913-022-08881-8.

Health related quality of life, service utilization and costs for patients with 
Huntington's disease in Norway.

van Walsem MR(1)(2)(3), Frich JC(4)(5), Gómez Castañeda M(4), Howe EI(6), 
Pihlstrøm L(7), Andelic N(8)(6), Aas E(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurohabilitation, Oslo University Hospital, P.O. Box 4950 
Nydalen, 0424, Oslo, Norway. r.m.v.walsem@medisin.uio.no.
(2)Department of Neurology, Oslo University Hospital, P.O. Box 4950 Nydalen, 
0424, Oslo, Norway. r.m.v.walsem@medisin.uio.no.
(3)Institute of Health and Society, CHARM - Research Centre of Habilitation and 
Rehabilitation Models and Services, Univeristy of Oslo, P.O. Box 1130 Blindern, 
0318, Oslo, Norway. r.m.v.walsem@medisin.uio.no.
(4)Institute of Health and Society, University of Oslo, P.O. Box 1130 Blindern, 
0318, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Division for Health Services, Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Oslo, 
Norway.
(6)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Oslo University Hospital, 
P.O. Box 4950 Nydalen, 0424, Oslo, Norway.
(7)Department of Neurology, Oslo University Hospital, P.O. Box 4950 Nydalen, 
0424, Oslo, Norway.
(8)Institute of Health and Society, CHARM - Research Centre of Habilitation and 
Rehabilitation Models and Services, Univeristy of Oslo, P.O. Box 1130 Blindern, 
0318, Oslo, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Huntington's disease (HD) is a progressive genetic neurodegenerative 
disease accompanied by mental and neurocognitive disabilities, which requires 
long-term and comprehensive treatment and care. Information on the health and 
economic burden of HD is scarce, but essential for conducting health economic 
analyses, in light of the prospect of new therapies for HD. In this study, we 
aim to identify values for Health-Related Quality of Life (HRQoL), describe 
service utilization and costs, and their associations with clinical and 
socio-demographic variables across all phases of HD.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study including 86 patients across all phases of HD. 
Values of HRQoL were calculated based on EQ-5D-3L index scores. Additionally, 
health care and societal costs were estimated based on service utilization 
collected using the Client Service Receipt Inventory (CSRI) and data from the 
patients' interviews. Total societal costs included costs of primary and 
secondary health care services, informal care and productivity loss of the 
patients. Multiple regression analyses were used to investigate associations 
between socio-demographic and clinical variables on HRQoL and costs.
RESULTS: HRQoL values declined, while total costs increased across disease 
severity. Total six-month healthcare costs and total societal costs were € 
18,538 and € 66,789 respectively. Healthcare and societal costs doubled from 
early to middle phase, and tripled from middle to advanced disease phase. Main 
six-month cost components for the three disease phases were informal care costs 
(€ 30,605) accounting for approximately half the total societal costs, and costs 
due to production loss (€ 18,907) being slightly higher than the total 
healthcare costs. Disease severity and gender were found to have the strongest 
effect on both values of HRQoL and costs.
CONCLUSIONS: Reported values of HRQoL and costs including costs for production 
loss may be used in modelling the cost-effectiveness of treatment for HD. Our 
results highlight the crucial role the informal caregivers play in the care 
provided to HD patients in all disease phases. Future research should focus on 
the estimation of productivity loss among informal caregivers.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12913-022-08881-8
PMCID: PMC9753307
PMID: 36517848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests. Oslo University Hospital has received a fee from Roche for consulting 
performed by L.P., unrelated to the present work.