---
reference_id: "PMID:34392395"
title: "Omphalocele: national current birth prevalence and survival."
authors:
- Fogelström A
- Caldeman C
- Oddsberg J
- Löf Granström A
- Mesas Burgos C
journal: Pediatr Surg Int
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00383-021-04978-z
keywords:
- Child
- Female
- "Hernia, Umbilical/epidemiology"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mass Screening
- Pregnancy
- Prenatal Diagnosis
- Prevalence
- Sweden/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Omphalocele: national current birth prevalence and survival.
**Authors:** Fogelström A, Caldeman C, Oddsberg J, Löf Granström A, Mesas Burgos C
**Journal:** Pediatr Surg Int (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00383-021-04978-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00383-021-04978-z)

## Content

1. Pediatr Surg Int. 2021 Nov;37(11):1515-1520. doi: 10.1007/s00383-021-04978-z. 
Epub 2021 Aug 15.

Omphalocele: national current birth prevalence and survival.

Fogelström A(1)(2), Caldeman C(3)(4), Oddsberg J(3)(4), Löf Granström 
A(3)(4)(5)(6), Mesas Burgos C(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Astrid Lindgren Children's Hospital, 
Karolinska University Hospital, 17176, Stockholm, Sweden. anna.fogelstrom@ki.se.
(2)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institute, 17177, 
Stockholm, Sweden. anna.fogelstrom@ki.se.
(3)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Astrid Lindgren Children's Hospital, 
Karolinska University Hospital, 17176, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska Institute, 17177, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Surgery, Danderyd Hospital, 18257, Stockholm, Sweden.
(6)Department of Clinical Sciences, Danderyd Hospital, Karolinska Institute, 
18288, Stockholm, Sweden.

PURPOSE: The increase in prenatal diagnosis together with the high rates of 
associated anomalies in omphalocele has led to increased rates of termination of 
pregnancies. The aim of this study was to examine the national Swedish birth 
prevalence and survival rates among these patients.
METHODS: This study is based on a nationwide population-based cohort of all 
children born in Sweden between 1/1/1997 and 31/12/2016. All omphalocele cases 
were identified though the Swedish National Patient Register and the Swedish 
Medical Birth Register. Outcome of malformations and deaths were retrieved from 
the Swedish Birth Defects Register and the Swedish Causes of Death Register.
RESULTS: The study included 207 cases of omphalocele (42% females). The birth 
prevalence for omphalocele was 1/10,000 live births. About 62% of the cases had 
associated malformations and/or genetic disorders; most common was ventricular 
septal defect. The mortality within the first year was 13%. The rate of 
termination of pregnancy was 59%.
CONCLUSION: The national birth prevalence for omphalocele in Sweden is 1/10,000 
newborn, with high termination rates. Over half of the pregnancies with 
prenatally diagnosed omphalocele will be terminated. Among those who continue 
the pregnancy, 1-year survival rates are high.
TYPE OF STUDY: National register study LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: III.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00383-021-04978-z
PMCID: PMC8520864
PMID: 34392395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no known 
competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared 
to influence the work reported in this paper.