---
reference_id: "PMID:36038944"
title: "Exome sequencing can misread high variant allele fraction of somatic variants in UBA1 as hemizygous in VEXAS syndrome: a case report."
authors:
- Wilke MVMB
- Morava-Kozicz E
- Koster MJ
- Schmitz CT
- Foster SK
- Patnaik M
- Warrington KJ
- Klee EW
- Pinto E Vairo F
journal: BMC Rheumatol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s41927-022-00281-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exome sequencing can misread high variant allele fraction of somatic variants in UBA1 as hemizygous in VEXAS syndrome: a case report.
**Authors:** Wilke MVMB, Morava-Kozicz E, Koster MJ, Schmitz CT, Foster SK, Patnaik M, Warrington KJ, Klee EW, Pinto E Vairo F
**Journal:** BMC Rheumatol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s41927-022-00281-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s41927-022-00281-z)

## Content

1. BMC Rheumatol. 2022 Aug 30;6(1):54. doi: 10.1186/s41927-022-00281-z.

Exome sequencing can misread high variant allele fraction of somatic variants in 
UBA1 as hemizygous in VEXAS syndrome: a case report.

Wilke MVMB(1), Morava-Kozicz E(2)(3), Koster MJ(4), Schmitz CT(1)(5), Foster 
SK(6), Patnaik M(7), Warrington KJ(4), Klee EW(1)(8)(9), Pinto E Vairo F(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)Center for Individualized Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA.
(2)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St SW, Rochester, MN, 
55905, USA. Morava-Kozicz.Eva@mayo.edu.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
55905, USA. Morava-Kozicz.Eva@mayo.edu.
(4)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
55905, USA.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
55905, USA.
(6)Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
55905, USA.
(7)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
55905, USA.
(8)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St SW, Rochester, MN, 
55905, USA.
(9)Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
55905, USA.

BACKGROUND: VEXAS syndrome (vacuoles, E1 enzyme, X-linked, autoinflammatory, 
somatic syndrome) is a recently described syndrome caused by a somatic missense 
variant at the methionine-41 (p.(Met41)) position in the ubiquitin-like modifier 
activating enzyme 1 (UBA1) in Xp11.3. Germline pathogenic variants in UBA1 are 
associated with a distinct phenotype: a syndrome with severe neurologic features 
associated with loss of anterior horn cells and infantile death denominated 
X-Linked Spinal Muscular Atrophy 2 (SMAX2) (OMIM 301,830).
CASE PRESENTATION: We report a male individual with the phenotype of VEXAS 
syndrome that was initially identified through exome sequencing (ES) as having a 
hemizygous germline variant in UBA1 due to high variant allele frequency (VAF). 
Research Sanger sequencing was able to confirm the absence of the p.(Met41Val) 
variant in a skin biopsy and in gastric mucosa tissue sample confirming the 
variant happened as a postzygotic event.
CONCLUSIONS: The present case exemplifies the diagnostic challenge that was 
imposed by the high VAF detected by ES that failed to correctly demonstrate that 
the variant was in a mosaic state. Sequencing of different tissues should be 
considered when there is conflict between the UBA1 variant status and the 
clinical findings.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s41927-022-00281-z
PMCID: PMC9426024
PMID: 36038944

Conflict of interest statement: None.