---
reference_id: "PMID:37914894"
title: A Retrospective Analysis of Long-Term Prophylaxis with Berotralstat in Patients with Hereditary Angioedema and Acquired C1-Inhibitor Deficiency-Real-World Data.
authors:
- Johnson F
- Stenzl A
- Hofauer B
- Heppt H
- Ebert EV
- Wollenberg B
- Lochbaum R
- Hahn J
- Greve J
- Trainotti S
journal: Clin Rev Allergy Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s12016-023-08972-2
keywords:
- Humans
- "Angioedemas, Hereditary/drug therapy, prevention & control"
- Quality of Life
- Retrospective Studies
- Bradykinin/therapeutic use
- Angioedema/therapy
- Complement C1 Inhibitor Protein/therapeutic use
- Pyrazoles
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Retrospective Analysis of Long-Term Prophylaxis with Berotralstat in Patients with Hereditary Angioedema and Acquired C1-Inhibitor Deficiency-Real-World Data.
**Authors:** Johnson F, Stenzl A, Hofauer B, Heppt H, Ebert EV, Wollenberg B, Lochbaum R, Hahn J, Greve J, Trainotti S
**Journal:** Clin Rev Allergy Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12016-023-08972-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12016-023-08972-2)

## Content

1. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2023 Dec;65(3):354-364. doi: 
10.1007/s12016-023-08972-2. Epub 2023 Nov 2.

A Retrospective Analysis of Long-Term Prophylaxis with Berotralstat in Patients 
with Hereditary Angioedema and Acquired C1-Inhibitor Deficiency-Real-World Data.

Johnson F(1), Stenzl A(2), Hofauer B(1), Heppt H(1), Ebert EV(3), Wollenberg 
B(3), Lochbaum R(4), Hahn J(4), Greve J(4), Trainotti S(3).

Author information:
(1)University Hospital for Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Medical 
University of Innsbruck, Anichstraße 35, A-6020, Innsbruck, Austria.
(2)University Hospital for Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Medical 
University of Innsbruck, Anichstraße 35, A-6020, Innsbruck, Austria. 
anna.stenzl@tirol-kliniken.at.
(3)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Klinikum rechts der 
Isar, TUM School of Medicine and Health, Department Clinical Medicine, Munich, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Ulm University 
Medical Center, Ulm, Germany.

Hereditary angioedema (HAE) and acquired C1-inhibitor deficiency (AAE-C1-INH) 
are orphan diseases. Berotralstat is a recently licensed long-term prophylaxis 
(LTP) and the first oral therapy for HAE patients. No approved therapies exist 
for AAE-C1-INH patients. This study is the first to report real-world clinical 
data of patients with AAE-C1-INH and HAE who received Berotralstat. All patients 
treated with Berotralstat were included in this retrospective, bi-centric study. 
Data was collected from patients' attack calendars and the angioedema quality of 
life (AE-QoL) and angioedema control test (AECT) questionnaires before 
treatment, and at 3, 6, and 12 months after treatment and was then analyzed. 
Twelve patients were included, 3 patients with AAE-C1-INH, 7 patients with HAE 
type I, and 2 patients with HAE-nC1-INH. One patient (HAE I) quit treatment. 
Berotralstat was associated with fewer attacks in all groups. After 6 months of 
treatment, a median decrease of attacks per month was noted for HAE type I 
patients (3.3 to 1.5) and AAE-C1-INH patients (2.3 to 1.0). No aerodigestive 
attacks were noted for AAE-C1-INH patients. For HAE-nC1-INH patients, a mean 
decrease from 3.8 to 1.0 was noted (3 months). For HAE I patients, the total 
AE-QoL lowered a mean of 24.1 points after 6 months, for HAE-nC1-HAE patients 
8.0 points, and for AAE-C1-INH patients 13.7 points. AECT scores increased for 
HAE I patients (mean: 7.1), HAE-nC1-INH patients (9.0), and AAE-C1-INH patients 
(4.2) after 6 months. Patients with HAE, HAE-nC1-INH, and AAE-C1-INH treated 
with Berotralstat showed reduced angioedema attacks and improved AE-QoL and AECT 
scores.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s12016-023-08972-2
PMCID: PMC10847220
PMID: 37914894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No financial assistance from any pharmaceutical 
company was obtained for this study. The authors of this study declare the 
following conflict of interests: F. Johnson: has received grant research support 
and/or speaker/consultancy fees from CSL Behring, Takeda and Pharming. He has 
also received funding to attend conferences/educational events from CSL Behring, 
Takeda and Pharming. He has participated as an investigator in a clinical 
trial/registry for CSL Behring, BioCryst, IONIS Pharmaceuticals and Takeda. A. 
Stenzl: has no conflict of interest to declare regarding this publication B. 
Hofauer: has participated as an investigator in clinical trials for CSL Behring 
and Takeda. H. Heppt: has no conflict of interest to declare regarding this 
publication E. Ebert: has received grant research support and/or 
speaker/consultancy fees from CSL Behring and Takeda. She has also received 
funding to attend conferences/educational events from CSL Behring, Takeda and 
Pharming. She has participated as an investigator in a clinical trial/registry 
for CSL Behring, BioCryst, IONIS Pharmaceuticals and Takeda. J. Hahn: has 
received speaker/consultancy fees from CSL Behring and Takeda. She has also 
received funding to attend conferences/educational events from CSL Behring and 
Takeda. She has participated as an investigator in a clinical trial/registry for 
CSL Behring, BioCryst, Pharvaris and Takeda. J. Greve: has received 
speaker/consultancy fees from CSL Behring, Takeda, Kalvista and BioCryst. He has 
also received funding to attend conferences/educational events from CSL Behring 
and Takeda. He has participated as an investigator in a clinical trial/registry 
for CSL Behring, BioCryst and Takeda. B. Wollenberg: has no conflict of interest 
to declare regarding this publication R. Lochbaum: Robin Lochbaum has received 
consultancy fees from BioCryst and Takeda. He has also received funding to 
attend conferences/educational events from CSL Behring, BioCryst and Takeda. He 
has participated as an investigator in a clinical trial/registry for Takeda and 
Pharvaris. S. Trainotti: has received grant research support and/or 
speaker/consultancy fees from CSL Behring and Takeda. She has also received 
funding to attend conferences/educational events from CSL Behring and Takeda. 
She has participated as an investigator in a clinical trial/registry for CSL 
Behring, BioCryst, IONIS Pharmaceuticals and Takeda.