---
reference_id: "PMID:24011710"
title: "Beyond the cherry-red spot: Ocular manifestations of sphingolipid-mediated neurodegenerative and inflammatory disorders."
authors:
- Chen H
- Chan AY
- Stone DU
- Mandal NA
journal: Surv Ophthalmol
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.survophthal.2013.02.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Beyond the cherry-red spot: Ocular manifestations of sphingolipid-mediated neurodegenerative and inflammatory disorders.
**Authors:** Chen H, Chan AY, Stone DU, Mandal NA
**Journal:** Surv Ophthalmol (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.survophthal.2013.02.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.survophthal.2013.02.005)

## Content

1. Surv Ophthalmol. 2014 Jan-Feb;59(1):64-76. doi: 
10.1016/j.survophthal.2013.02.005. Epub 2013 Sep 5.

Beyond the cherry-red spot: Ocular manifestations of sphingolipid-mediated 
neurodegenerative and inflammatory disorders.

Chen H(#)(1)(2), Chan AY(#)(1)(2), Stone DU(1)(2), Mandal NA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center 
(OUHSC), Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA.
(2)Dean A. McGee Eye Institute, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA.
(#)Contributed equally

Sphingolipids are a ubiquitous membrane lipid present in every cell and found 
most abundantly in neural tissues. Disorders such as Tay-Sachs or Niemann-Pick 
disease are the most familiar examples of dysfunction in sphingolipid metabolism 
and are typically associated with neurodegeneration and ocular findings such as 
blindness. More recently, the role of bioactive sphingolipids has been 
established in a multitude of cellular events, including cell survival, growth, 
senescence and apoptosis, inflammation, and neovascularization. We discuss our 
current knowledge and understanding of sphingolipid metabolism and signaling in 
the pathogenesis of ocular diseases.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.survophthal.2013.02.005
PMCID: PMC3864975
PMID: 24011710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]