---
reference_id: "PMID:34115847"
title: Somatic uniparental disomy mitigates the most damaging EFL1 allele combination in Shwachman-Diamond syndrome.
authors:
- Lee S
- Shin CH
- Lee J
- Jeong SD
- Hong CR
- Kim JD
- Kim AR
- Park B
- Son SJ
- Kokhan O
- Yoo T
- Ko JS
- Sohn YB
- Kim OH
- Ko JM
- Cho TJ
- Wright NT
- Seong JK
- Jin SW
- Kang HJ
- Kim HH
- Choi M
journal: Blood
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1182/blood.2021010913
keywords:
- Adult
- Alleles
- Animals
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Models, Molecular"
- Peptide Elongation Factors/genetics
- Point Mutation
- "Ribonucleoprotein, U5 Small Nuclear/genetics"
- Shwachman-Diamond Syndrome/genetics
- Uniparental Disomy/genetics
- Mice
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Somatic uniparental disomy mitigates the most damaging EFL1 allele combination in Shwachman-Diamond syndrome.
**Authors:** Lee S, Shin CH, Lee J, Jeong SD, Hong CR, Kim JD, Kim AR, Park B, Son SJ, Kokhan O, Yoo T, Ko JS, Sohn YB, Kim OH, Ko JM, Cho TJ, Wright NT, Seong JK, Jin SW, Kang HJ, Kim HH, Choi M
**Journal:** Blood (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood.2021010913](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood.2021010913)

## Content

1. Blood. 2021 Nov 25;138(21):2117-2128. doi: 10.1182/blood.2021010913.

Somatic uniparental disomy mitigates the most damaging EFL1 allele combination
in Shwachman-Diamond syndrome.

Lee S(1), Shin CH(2), Lee J(1), Jeong SD(2), Hong CR(3), Kim JD(4), Kim AR(5),
Park B(5), Son SJ(6)(7), Kokhan O(8), Yoo T(1), Ko JS(3), Sohn YB(9), Kim
OH(10), Ko JM(3), Cho TJ(11), Wright NT(8), Seong JK(6)(7)(12), Jin SW(4)(5),
Kang HJ(3)(13), Kim HH(2)(14), Choi M(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Department of Health Sciences and Technology, Samsung Advanced Institute for
Health Sciences and Technology, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, South Korea.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, South Korea.
(4)Yale Cardiovascular Research Center, Section of Cardiovascular Medicine,
Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
CT.
(5)School of Life Sciences, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology,
Gwangju, South Korea.
(6)Laboratory of Developmental Biology and Genomics, Research Institute for
Veterinary Science, and BK21 PLUS Program for Creative Veterinary Science
Research, College of Veterinary Medicine, and.
(7)Korea Mouse Phenotyping Center, Seoul National University, Seoul, South
Korea.
(8)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, James Madison University,
Harrisonburg, VA.
(9)Department of Medical Genetics, Ajou University Hospital, Ajou University
School of Medicine, Suwon, South Korea.
(10)Department of Pediatric Radiology, VIC 365 Children's Hospital, Incheon,
South Korea.
(11)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(12)Interdisciplinary Program for Bioinformatics-Program for Cancer Biology,
BIO-MAX/N-Bio Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea.
(13)Seoul National University Cancer Research Institute, Seoul, South Korea;
and.
(14)Institute for Future Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, South Korea.

Erratum in
    Blood. 2023 Aug 31;142(9):857. doi: 10.1182/blood.2023021819.

Comment in
    Blood. 2021 Nov 25;138(21):2016-2018. doi: 10.1182/blood.2021012724.

Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (SDS; OMIM #260400) is caused by variants in SBDS
(Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond syndrome gene), which encodes a protein that plays an
important role in ribosome assembly. Recent reports suggest that recessive
variants in EFL1 are also responsible for SDS. However, the precise genetic
mechanism that leads to EFL1-induced SDS remains incompletely understood. Here
we present 3 unrelated Korean SDS patients who carry biallelic pathogenic
variants in EFL1 with biased allele frequencies, resulting from a bone
marrow-specific somatic uniparental disomy in chromosome 15. The recombination
events generated cells that were homozygous for the relatively milder variant,
allowing for the evasion of catastrophic physiologic consequences. However, the
milder EFL1 variant was still solely able to impair 80S ribosome assembly and
induce SDS features in cell line and animal models. The loss of EFL1 resulted in
a pronounced inhibition of terminal oligopyrimidine element-containing ribosomal
protein transcript 80S assembly. Therefore, we propose a more accurate
pathogenesis mechanism of EFL1 dysfunction that eventually leads to aberrant
translational control and ribosomopathy.

© 2021 by The American Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1182/blood.2021010913
PMID: 34115847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
