---
reference_id: "PMID:39147951"
title: Specific clinical and radiological characteristics of anti-NMDA receptor autoimmune encephalitis following herpes encephalitis.
authors:
- Dumez P
- Villagrán-García M
- Bani-Sadr A
- Benaiteau M
- Peter E
- Farina A
- Picard G
- Rogemond V
- Ruitton-Allinieu MC
- Cotton F
- Aubart M
- Hully M
- Antoine JC
- Joubert B
- Honnorat J
journal: J Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00415-024-12615-7
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- "Encephalitis, Herpes Simplex/diagnostic imaging, complications, immunology"
- "Anti-N-Methyl-D-Aspartate Receptor Encephalitis/diagnostic imaging, complications"
- Adult
- Retrospective Studies
- Child
- Adolescent
- "Child, Preschool"
- Young Adult
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- Infant
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Specific clinical and radiological characteristics of anti-NMDA receptor autoimmune encephalitis following herpes encephalitis.
**Authors:** Dumez P, Villagrán-García M, Bani-Sadr A, Benaiteau M, Peter E, Farina A, Picard G, Rogemond V, Ruitton-Allinieu MC, Cotton F, Aubart M, Hully M, Antoine JC, Joubert B, Honnorat J
**Journal:** J Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00415-024-12615-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00415-024-12615-7)

## Content

1. J Neurol. 2024 Oct;271(10):6692-6701. doi: 10.1007/s00415-024-12615-7. Epub
2024  Aug 16.

Specific clinical and radiological characteristics of anti-NMDA receptor 
autoimmune encephalitis following herpes encephalitis.

Dumez P(1)(2), Villagrán-García M(1)(2), Bani-Sadr A(3), Benaiteau M(1)(2), 
Peter E(1)(2), Farina A(1)(2), Picard G(1)(2), Rogemond V(1)(2), 
Ruitton-Allinieu MC(4), Cotton F(4)(5), Aubart M(6), Hully M(6), Antoine 
JC(1)(2)(7), Joubert B(1)(2), Honnorat J(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)French Reference Center on Paraneoplastic Neurological Syndromes and 
Autoimmune Encephalitis, Hôpital Neurologique Pierre Wertheimer, Hospices Civils 
de Lyon, 59 Bd Pinel, 69677, Bron cedex, France.
(2)MeLiS-UCBL-CNRS UMR 5284, INSERM U1314, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, 
Lyon, France.
(3)Department of Radiology, Hôpital Neurologique Pierre Wertheimer, Hospices 
Civils de Lyon, Bron, France.
(4)Department of Radiology, Centre Hospitalier Lyon-Sud, Hospices Civils de 
Lyon, Pierre-Bénite, France.
(5)CREATIS, INSERM U1044, CNRS UMR 5220, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, 
Villeurbanne, France.
(6)Pediatric Neurology Department, Necker-Enfants-Malades Hospital, Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(7)Department of Neurology, Hôpital Universitaire de Saint-Etienne, 
Saint-Etienne, France.
(8)French Reference Center on Paraneoplastic Neurological Syndromes and 
Autoimmune Encephalitis, Hôpital Neurologique Pierre Wertheimer, Hospices Civils 
de Lyon, 59 Bd Pinel, 69677, Bron cedex, France. jerome.honnorat@chu-lyon.fr.
(9)MeLiS-UCBL-CNRS UMR 5284, INSERM U1314, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, 
Lyon, France. jerome.honnorat@chu-lyon.fr.

BACKGROUND: Herpes simplex virus encephalitis (HSE) frequently triggers 
secondary anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor encephalitis (NMDARE), but markers 
predicting the occurrence of this entity (HSE-NMDARE) are lacking.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective description of patients with HSE-NMDARE 
diagnosed between July 2014 and August 2022 and compared them to both patients 
with regular forms of HSE and NMDARE.
RESULTS: Among the 375 patients with NMDARE, 13 HSE-NMDARE were included. The 
median age was 19 years (0.5-73), 4/13 (31%) were children < 4 years old, and 
7/13 (54%) were male. The median time between HSE and NMDARE onset was 30 days 
(21-46). During NMDARE, symptoms differed from HSE, including increased 
behavioral changes (92% vs 23%, p = 0.008), movements disorders (62% vs 0%, 
p = 0.013), and dysautonomia (54% vs 0%, p = 0.041). Compared to 21 patients 
with regular HSE, patients with HSE-NMDARE more often achieved 
severity-associated criteria on initial MRIs, with extensive lesions (11/11, 
100% vs 10/21, 48%, p = 0.005) and bilateral diffusion-weighted imaging sequence 
abnormalities (9/10, 90% vs 6/21, 29%, p = 0.002). Compared to 198 patients with 
regular NMDARE, patients with HSE-NMDARE were more frequently males (7/13, 54% 
vs 43/198, 22%; p = 0.015) and children < 4 (4/13, 31% vs 14/198, 7%; 
p = 0.016), with a worse 12-month mRS (2[1-6] vs 1[0-6], p = 0.023).
CONCLUSIONS: Herein, patients with HSE-NMDARE have a poorer long-term prognosis 
than patients with regular NMDARE. We report a greater rate of 
severity-associated criteria on initial MRIs for HSE-NMDARE compared to regular 
HSE, which may help identify patients with higher risk of HSE-NMDARE.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-024-12615-7
PMCID: PMC11447135
PMID: 39147951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no competing interests.