---
reference_id: "PMID:38782207"
title: Glial fibrillary acidic protein is pathologically modified in Alexander disease.
authors:
- Lin NH
- Jian WS
- Snider N
- Perng MD
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2024.107402
keywords:
- "Alexander Disease/metabolism, genetics, pathology"
- "Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein/metabolism, genetics"
- Humans
- Animals
- Ubiquitination
- Mutation
- Mice
- "Astrocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational"
- Rats
- Male
- Female
- "Protein Aggregation, Pathological/metabolism, genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glial fibrillary acidic protein is pathologically modified in Alexander disease.
**Authors:** Lin NH, Jian WS, Snider N, Perng MD
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jbc.2024.107402](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbc.2024.107402)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2024 Jul;300(7):107402. doi: 10.1016/j.jbc.2024.107402. Epub 2024
 May 21.

Glial fibrillary acidic protein is pathologically modified in Alexander disease.

Lin NH(1), Jian WS(1), Snider N(2), Perng MD(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, 
Taiwan.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina, 
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.
(3)Institute of Molecular Medicine, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, 
Taiwan; School of Medicine, College of Life Sciences and Medicine, National 
Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. Electronic address: 
mdperng@life.nthu.edu.tw.

Here, we describe pathological events potentially involved in the disease 
pathogenesis of Alexander disease (AxD). This is a primary genetic disorder of 
astrocyte caused by dominant gain-of-function mutations in the gene coding for 
an intermediate filament protein glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). 
Pathologically, this disease is characterized by the upregulation of GFAP and 
its accumulation as Rosenthal fibers. Although the genetic basis linking GFAP 
mutations with Alexander disease has been firmly established, the initiating 
events that promote GFAP accumulation and the role of Rosenthal fibers (RFs) in 
the disease process remain unknown. Here, we investigate the hypothesis that 
disease-associated mutations promote GFAP aggregation through aberrant 
posttranslational modifications. We found high molecular weight GFAP species in 
the RFs of AxD brains, indicating abnormal GFAP crosslinking as a prominent 
pathological feature of this disease. In vitro and cell-based studies 
demonstrate that cystine-generating mutations promote GFAP crosslinking by 
cysteine-dependent oxidation, resulting in defective GFAP assembly and decreased 
filament solubility. Moreover, we found GFAP was ubiquitinated in RFs of AxD 
patients and rodent models, supporting this modification as a critical factor 
linked to GFAP aggregation. Finally, we found that arginine could increase the 
solubility of aggregation-prone mutant GFAP by decreasing its ubiquitination and 
aggregation. Our study suggests a series of pathogenic events leading to AxD, 
involving interplay between GFAP aggregation and abnormal modifications by GFAP 
ubiquitination and oxidation. More important, our findings provide a basis for 
investigating new strategies to treat AxD by targeting abnormal GFAP 
modifications.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbc.2024.107402
PMCID: PMC11259701
PMID: 38782207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interests with the contents of this article.