---
reference_id: "PMID:40835085"
title: Cathelicidin LL-37-Induced Transcriptome of Human Keratinocyte Identifies Chemokine CXCL10 Link to T-Cell-Mediated Rosacea Pathogenesis through Jak1/STAT1 Pathway.
authors:
- Ansari AW
- Habib T
- Ahmad F
- Raheed T
- Elizabeth CS
- Al-Harami S
- Jochebeth A
- Steinhoff M
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1016/j.jid.2025.08.003
keywords:
- Humans
- "Rosacea/immunology, pathology, genetics"
- "Keratinocytes/immunology, metabolism"
- "Chemokine CXCL10/metabolism, genetics"
- Cathelicidins
- STAT1 Transcription Factor/metabolism
- Signal Transduction/immunology
- "Antimicrobial Cationic Peptides/pharmacology, metabolism"
- Transcriptome
- Janus Kinase 1/metabolism
- T-Lymphocytes/immunology
- Gene Expression Profiling
- "Cells, Cultured"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cathelicidin LL-37-Induced Transcriptome of Human Keratinocyte Identifies Chemokine CXCL10 Link to T-Cell-Mediated Rosacea Pathogenesis through Jak1/STAT1 Pathway.
**Authors:** Ansari AW, Habib T, Ahmad F, Raheed T, Elizabeth CS, Al-Harami S, Jochebeth A, Steinhoff M
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jid.2025.08.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jid.2025.08.003)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 2026 Mar;146(3):711-721.e6. doi: 10.1016/j.jid.2025.08.003.
 Epub 2025 Aug 18.

Cathelicidin LL-37-Induced Transcriptome of Human Keratinocyte Identifies 
Chemokine CXCL10 Link to T-Cell-Mediated Rosacea Pathogenesis through Jak1/STAT1 
Pathway.

Ansari AW(1), Habib T(2), Ahmad F(3), Raheed T(4), Elizabeth CS(3), Al-Harami 
S(5), Jochebeth A(3), Steinhoff M(6).

Author information:
(1)Dermatology Institute, Academic Health System, Hamad Medical Corporation, 
Doha, Qatar; Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Hamad Medical 
Corporation, Doha, Qatar; Translational Research Institute, Academic Health 
System, Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar. Electronic address: 
AAnsari1@hamad.qa.
(2)Research Division, Weill Cornell Medicine-Qatar, Doha, Qatar.
(3)Dermatology Institute, Academic Health System, Hamad Medical Corporation, 
Doha, Qatar; Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Hamad Medical 
Corporation, Doha, Qatar; Translational Research Institute, Academic Health 
System, Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar.
(4)Dermatology Institute, Academic Health System, Hamad Medical Corporation, 
Doha, Qatar; Translational Research Institute, Academic Health System, Hamad 
Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar.
(5)Department of Plastic Surgery, Hamad General Hospital, Hamad Medical 
Corporation, Doha, Qatar.
(6)Dermatology Institute, Academic Health System, Hamad Medical Corporation, 
Doha, Qatar; Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Hamad Medical 
Corporation, Doha, Qatar; Translational Research Institute, Academic Health 
System, Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar; Research Division, Weill Cornell 
Medicine-Qatar, Doha, Qatar; Department of Medicine, Weill Cornell 
Medicine-Qatar, Doha, Qatar; Department of Dermatology, Weill Cornell 
University, New York, New York, USA; School of Life Sciences, Hamad bin Khalifa 
University, Doha, Qatar; College of Medicine, University of Qatar, Doha, Qatar. 
Electronic address: martin_steinhoff@web.de.

Rosacea is a chronic inflammatory disease of facial skin with unknown 
pathophysiology. Abnormal overexpression of human antimicrobial peptide LL-37 is 
a hallmark of rosacea. However, its significance in rosacea pathogenesis is not 
fully understood. We sought to understand the molecular mechanisms of 
LL-37-mediated rosacea-like inflammation in an in vitro model of normal human 
epidermal keratinocytes. Transcriptome profiling of LL-37-treated keratinocytes 
identified signatures of IFN-stimulating genes, such as CXCL10, IFIT2, RSAD2, 
and CXCL11 among the top upregulated differentially expressed genes. Gene 
ontology enrichment of biological processes revealed activation of cellular 
response to molecules of bacterial origin, response to chemokines, and 
cytokine-mediated signaling pathways, whereas Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and 
Genomes enrichment analysis revealed the activation of TNF signaling, IL-17 
signaling, NF-kB signaling, and chemokine signaling among the most significant 
pathways. Remarkably, T-cell recruiting chemokine CXCL10 turns out to be the 
most abundant inflammatory mediator overexpressed upon LL-37 exposure. 
Mechanistically, LL-37-induced CXCL10 production relied on the Jak1/signal 
transducer and activator of transcription 1 signaling pathway. In summary, our 
findings provide a crucial link to keratinocyte-T-cell crosstalk, and blockade 
of the CXCL10:CXCR3 axis or Jak1/signal transducer and activator of 
transcription 1 pathways can be an effective anti-inflammatory strategy to 
reduce rosacea inflammation by restricting pathogenic T-cell infiltration.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jid.2025.08.003
PMID: 40835085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]