---
reference_id: "PMID:26494386"
title: Calcitonin as Biomarker for the Medullary Thyroid Carcinoma.
authors:
- Bae YJ
- Schaab M
- Kratzsch J
journal: Recent Results Cancer Res
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-22542-5_5
keywords:
- Animals
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/blood"
- Calcitonin/blood
- "Carcinoma, Neuroendocrine/blood, pathology"
- Humans
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Prognosis
- Thyroid Function Tests
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/blood, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Calcitonin as Biomarker for the Medullary Thyroid Carcinoma.
**Authors:** Bae YJ, Schaab M, Kratzsch J
**Journal:** Recent Results Cancer Res (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-319-22542-5_5](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-22542-5_5)

## Content

1. Recent Results Cancer Res. 2015;204:117-37. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-22542-5_5.

Calcitonin as Biomarker for the Medullary Thyroid Carcinoma.

Bae YJ(1), Schaab M(1), Kratzsch J(2).

Author information:
(1)Institut für Laboratoriumsmedizin, Klinische Chemie und Molekulare
Diagnostik, Universität Leipzig, Paul-List-Str. 13-15, 04103, Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Institut für Laboratoriumsmedizin, Klinische Chemie und Molekulare
Diagnostik, Universität Leipzig, Paul-List-Str. 13-15, 04103, Leipzig, Germany.
kraj@medizin.uni-leipzig.de.

Calcitonin (CTN) is a polypeptide hormone consisting of 32 amino acids with a
disulfide bridge between position 1 and 7 that is mainly produced by the C-cells
of thyroid gland. The measurement of CTN concentrations in blood reflects C-cell
activity and is performed in general by immunoassay methods. However, there are
analytical, physiological, pharmacological, and pathological factors that can
influence results of serum CTN values. Due to the influence of these factors,
there is a high variability in assay-dependent cutoffs used to discriminate
between MTC, C-cell hyperplasia (CCH), and the absence of the pathological
impairment of C-cells. There is a lot of evidence that the measurement of serum
CTN concentrations in patients with thyroid nodules can lead to an earlier
diagnosis of MTC or CCH than the exclusive use of imaging procedures and/or
fine-needle aspiration cytology. Basal CTN concentrations higher than
60-100 pg/mL are highly indicative for the diagnosis MTC. In the range between
cutoff and 60 pg/mL CTN, both MTC and HCC may be a relevant diagnosis. PCT and
CTN appear to have a comparable diagnostic capability to diagnose MTCs. However,
"positive" PCT values of more than 50 pg/mL may be reached also in subclinical
infections and will lead, therefore, to an overdiagnosis of the tumor.
Pentagastrin- or calcium-stimulated serum CTN concentrations higher than cutoff
values might improve diagnostics of MTC, but the non-availability of the first
and the lacking of relevant cutoff values for the second tool favors the use of
only basal values currently.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-22542-5_5
PMID: 26494386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
