---
reference_id: PMID:29776671
title: "Guidelines on Diabetic Eye Care: The International Council of Ophthalmology Recommendations for Screening, Follow-up, Referral, and Treatment Based on Resource Settings."
authors:
- Wong TY
- Sun J
- Kawasaki R
- Ruamviboonsuk P
- Gupta N
- Lansingh VC
- Maia M
- Mathenge W
- Moreker S
- Muqit MMK
- Resnikoff S
- Verdaguer J
- Zhao P
- Ferris F
- Aiello LP
- Taylor HR
journal: Ophthalmology
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2018.04.007
keywords:
- "Diabetic Retinopathy/diagnosis, epidemiology, therapy"
- Disease Management
- Follow-Up Studies
- Global Health
- Humans
- Morbidity/trends
- Ophthalmology/standards
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
- Referral and Consultation
- "Societies, Medical"
- Vision Screening/standards
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Guidelines on Diabetic Eye Care: The International Council of Ophthalmology Recommendations for Screening, Follow-up, Referral, and Treatment Based on Resource Settings.
**Authors:** Wong TY, Sun J, Kawasaki R, Ruamviboonsuk P, Gupta N, Lansingh VC, Maia M, Mathenge W, Moreker S, Muqit MMK, Resnikoff S, Verdaguer J, Zhao P, Ferris F, Aiello LP, Taylor HR
**Journal:** Ophthalmology (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ophtha.2018.04.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ophtha.2018.04.007)

## Content

1. Ophthalmology. 2018 Oct;125(10):1608-1622. doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2018.04.007. 
Epub 2018 May 24.

Guidelines on Diabetic Eye Care: The International Council of Ophthalmology 
Recommendations for Screening, Follow-up, Referral, and Treatment Based on 
Resource Settings.

Wong TY(1), Sun J(2), Kawasaki R(3), Ruamviboonsuk P(4), Gupta N(5), Lansingh 
VC(6), Maia M(7), Mathenge W(8), Moreker S(9), Muqit MMK(10), Resnikoff S(11), 
Verdaguer J(12), Zhao P(13), Ferris F(14), Aiello LP(2), Taylor HR(15).

Author information:
(1)Singapore Eye Research Institute, Singapore National Eye Centre, Singapore, 
Republic of Singapore; Duke-NUS Medical School, National University of 
Singapore, Singapore, Republic of Singapore. Electronic address: 
wong.tien.yin@snec.com.sg.
(2)Beetham Eye Institute, Joslin Diabetes Center, and Department of 
Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Department of Public Health, Yamagata University Graduate School of Medical 
Science, Yamagata, Japan.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Rajavithi Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand.
(5)Ophthalmology and Vision Sciences, St. Michael's Hospital, University of 
Toronto, and Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, 
Canada.
(6)Help Me See and Instituto Mexicano de Oftalmologia, Queretaro, Mexico.
(7)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Escola Paulista de Medicina, 
Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.
(8)Rwanda International Institute of Ophthalmology, and Dr Agarwal's Eye 
Hospital, Kigali, Rwanda.
(9)Apollo, Nanavati, Seven Hills, Fortis Hiranandani, Cumballa Hill, SL Raheja, 
Eyeris, Conwest Jain, Bhaktivedant, MGM Hospitals, Mumbai, India.
(10)Vitreoretinal Service, Moorfields Eye Hospital, NIHR Moorfields Biomedical 
Research Centre (BRC), London, United Kingdom.
(11)Brien Holden Vision Institute and SOVS, University of New South Wales, 
Sydney, Australia.
(12)Los Andes Ophthalmologic Foundation, Los Andes University, Santiago, Chile.
(13)Department of Ophthalmology, Xin Hua Hospital affiliated with Shanghai Jiao 
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(14)National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(15)Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Australia.

Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a global epidemic and affects populations in both 
developing and developed countries, with differing health care and resource 
levels. Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is a major complication of DM and a leading 
cause of vision loss in working middle-aged adults. Vision loss from DR can be 
prevented with broad-level public health strategies, but these need to be 
tailored to a country's and population's resource setting. Designing DR 
screening programs, with appropriate and timely referral to facilities with 
trained eye care professionals, and using cost-effective treatment for 
vision-threatening levels of DR can prevent vision loss. The International 
Council of Ophthalmology Guidelines for Diabetic Eye Care 2017 summarize and 
offer a comprehensive guide for DR screening, referral and follow-up schedules 
for DR, and appropriate management of vision-threatening DR, including diabetic 
macular edema (DME) and proliferative DR, for countries with high- and low- or 
intermediate-resource settings. The guidelines include updated evidence on 
screening and referral criteria, the minimum requirements for a screening vision 
and retinal examination, follow-up care, and management of DR and DME, including 
laser photocoagulation and appropriate use of intravitreal anti-vascular 
endothelial growth factor inhibitors and, in specific situations, intravitreal 
corticosteroids. Recommendations for management of DR in patients during 
pregnancy and with concomitant cataract also are included. The guidelines offer 
suggestions for monitoring outcomes and indicators of success at a population 
level.

Copyright © 2018 American Academy of Ophthalmology. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2018.04.007
PMID: 29776671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]