---
reference_id: "PMID:28247148"
title: Very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (VLCAD-) deficiency-studies on treatment effects and long-term outcomes in mouse models.
authors:
- Tucci S
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-017-0016-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (VLCAD-) deficiency-studies on treatment effects and long-term outcomes in mouse models.
**Authors:** Tucci S
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-017-0016-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-017-0016-8)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2017 May;40(3):317-323. doi: 10.1007/s10545-017-0016-8. 
Epub 2017 Feb 28.

Very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (VLCAD-) deficiency-studies on treatment 
effects and long-term outcomes in mouse models.

Tucci S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Pediatrics, Center for Pediatrics and Adolescent 
Medicine, Medical Centre - University of Freiburg, Mathildenstrasse 1, 79106, 
Freiburg, Germany. sara.tucci@uniklinik-freiburg.de.

Very-long-chain-acyl-CoA-dehydrogenase deficiency is the most common disorder of 
mitochondrial long-chain fatty acid (LCFA) oxidation, with an incidence of 
1:50,000-1:100,000 in newborns. Catabolic situations contribute to the 
aggravation of symptoms and induce severe metabolic derangement. Treatment for 
VLCAD-deficiency includes avoidance of fasting and a long-chain fat-restricted 
and fat-modified diet in which LCFAs are fully or partially replaced by 
medium-chain triglycerides (MCT). The aim of this work was to investigate the 
outcome and the effects of long-term treatment in a mouse model of 
VLCAD-deficiency. The application of a single MCT bolus in a mouse model of 
VLCAD-deficiency (VLCAD-/- mice) immediately prior to exercise protected the 
muscles from the accumulation of acylcarnitines providing the required energy 
and it did not affect hepatic lipid metabolism. However, when MCT was applied 
over the course of a year as a regular part of the diet, female VLCAD-/- mice 
developed a severe clinical phenotype comparable to the human metabolic 
syndrome. Indeed, they were characterized by massive visceral fat infiltration, 
hepatosteatosis, disturbed fatty acid composition, hyperlipidemia, and systemic 
oxidative stress. In contrast, male VLCAD-/- mice seemed to be protected and 
displayed only signs of insulin resistance. Besides the sex-specific response to 
MCT supplementation with regard to the lipid metabolism, all VLCAD-/- mice 
developed progressive cardiac dysfunction over time which worsened when they 
were treated with regular MCT resulting in severe dilated cardiomyopathy. While 
long term use of MCT oil in mice has adverse effects, no such effects have been 
demonstrated in humans, likely reflecting the differences in long chain fatty 
acid oxidation between the two species.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-017-0016-8
PMID: 28247148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]