---
reference_id: "PMID:36010351"
title: Pathological and Molecular Features of Nodal Peripheral T-Cell Lymphomas.
authors:
- Satou A
- Takahara T
- Tsuzuki T
journal: Diagnostics (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/diagnostics12082001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathological and Molecular Features of Nodal Peripheral T-Cell Lymphomas.
**Authors:** Satou A, Takahara T, Tsuzuki T
**Journal:** Diagnostics (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/diagnostics12082001](https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics12082001)

## Content

1. Diagnostics (Basel). 2022 Aug 18;12(8):2001. doi: 10.3390/diagnostics12082001.

Pathological and Molecular Features of Nodal Peripheral T-Cell Lymphomas.

Satou A(1), Takahara T(1), Tsuzuki T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgical Pathology, Aichi Medical University Hospital, Nagakute
480-1195, Japan.

Peripheral T-cell lymphomas (PTCLs) are uncommon neoplasms derived from mature T
cells or NK cells. PTCLs comprise numerous disease entities, with over 30
distinct entities listed in the latest WHO classification. They predominantly
affect adults and elderly people and usually exhibit an aggressive clinical
course with poor prognosis. According to their presentation, PTCLs can be
divided into nodal, extranodal or cutaneous, and leukemic types. The most
frequent primary sites of PTCLs are lymph nodes, with over half of cases showing
nodal presentation. Nodal PTCLs include ALK-positive and ALK-negative anaplastic
large cell lymphoma; nodal T-cell lymphoma with T follicular helper cell origin;
and PTCL, not otherwise specified. Adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma also
frequently affects lymph nodes. Recent pathological and molecular findings in
nodal PTCLs have profoundly advanced the identification of tumor signatures and
the refinement of the classification. Therefore, the therapies and pathological
diagnosis of nodal PTCLs are continually evolving. This paper aims to provide a
summary and update of the pathological and molecular features of nodal PTCLs,
which will be helpful for diagnostic practice.

DOI: 10.3390/diagnostics12082001
PMCID: PMC9407466
PMID: 36010351

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
