---
reference_id: "PMID:37110221"
title: Understanding the Pathogenesis of Cardiac Complications in Patients with Propionic Acidemia and Exploring Therapeutic Alternatives for Those Who Are Not Eligible or Are Waiting for Liver Transplantation.
authors:
- Maines E
- Moretti M
- Vitturi N
- Gugelmo G
- Fasan I
- Lenzini L
- Piccoli G
- Gragnaniello V
- Maiorana A
- Soffiati M
- Burlina A
- Franceschi R
journal: Metabolites
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/metabo13040563
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Understanding the Pathogenesis of Cardiac Complications in Patients with Propionic Acidemia and Exploring Therapeutic Alternatives for Those Who Are Not Eligible or Are Waiting for Liver Transplantation.
**Authors:** Maines E, Moretti M, Vitturi N, Gugelmo G, Fasan I, Lenzini L, Piccoli G, Gragnaniello V, Maiorana A, Soffiati M, Burlina A, Franceschi R
**Journal:** Metabolites (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/metabo13040563](https://doi.org/10.3390/metabo13040563)

## Content

1. Metabolites. 2023 Apr 16;13(4):563. doi: 10.3390/metabo13040563.

Understanding the Pathogenesis of Cardiac Complications in Patients with 
Propionic Acidemia and Exploring Therapeutic Alternatives for Those Who Are Not 
Eligible or Are Waiting for Liver Transplantation.

Maines E(1), Moretti M(2), Vitturi N(3), Gugelmo G(4), Fasan I(4), Lenzini L(5), 
Piccoli G(6), Gragnaniello V(7), Maiorana A(8), Soffiati M(1), Burlina A(7), 
Franceschi R(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatrics, Santa Chiara General Hospital, APSS, 38122 Trento, 
Italy.
(2)Division of Cardiology, Santa Chiara General Hospital, APSS, 38122 Trento, 
Italy.
(3)Division of Metabolic Diseases, Department of Medicine-DIMED, University 
Hospital, 35128 Padova, Italy.
(4)Division of Clinical Nutrition, Department of Medicine-DIMED, University 
Hospital, 35128 Padova, Italy.
(5)Emergency Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine-DIMED, University Hospital, 
35128 Padova, Italy.
(6)CIBIO, Department of Cellular, Computational and Integrative Biology, Italy & 
Dulbecco Telethon Institute, Università degli Studi di Trento, 38123 Trento, 
Italy.
(7)Division of Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Reference Centre Expanded Newborn 
Screening, Department of Women's and Children's Health, University Hospital, 
35128 Padova, Italy.
(8)Division of Metabolism and Research Unit of Metabolic Biochemistry, Bambino 
Gesù Children's Hospital-IRCCS, 00165 Rome, Italy.

The guidelines for the management of patients affected by propionic acidemia 
(PA) recommend standard cardiac therapy in the presence of cardiac 
complications. A recent revision questioned the impact of high doses of coenzyme 
Q10 on cardiac function in patients with cardiomyopathy (CM). Liver 
transplantation is a therapeutic option for several patients since it may 
stabilize or reverse CM. Both the patients waiting for liver transplantation 
and, even more, the ones not eligible for transplant programs urgently need 
therapies to improve cardiac function. To this aim, the identification of the 
pathogenetic mechanisms represents a key point. Aims: This review summarizes: 
(1) the current knowledge of the pathogenetic mechanisms underlying cardiac 
complications in PA and (2) the available and potential pharmacological options 
for the prevention or the treatment of cardiac complications in PA. To select 
articles, we searched the electronic database PubMed using the Mesh terms 
"propionic acidemia" OR "propionate" AND "cardiomyopathy" OR "Long QT syndrome". 
We selected 77 studies, enlightening 12 potential disease-specific or 
non-disease-specific pathogenetic mechanisms, namely: impaired substrate 
delivery to TCA cycle and TCA dysfunction, secondary mitochondrial electron 
transport chain dysfunction and oxidative stress, coenzyme Q10 deficiency, 
metabolic reprogramming, carnitine deficiency, cardiac excitation-contraction 
coupling alteration, genetics, epigenetics, microRNAs, micronutrients 
deficiencies, renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system activation, and increased 
sympathetic activation. We provide a critical discussion of the related 
therapeutic options. Current literature supports the involvement of multiple 
cellular pathways in cardiac complications of PA, indicating the growing 
complexity of their pathophysiology. Elucidating the mechanisms responsible for 
such abnormalities is essential to identify therapeutic strategies going beyond 
the correction of the enzymatic defect rather than engaging the dysregulated 
mechanisms. Although these approaches are not expected to be resolutive, they 
may improve the quality of life and slow the disease progression. Available 
pharmacological options are limited and tested in small cohorts. Indeed, a 
multicenter approach is mandatory to strengthen the efficacy of therapeutic 
options.

DOI: 10.3390/metabo13040563
PMCID: PMC10143878
PMID: 37110221

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.