---
reference_id: "PMID:7691249"
title: "Demonstration of Rickettsia conorii-induced endothelial injury in vivo by measuring circulating endothelial cells, thrombomodulin, and von Willebrand factor in patients with Mediterranean spotted fever."
authors:
- George F
- Brouqui P
- Boffa MC
- Mutin M
- Drancourt M
- Brisson C
- Raoult D
- Sampol J
journal: Blood
year: '1993'
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal"
- Antigens/blood
- "Boutonneuse Fever/blood, pathology, therapy"
- "Endothelium, Vascular/pathology"
- Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
- Heparin/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Staining and Labeling
- Thrombomodulin/analysis
- "von Willebrand Factor/analysis, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Demonstration of Rickettsia conorii-induced endothelial injury in vivo by measuring circulating endothelial cells, thrombomodulin, and von Willebrand factor in patients with Mediterranean spotted fever.
**Authors:** George F, Brouqui P, Boffa MC, Mutin M, Drancourt M, Brisson C, Raoult D, Sampol J
**Journal:** Blood (1993)

## Content

1. Blood. 1993 Oct 1;82(7):2109-16.

Demonstration of Rickettsia conorii-induced endothelial injury in vivo by
measuring circulating endothelial cells, thrombomodulin, and von Willebrand
factor in patients with Mediterranean spotted fever.

George F(1), Brouqui P, Boffa MC, Mutin M, Drancourt M, Brisson C, Raoult D,
Sampol J.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire d'Immuno-Hématologie, Faculté de Pharmacie, Marseille, France.

Comment in
    Blood. 1994 May 15;83(10):3101.

The endothelial cell (EC) is the primary target for Rickettsia conorii (RC) in
Mediterranean spotted fever (MSF). Clinical manifestations such as thrombosis
and vasculitis are mediated by pathologic changes localized in blood vessels. To
study the in vivo endothelial injury induced by RC, markers of endothelial
damage, including circulating EC (CEC), plasmatic thrombomodulin (TM), and von
Willebrand factor (vWF), were investigated in 12 patients with MSF. CEC were
counted in whole blood by a new immunomagnetic separation assay using a specific
anti-EC antibody, S-Endo 1. Plasmatic TM and vWF antigens were measured by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. High levels of CEC and cell fragments were
found in patients with a severe or malignant form of MSF. Sequential studies of
CEC showed a decrease from 162 +/- 454 cells/mL before treatment to 6 +/- 7
cells/mL during treatment and recovery. Mean plasma TM and vWF levels that were
also elevated before therapy (TM, 106 +/- 27 ng/mL; vWF, 420% +/- 164%)
decreased progressively (TM, 55 +/- 43 ng/mL; vWF, 148% +/- 26%) during
treatment. The measurement of cellular and molecular markers of vascular damage
such as CEC, plasmatic TM, and vWF contributes to the definition of the
Rickettsia-induced endothelial injury in vivo.

PMID: 7691249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
