---
reference_id: "PMID:35795400"
title: Postintensive Care Syndrome-Family Associated With COVID-19 Infection.
authors:
- Shirasaki K
- Hifumi T
- Isokawa S
- Hashiuchi S
- Tanaka S
- Yanagisawa Y
- Takahashi O
- Otani N
journal: Crit Care Explor
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1097/CCE.0000000000000725
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Postintensive Care Syndrome-Family Associated With COVID-19 Infection.
**Authors:** Shirasaki K, Hifumi T, Isokawa S, Hashiuchi S, Tanaka S, Yanagisawa Y, Takahashi O, Otani N
**Journal:** Crit Care Explor (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1097/CCE.0000000000000725](https://doi.org/10.1097/CCE.0000000000000725)

## Content

1. Crit Care Explor. 2022 Jun 30;4(7):e0725. doi: 10.1097/CCE.0000000000000725. 
eCollection 2022 Jul.

Postintensive Care Syndrome-Family Associated With COVID-19 Infection.

Shirasaki K(1), Hifumi T(1), Isokawa S(1), Hashiuchi S(2), Tanaka S(2), 
Yanagisawa Y(2), Takahashi O(3), Otani N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine, St. Luke's International 
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Nursing, St. Luke's International Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Support Unit for Conducting Clinically Essential Study, St Luke's 
International University Graduate School of Public Health, Tokyo, Japan.

To assess the prevalence of and risk factors for postintensive care syndrome in 
family (PICS-F) in the COVID-19 era.
DESIGN: A single-center retrospective study using questionnaires and telephone 
calls.
SETTING: An ICU at St. Luke's International Hospital.
PATIENTS: Patients who were treated for COVID-19-related acute respiratory 
distress syndrome between March 23, 2020, and September 30, 2021, and their 
family members participated.
INTERVENTIONS: None.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: PICS-F refers to the psychologic distress such as 
anxiety, depression, and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) experienced by the 
patient's family. The primary outcome was PICS-F occurrence. Furthermore, 
factors related to PICS-F development were identified using statistical 
analysis. Of 85 patients with COVID-19 who were admitted to the ICU, 57 family 
members consented to the study and completed the survey, and 54 family members' 
data were analyzed. The median age of family members was 53.5 years, 68.5% were 
female, and 46.3% were spouses. The median age of patients was 55.5 years, and 
83.3% were male. During their ICU stay, 68.5% received invasive mechanical 
ventilation, 11.1% received venovenous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, and 
11.1% underwent tracheostomy. The median ICU and hospital stays were 7 and 22 
days, respectively. Overall PICS-F occurred in 33%. Anxiety, depression, and 
PTSD occurred in 24%, 26%, and 4% of family members, respectively. The 
prevalence of all three components of PICS-F was 4%. Multivariable analysis 
showed that Family Satisfaction with the ICU Survey (FS-ICU) scores were 
independently associated with PICS-F development (odds ratio, 0.941; 95% CI, 
0.891-0.983; p = 0.005).
CONCLUSIONS: One-third of family members of COVID-19 patients admitted to the 
ICU had symptoms of PICS-F. These results suggest that measurement of FS-ICU may 
be helpful as a predictor of PICS-F development. In addition, increasing the 
level of ICU care satisfaction of the family members may prevent PICS-F.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. on behalf 
of the Society of Critical Care Medicine.

DOI: 10.1097/CCE.0000000000000725
PMCID: PMC9249265
PMID: 35795400