---
reference_id: "PMID:24894770"
title: ALK-negative anaplastic large cell lymphoma is a genetically heterogeneous disease with widely disparate clinical outcomes.
authors:
- Parrilla Castellar ER
- Jaffe ES
- Said JW
- Swerdlow SH
- Ketterling RP
- Knudson RA
- Sidhu JS
- Hsi ED
- Karikehalli S
- Jiang L
- Vasmatzis G
- Gibson SE
- Ondrejka S
- Nicolae A
- Grogg KL
- Allmer C
- Ristow KM
- Wilson WH
- Macon WR
- Law ME
- Cerhan JR
- Habermann TM
- Ansell SM
- Dogan A
- Maurer MJ
- Feldman AL
journal: Blood
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-04-571091
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics, metabolism"
- Child
- Dual-Specificity Phosphatases/genetics
- Female
- Gene Rearrangement
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Interferon Regulatory Factors/genetics
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- "Lymphoma, Large-Cell, Anaplastic/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase Phosphatases/genetics
- Prognosis
- "Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Tumor Suppressor Proteins/genetics
- Young Adult
- Interferon Regulatory Factor-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ALK-negative anaplastic large cell lymphoma is a genetically heterogeneous disease with widely disparate clinical outcomes.
**Authors:** Parrilla Castellar ER, Jaffe ES, Said JW, Swerdlow SH, Ketterling RP, Knudson RA, Sidhu JS, Hsi ED, Karikehalli S, Jiang L, Vasmatzis G, Gibson SE, Ondrejka S, Nicolae A, Grogg KL, Allmer C, Ristow KM, Wilson WH, Macon WR, Law ME, Cerhan JR, Habermann TM, Ansell SM, Dogan A, Maurer MJ, Feldman AL
**Journal:** Blood (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2014-04-571091](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2014-04-571091)

## Content

1. Blood. 2014 Aug 28;124(9):1473-80. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-04-571091. Epub
2014  Jun 3.

ALK-negative anaplastic large cell lymphoma is a genetically heterogeneous
disease with widely disparate clinical outcomes.

Parrilla Castellar ER(1), Jaffe ES(2), Said JW(3), Swerdlow SH(4), Ketterling
RP(1), Knudson RA(1), Sidhu JS(5), Hsi ED(6), Karikehalli S(7), Jiang L(8),
Vasmatzis G(9), Gibson SE(4), Ondrejka S(6), Nicolae A(2), Grogg KL(1), Allmer
C(10), Ristow KM(11), Wilson WH(12), Macon WR(1), Law ME(1), Cerhan JR(10),
Habermann TM(11), Ansell SM(11), Dogan A(1), Maurer MJ(10), Feldman AL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN;
(2)Hematopathology Section, Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, MD;
(3)Department of Pathology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, CA;
(4)Division of Hematopathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Pittsburgh, PA;
(5)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, United Health Services
Hospitals, Johnson City/Binghamton, NY;
(6)Department of Clinical Pathology, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH;
(7)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Centrex Clinical
Laboratories, Utica, NY;
(8)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville,
FL;
(9)Center for Individualized Medicine.
(10)Department of Health Sciences Research, and.
(11)Division of Hematology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN; and.
(12)Lymphoid Malignancies Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, Bethesda, MD.

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 Aug 28;124(9):1385-6. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-06-581694.

Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-negative anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL)
is a CD30-positive T-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma that morphologically resembles
ALK-positive ALCL but lacks chromosomal rearrangements of the ALK gene. The
genetic and clinical heterogeneity of ALK-negative ALCL has not been delineated.
We performed immunohistochemistry and fluorescence in situ hybridization on 73
ALK-negative ALCLs and 32 ALK-positive ALCLs and evaluated the associations
among pathology, genetics, and clinical outcome. Chromosomal rearrangements of
DUSP22 and TP63 were identified in 30% and 8% of ALK-negative ALCLs,
respectively. These rearrangements were mutually exclusive and were absent in
ALK-positive ALCLs. Five-year overall survival rates were 85% for ALK-positive
ALCLs, 90% for DUSP22-rearranged ALCLs, 17% for TP63-rearranged ALCLs, and 42%
for cases lacking all 3 genetic markers (P < .0001). Hazard ratios for death in
these 4 groups after adjusting for International Prognostic Index and age were
1.0 (reference group), 0.58, 8.63, and 4.16, respectively (P = 7.10 × 10(-5)).
These results were similar when restricted to patients receiving
anthracycline-based chemotherapy, as well as to patients not receiving stem cell
transplantation. Thus, ALK-negative ALCL is a genetically heterogeneous disease
with widely disparate outcomes following standard therapy. DUSP22 and TP63
rearrangements may serve as predictive biomarkers to help guide patient
management.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2014-04-571091
PMCID: PMC4148769
PMID: 24894770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
