---
reference_id: "PMID:36375463"
title: "Case Report: Extensive Gangrene: A Rare Presentation of Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children."
authors:
- Banothu KK
- Dekate PS
- Gupta P
- Reddy A
- Immaneni SR
journal: Am J Trop Med Hyg
year: '2022'
doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.22-0252
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case Report: Extensive Gangrene: A Rare Presentation of Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children.
**Authors:** Banothu KK, Dekate PS, Gupta P, Reddy A, Immaneni SR
**Journal:** Am J Trop Med Hyg (2022)
**DOI:** [10.4269/ajtmh.22-0252](https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.22-0252)

## Content

1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2022 Nov 14;107(6):1245-1249. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.22-0252. 
Print 2022 Dec 14.

Case Report: Extensive Gangrene: A Rare Presentation of Multisystem Inflammatory 
Syndrome in Children.

Banothu KK(1), Dekate PS(1), Gupta P(1), Reddy A(1), Immaneni SR(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Krishna Institute of Medical Sciences, Kondapur, 
Hyderabad, India.
(2)Department of Pathology, Krishna Institute of Medical Sciences, Secunderabad, 
India.

A wide spectrum of cutaneous manifestations are reported in multisystem 
inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C). However, gangrenous changes are less 
frequently reported. A 3-year old boy, with a known case of unoperated tetralogy 
of Fallot, presented with a short history of fever, rash, and melena. The rash 
was black and diffuse, with a rapid progression. The patient was stable 
hemodynamically at admission, with pallor, grade II clubbing, edema, and oral 
ulcers. Inflammatory markers were raised. He developed gangrenous changes over 
the ears and acral areas. He had very high levels of antibodies to severe acute 
respiratory syndrome coronavirus2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection and was diagnosed as 
having MIS-C. Skin biopsy revealed near total epidermal necrosis with dermal 
vascular thrombi and negative immunofluorescence. Skin biopsy was positive for 
IgG antibodies to SARS-CoV-2. He was treated with antibiotics, immunomodulation 
with steroids, intravenous immunoglobulin, and plasmapheresis. He had features 
of both micro- and macroangiopathy. Gradually the child improved, with residual 
deformity.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.22-0252
PMCID: PMC9768269
PMID: 36375463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]