---
reference_id: "PMID:36180932"
title: "Colonization with extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-producing Escherichia coli and traveler's diarrhea attack rates among travelers to India: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Muzembo BA
- Kitahara K
- Ohno A
- Okamoto K
- Miyoshi SI
journal: Trop Dis Travel Med Vaccines
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s40794-022-00179-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Colonization with extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-producing Escherichia coli and traveler's diarrhea attack rates among travelers to India: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Muzembo BA, Kitahara K, Ohno A, Okamoto K, Miyoshi SI
**Journal:** Trop Dis Travel Med Vaccines (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40794-022-00179-1](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40794-022-00179-1)

## Content

1. Trop Dis Travel Med Vaccines. 2022 Oct 1;8(1):22. doi: 
10.1186/s40794-022-00179-1.

Colonization with extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-producing Escherichia coli 
and traveler's diarrhea attack rates among travelers to India: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis.

Muzembo BA(1), Kitahara K(2)(3), Ohno A(2)(3), Okamoto K(2), Miyoshi SI(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama 
University, 1-1-1 Tsushimanaka, Kita Ward, Okayama, 700-8530, Japan. 
andersonbasilua@yahoo.fr.
(2)Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama 
University, 1-1-1 Tsushimanaka, Kita Ward, Okayama, 700-8530, Japan.
(3)Collaborative Research Centre of Okayama University for Infectious Diseases 
in India, Kolkata 700010, India.

BACKGROUND: India is an attractive destination for travelers. Unfortunately, 
numerous reports exist on traveler's diarrhea (TD) and fecal colonization with 
extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-producing Escherichia coli (ESBL-EC) among 
international travelers visiting India. Here, we systematically reviewed studies 
published on the acquisition of ESBL-EC and TD attack rates among international 
visitors to India.
METHODS: Design: Systematic review and meta-analysis. A systematic search was 
performed using Google Scholar, PubMed, EMBASE, Web of Science, and gray 
literature from 2000 to December 2021, for studies containing data for ESBL-EC 
acquisition or TD experience related to a trip to India. Random effects models 
were used to compute the prevalence of ESBL-EC acquisition and TD attack.
RESULTS: The literature search yielded a total of 5023 records. Of these, 31 met 
our inclusion criteria for systematic review and only 17 could be meta-analyzed 
(9 for TD, and 8 for ESBL-EC). The overall pooled attack rate of TD was 39% (95% 
confidence interval, CI: 25-53%). In studies where travelers' memory was used to 
diagnose TD, the pooled attack rate of TD was slightly higher (42%, 95% CI: 
21-64%) compared to those where TD was objectively documented (33%, 95% CI: 
17-49%). There were significant risks to be colonized with ESBL-EC among the 
travelers who experienced TD. The pooled rate of ESBL-EC colonization was 72% 
(CI: 67-78%). Most ESBL-EC produced CTX-M-15 enzyme. Furthermore, most of the 
travelers who acquired ESBL-EC were from highly industrialized countries 
recruited from travel clinics: Canada (n = 80), Germany (n = 69), Netherlands 
(n = 20), Sweden (n = 18), Japan (n = 10), Finland (n = 8), USA (n = 7), Spain 
(n = 5), and Denmark (n = 3).
CONCLUSIONS: TD pooled attack rate and ESBL-EC acquisition among international 
travelers visiting India were high in this study. However, we cannot make 
generalizations based upon this TD pooled attack rate for the current situation, 
due to a lack of current data. Our study highlights that travelers should be 
advised on TD to ensure that they do not disregard the risk of contracting TD 
and be better prepared as a result. It also illustrates the importance of 
international travel in acquiring antibiotic-resistant Escherichia coli.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40794-022-00179-1
PMCID: PMC9525155
PMID: 36180932