---
reference_id: "PMID:35243166"
title: Late-onset Stargardt disease.
authors:
- Alsberge JB
- Agarwal A
journal: Am J Ophthalmol Case Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajoc.2022.101429
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Late-onset Stargardt disease.
**Authors:** Alsberge JB, Agarwal A
**Journal:** Am J Ophthalmol Case Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajoc.2022.101429](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajoc.2022.101429)

## Content

1. Am J Ophthalmol Case Rep. 2022 Feb 16;26:101429. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajoc.2022.101429. eCollection 2022 Jun.

Late-onset Stargardt disease.

Alsberge JB(1), Agarwal A(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Northwest Permanente, Portland, OR, USA.
(2)West Coast Retina Medical Group, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, California Pacific Medical Center, San 
Francisco, CA, USA.

PURPOSE: To report a case of late-onset Stargardt disease, discuss the 
differential diagnosis, and review the role of vitamin A supplementation in 
Stargardt disease.
OBSERVATIONS: A 60-year-old man presented with blurry vision in the right eye 
for the past two years. Current medications included a daily multivitamin 
containing vitamin A and age-related eye disease study vitamins. Examination 
revealed bilateral macular atrophy and scattered yellow flecks which were 
intensely hyperautofluorescent. Fluorescein angiography revealed a dark choroid. 
Full-field electroretinogram showed normal rod and cone responses, and genetic 
testing revealed two pathogenic ABCA4 gene variations confirming the diagnosis 
of late-onset Stargardt disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Stargardt disease is typically described in young patients but may 
develop later in adulthood and masquerade as age-related macular degeneration 
and a number of other conditions. Though the evidence is limited, there is 
concern that high-dose vitamin A supplementation could lead to progression of 
Stargardt disease. Avoidance of high-dose vitamin A supplementation should be 
discussed with Stargardt disease patients.

© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajoc.2022.101429
PMCID: PMC8866146
PMID: 35243166

Conflict of interest statement: Neither of the authors have a proprietary 
interest in the material presented in this study.