---
reference_id: "PMID:25206244"
title: "Apert's Syndrome."
authors:
- Kumar GR
- Jyothsna M
- Ahmed SB
- Sree Lakshmi KR
journal: Int J Clin Pediatr Dent
year: '2014'
doi: 10.5005/jp-journals-10005-1239
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Apert's Syndrome.
**Authors:** Kumar GR, Jyothsna M, Ahmed SB, Sree Lakshmi KR
**Journal:** Int J Clin Pediatr Dent (2014)
**DOI:** [10.5005/jp-journals-10005-1239](https://doi.org/10.5005/jp-journals-10005-1239)

## Content

1. Int J Clin Pediatr Dent. 2014 Jan;7(1):69-72. doi: 
10.5005/jp-journals-10005-1239. Epub 2014 Apr 26.

Apert's Syndrome.

Kumar GR(1), Jyothsna M(2), Ahmed SB(3), Sree Lakshmi KR(4).

Author information:
(1)Assistant Professor, Department of Pedodontics and Preventive Dentistry 
Government Dental College and Hospital, Rims, Kadapa Andhra Pradesh, India.
(2)Assistant Professor, Department of Oral Pathology, Government Dental College 
and Hospital, Rims, Kadapa, Andhra Pradesh, India.
(3)Associate Professor, Department of Prosthodontics, Crown and Bridge, 
Government Dental College and Hopital, Rims, Kadapa, Andhra Pradesh India.
(4)Tutor, Department of Pedodontics and Preventive Dentistry Government Dental 
College and Hospital, Rims, Kadapa Andhra Pradesh, India.

Apert's syndrome (acrocephalosyndactyly) is a rare congenital disorder 
characterized by craniosynostosis, midfacial malforma-tion and symmetrical 
syndactyly of hands and feet. Craniofacial deformities include cone-shaped 
calvarium, fat forehead, prop-tosis, hypertelorism and short nose with a bulbous 
tip. Intraoral findings include high arched palate with pseudocleft, maxillary 
transverse and sagittal hypoplasia with concomitant dental crowding, skeletal 
and dental anterior open bite and several retained primary teeth. We report one 
such case of 14-year-old boy having all the classical features of Apert's 
syndrome with particular emphasis on brief review of genetic features. How to 
cite this article: Kumar GR, Jyothsna M, Ahmed SB, Lakshmi KRS. Apert's 
Syndrome. Int J Clin Pediatr Dent 2014;7(1):69-72.

DOI: 10.5005/jp-journals-10005-1239
PMCID: PMC4144061
PMID: 25206244

Conflict of interest statement: Source of support: Nil Conflict of interest: 
None