---
reference_id: "PMID:36519436"
title: Atrial Fibrillation Detection and Management in Hypertension.
authors:
- Gawałko M
- Linz D
journal: Hypertension
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.122.19459
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atrial Fibrillation Detection and Management in Hypertension.
**Authors:** Gawałko M, Linz D
**Journal:** Hypertension (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.122.19459](https://doi.org/10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.122.19459)

## Content

1. Hypertension. 2023 Mar;80(3):523-533. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.122.19459. 
Epub 2022 Dec 15.

Atrial Fibrillation Detection and Management in Hypertension.

Gawałko M(1)(2), Linz D(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)First Department of Cardiology, Medical University of Warsaw, Poland (M.G.).
(2)Department of Cardiology, Maastricht University Medical Centre and 
Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht, Maastricht University, the 
Netherlands (M.G., D.L.).
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Denmark (D.L.).
(4)Centre for Heart Rhythm Disorders, Royal Adelaide Hospital, University of 
Adelaide, Australia (D.L.).
(5)Department of Cardiology, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, the 
Netherlands (D.L.).

Hypertension is prevalent in >70% of atrial fibrillation patients. In turn, 
hypertensive patients have up to 73% greater likelihood of atrial fibrillation. 
Current guidelines recommend that a systematic atrial fibrillation screening may 
be justified in all patients aged ≥65 years with at least 1 cardiovascular 
disease, including hypertension. Although most blood pressure monitors include 
algorithms to detect atrial fibrillation with a high sensitivity of 96 [92-98]% 
and specificity of 94 [91-96]%, an electrocardiography confirmation is necessary 
to establish a diagnosis of atrial fibrillation. Early detection and diagnosis 
of atrial fibrillation is important to allow initiation of atrial fibrillation 
management. In the Early Treatment of Atrial Fibrillation for Stroke Prevention 
Trial (EAST-AFNET 4), hypertension was present in 88% of participants, and early 
rhythm control therapy lowered the risk of adverse cardiovascular outcomes in 
patients with early atrial fibrillation aged >75 or with CHA2DS2-VASc score ≥2 
(Congestive heart failure, Hypertension, Age ≥75 (doubled), Diabetes, Stroke 
(doubled), Vascular disease, Age 65-74, Sex category [female]) and 
cardiovascular condition. Strategies for early atrial fibrillation detection 
should always be linked to a comprehensive atrial fibrillation work-up 
infrastructure organized within an integrated ABC pathway (Anticoagulation/Avoid 
stroke; Better symptom control; Cardiovascular and Comorbidity optimization). 
For secondary prophylaxis, blood pressure control should be embedded in a 
combined risk factor management program. In hypertensive patients where no 
atrial fibrillation is detected, intensive blood pressure lowering therapy for 
primary prophylaxis should be initiated to reduce the risk of developing atrial 
fibrillation and other cardiovascular complications in the future. The aim of 
the article is to review the current literature on atrial fibrillation detection 
and management in hypertensive patients.

DOI: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.122.19459
PMID: 36519436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]