---
reference_id: "PMID:32529415"
title: "Parameter and State Estimation in a Cholera Model with Threshold Immunology: A Case Study of Senegal."
authors:
- Ogola BO
- Woldegerima WA
- Omondi EO
journal: Bull Math Biol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s11538-020-00755-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Parameter and State Estimation in a Cholera Model with Threshold Immunology: A Case Study of Senegal.
**Authors:** Ogola BO, Woldegerima WA, Omondi EO
**Journal:** Bull Math Biol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11538-020-00755-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11538-020-00755-6)

## Content

1. Bull Math Biol. 2020 Jun 11;82(6):72. doi: 10.1007/s11538-020-00755-6.

Parameter and State Estimation in a Cholera Model with Threshold Immunology: A 
Case Study of Senegal.

Ogola BO(1), Woldegerima WA(2)(3), Omondi EO(4).

Author information:
(1)AIMS, Cameroon, P.O. Box 608, Crystal Gardens, Limbe, Cameroon. 
ogobeda89@gmail.com.
(2)AIMS, Cameroon, P.O. Box 608, Crystal Gardens, Limbe, Cameroon.
(3)CNCS, Department of Mathematics, Mekelle University, P.O. Box 231, Mekelle, 
Ethiopia.
(4)Institute of Mathematical Sciences, Strathmore University, P.O. Box 
59857-00200, Nairobi, Kenya.

It is often impossible to measure all states affecting spread of a disease. In 
cholera, asymptomatic and cholera pathogen densities are not practically 
measurable despite playing a big role in its transmission. They are referred to 
as inaccessible states of the model and can only be manipulated using the 
measurable states of the given model. Our interest lies in estimating such 
states and the parameters catalyzing the spread. A mathematical model for 
cholera dynamics consisting of five compartments (susceptible, symptomatic, 
asymptomatic, recovered and bacteria population) with a minimum infection dose 
(MID) is considered. A method based on observer (from modern control theory) is 
proposed to estimate the state variables not accessible to measurement and the 
time-dependent parameters from real data of Senegal. We suppose that the total 
population of Senegal, the monthly reported cholera-induced deaths and the 
monthly recovered individuals are known inputs obtainable from real data, and 
the monthly new cholera cases the system output. An auxiliary system is used, an 
observer whose solutions converge exponentially to those of an original system 
and solely utilize known inputs and output of the model. Thus, the estimation of 
the unmeasured state variables like the pathogen density and the yearly 
asymptomatic population within the human community playing an important role in 
the spread of cholera is possible. We derive the expressions for time-dependent 
infection rate, induced cholera death rate and symptomatic recovery rate and 
their estimations done using real data. Numerical simulations are then performed 
for the validation of estimation results. The system together with the observer 
designed is detectable but is not observable. The observer delivered estimates 
reflect a close trend already ascertained by other researchers. They indicate 
the existence of bacteria and asymptomatic individuals in the population of 
Senegal at any single time for the duration of collection of the data. The ever 
existence of cholera pathogen explains the endemicity of Cholera in Senegal and 
other sub-Saharan-African countries owing to role played by the asymptomatic 
individual in the bacteria density. As such, the heath authorities in Senegal 
need to educate the general public on hygiene irrespective of observable 
symptoms to lower the possible number of new infections. We have analytically 
showed and numerically confirmed the exponential convergence to zero of the 
estimation errors resulting from the observer model hence the high quality of 
the estimates.

DOI: 10.1007/s11538-020-00755-6
PMID: 32529415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]