---
reference_id: "PMID:37884691"
title: "Strategies adopted by oral physicians, oral and maxillofacial surgeons, and oral pathologists in patient education on oral cancer: A Nigerian study."
authors:
- Kanmodi KK
- Salami AA
- Gbadamosi AA
- Nwafor JN
- Amoo BA
- Adisa AO
- Aladelusi TO
- Almu B
- Amzat J
- Braimah RO
- Ogbeide ME
- Okwuosa CU
journal: Cancer Rep (Hoboken)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/cnr2.1929
keywords:
- Humans
- Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Pathologists
- Patient Education as Topic
- Physicians
- Mouth Neoplasms
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Strategies adopted by oral physicians, oral and maxillofacial surgeons, and oral pathologists in patient education on oral cancer: A Nigerian study.
**Authors:** Kanmodi KK, Salami AA, Gbadamosi AA, Nwafor JN, Amoo BA, Adisa AO, Aladelusi TO, Almu B, Amzat J, Braimah RO, Ogbeide ME, Okwuosa CU
**Journal:** Cancer Rep (Hoboken) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cnr2.1929](https://doi.org/10.1002/cnr2.1929)

## Content

1. Cancer Rep (Hoboken). 2024 Jan;7(1):e1929. doi: 10.1002/cnr2.1929. Epub 2023
Oct  26.

Strategies adopted by oral physicians, oral and maxillofacial surgeons, and oral 
pathologists in patient education on oral cancer: A Nigerian study.

Kanmodi KK(1)(2)(3)(4), Salami AA(1)(2)(5), Gbadamosi AA(2)(6), Nwafor JN(2)(7), 
Amoo BA(2)(8), Adisa AO(9)(10), Aladelusi TO(5)(11), Almu B(12), Amzat 
J(12)(13), Braimah RO(14)(15), Ogbeide ME(15), Okwuosa CU(16).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Dentistry, University of Puthisastra, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
(2)Campaign for Head and Neck Cancer Education (CHANCE) Programme, Cephas Health 
Research Initiative Inc, Ibadan, Nigeria.
(3)School of Dentistry, University of Rwanda, Kigali, Rwanda.
(4)School of Health and Life Sciences, Teesside University, Middlesbrough, UK.
(5)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, University College Hospital, 
Ibadan, Nigeria.
(6)Department of Dental Surgery, Federal Medical Centre, Bida, Nigeria.
(7)Division of Medicine, Nottingham University Hospital NHS Trust, Nottingham, 
UK.
(8)African Field Epidemiology Network, Abuja, Nigeria.
(9)Department of Oral Pathology/Oral Medicine, University College Hospital, 
Ibadan, Nigeria.
(10)Department of Oral Pathology/Oral Medicine, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, 
Nigeria.
(11)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, 
Nigeria.
(12)Department of Sociology, Usmanu Danfodiyo University, Sokoto, Nigeria.
(13)Department of Sociology, University of Johannesburg, Johannesburg, South 
Africa.
(14)Faculty of Dental Sciences, Usmanu Danfodiyo University, Sokoto, Nigeria.
(15)Department of Dental and Maxillofacial Surgery, Usmanu Danfodiyo University, 
Sokoto, Nigeria.
(16)Department of Oral Pathology and Oral Medicine, University of Nigeria 
Teaching Hospital, Ituku-Ozalla, Nigeria.

BACKGROUND: The burden of oral cancer in Nigeria is increasing. Different 
studies have shown how public education on oral cancer have increased knowledge 
of oral cancer across populations, however, it is not known if these practices 
are adopted by oral physicians, oral and maxillofacial surgeons, and oral 
pathologists in Nigeria.
AIMS: To investigate the patient oral cancer education strategies adopted by 
oral physicians, oral and maxillofacial surgeons, and oral pathologists in 
Nigeria.
METHODS: This study adopted an analytical cross-sectional study design. This 
study surveyed practicing oral physicians, oral and maxillofacial surgeons, and 
oral pathologists in Nigeria. An e-questionnaire was used for this study. The 
data were analyzed using the SPSS Version 20 software, and a p-value of <.05 was 
used to determine the level of statistical significance.
RESULTS: The study's response rate was 46.6% (75/161). The 75 participants were 
from the six geopolitical zones in Nigeria responded to the survey 
questionnaire. Even though more than half (43/75, 57.3%) of the respondents have 
never received any training since their post-bachelor's degree qualification on 
the strategies that can be used in educating patients on oral cancer, majority 
(54/75, 72.0%) of them knew at least one education strategy; also, the most 
known (36/54, 66.7%) and utilized (33/54, 61.3%) strategy among those 
respondents who were aware of patient education strategy was health talk. Only 
38.7% (29/75) of the respondents reported that health learning materials 
(posters, leaflets, fliers, and flipcharts) are available in their clinics, all 
of which were in insufficient quantities. Also, 93.3% (70/75) of the respondents 
opined that it is worthwhile that dental clinics/hospitals in Nigeria invest in 
the provision of oral cancer learning materials for patient use. Inferential 
statistical analysis did not reveal any significant relationship between the 
respondents' characteristics and their awareness and practice on patient oral 
cancer education strategies.
CONCLUSION: This study identified that many oral physicians, oral and 
maxillofacial surgeons, and oral pathologists in Nigeria lack the needed 
capacity to educate their patients on oral cancer. There is a need to strengthen 
their capacity by giving them training on patient oral cancer education 
strategies, and by providing them with good quality and enough teaching aids.

© 2023 The Authors. Cancer Reports published by Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/cnr2.1929
PMCID: PMC10809197
PMID: 37884691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have stated explicitly that there 
are no conflicts of interest in connection with this article.