---
reference_id: "PMID:36216412"
title: "Monkeypox as an emerging infectious disease: the ophthalmic implications."
authors:
- Milligan AL
- Koay SY
- Dunning J
journal: Br J Ophthalmol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1136/bjo-2022-322268
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monkeypox as an emerging infectious disease: the ophthalmic implications.
**Authors:** Milligan AL, Koay SY, Dunning J
**Journal:** Br J Ophthalmol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bjo-2022-322268](https://doi.org/10.1136/bjo-2022-322268)

## Content

1. Br J Ophthalmol. 2022 Dec;106(12):1629-1634. doi: 10.1136/bjo-2022-322268.
Epub  2022 Oct 10.

Monkeypox as an emerging infectious disease: the ophthalmic implications.

Milligan AL(1), Koay SY(2), Dunning J(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Corneal and External Diseases Department and Accident and Emergency 
Department, Moorfields Eye Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK 
alice.milligan@nhs.net.
(2)Corneal and External Diseases Department and Accident and Emergency 
Department, Moorfields Eye Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Royal Free London NHS Foundation Trust, 
London, UK.
(4)Pandemic Sciences Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

The 2022 outbreak of monkeypox is of worldwide significance. There has been a 
rapid escalation in case numbers despite efforts to contain it and the WHO has 
declared it a Public Health Emergency of International Concern. To date, over 51 
257 laboratory-confirmed cases have been reported, the majority in non-endemic 
countries, with 3279 in the UK. It is vital for ophthalmologists to understand 
this disease and the risk it poses.  Human monkeypox is a zoonotic disease 
caused by the monkeypox virus, a double-stranded DNA virus in the Orthopoxvirus 
genus of the Poxviridae family. Other orthopoxviruses include variola 
(smallpox), cowpox and vaccinia; all of which have significant ocular sequelae. 
Transmission occurs from an animal reservoir (unknown, likely rodents) to a 
human host, leading to secondary human-to-human spread. During the recent 
outbreak, a higher incidence has been found in gay, bisexual or other men who 
have sex with men.  Clinical diagnosis may be challenging as presentation can 
mimic common ophthalmic diseases. A thorough history is key to identifying 
potential cases. Ophthalmic manifestations may include preseptal cellulitis, 
conjunctivitis and keratitis. The oral antiviral agent tecovirimat, which was 
developed to treat smallpox, is the mainstay of treatment. Trifluorothymidine 
(trifluridine) eye-drops can be used for ophthalmic involvement. In addition, 
smallpox vaccines have provided some cross-immunity.  Ocular monkeypox should be 
managed by infectious diseases specialists, in consultation with 
ophthalmologists to provide the expertise needed to treat potentially 
vision-threatening complications. This outbreak highlights the need for 
healthcare providers to implement appropriate infection control measures and be 
familiar with the identification and treatment of both cutaneous and ocular 
disease.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2022. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bjo-2022-322268
PMID: 36216412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.