---
reference_id: "PMID:36822570"
title: "Visual Outcomes Following Plasma Exchange for Optic Neuritis: An International Multicenter Retrospective Analysis of 395 Optic Neuritis Attacks."
authors:
- Chen JJ
- Flanagan EP
- Pittock SJ
- Stern NC
- Tisavipat N
- Bhatti MT
- Chodnicki KD
- Tajfirouz DA
- Jamali S
- Kunchok A
- Eggenberger ER
- Nome MAD
- Sotirchos ES
- Vasileiou ES
- Henderson AD
- Arnold AC
- Bonelli L
- Moss HE
- Navarro SEV
- Padungkiatsagul T
- Stiebel-Kalish H
- Lotan I
- Wilf-Yarkoni A
- Danesh-Meyer H
- Ivanov S
- Huda S
- Forcadela M
- Hodge D
- Poullin P
- Rode J
- Papeix C
- Saheb S
- Boudot de la Motte M
- Vignal C
- Hacohen Y
- Pique J
- Maillart E
- Deschamps R
- Audoin B
- Marignier R
journal: Am J Ophthalmol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2023.02.013
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- Plasma Exchange
- Retrospective Studies
- Myelin-Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein
- Optic Neuritis/therapy
- Neuromyelitis Optica
- Vision Disorders/therapy
- Autoantibodies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Visual Outcomes Following Plasma Exchange for Optic Neuritis: An International Multicenter Retrospective Analysis of 395 Optic Neuritis Attacks.
**Authors:** Chen JJ, Flanagan EP, Pittock SJ, Stern NC, Tisavipat N, Bhatti MT, Chodnicki KD, Tajfirouz DA, Jamali S, Kunchok A, Eggenberger ER, Nome MAD, Sotirchos ES, Vasileiou ES, Henderson AD, Arnold AC, Bonelli L, Moss HE, Navarro SEV, Padungkiatsagul T, Stiebel-Kalish H, Lotan I, Wilf-Yarkoni A, Danesh-Meyer H, Ivanov S, Huda S, Forcadela M, Hodge D, Poullin P, Rode J, Papeix C, Saheb S, Boudot de la Motte M, Vignal C, Hacohen Y, Pique J, Maillart E, Deschamps R, Audoin B, Marignier R
**Journal:** Am J Ophthalmol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajo.2023.02.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajo.2023.02.013)

## Content

1. Am J Ophthalmol. 2023 Aug;252:213-224. doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2023.02.013. Epub
2023  Feb 21.

Visual Outcomes Following Plasma Exchange for Optic Neuritis: An International 
Multicenter Retrospective Analysis of 395 Optic Neuritis Attacks.

Chen JJ(1), Flanagan EP(2), Pittock SJ(2), Stern NC(3), Tisavipat N(4), Bhatti 
MT(5), Chodnicki KD(3), Tajfirouz DA(6), Jamali S(3), Kunchok A(7), Eggenberger 
ER(8), Nome MAD(9), Sotirchos ES(10), Vasileiou ES(10), Henderson AD(11), Arnold 
AC(12), Bonelli L(12), Moss HE(13), Navarro SEV(14), Padungkiatsagul T(15), 
Stiebel-Kalish H(16), Lotan I(17), Wilf-Yarkoni A(17), Danesh-Meyer H(18), 
Ivanov S(18), Huda S(19), Forcadela M(19), Hodge D(20), Poullin P(21), Rode 
J(21), Papeix C(22), Saheb S(23), Boudot de la Motte M(24), Vignal C(25), 
Hacohen Y(26), Pique J(27), Maillart E(23), Deschamps R(24), Audoin B(21), 
Marignier R(27).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Ophthalmology (J.J.C., N.C.S., K.D.C., D.A.T., S.J.); 
Neurology (J.J.C., E.P.F., S.J.P., N.T., D.A.T., A.K.). Electronic address: 
Chen.john@mayo.edu.
(2)Neurology (J.J.C., E.P.F., S.J.P., N.T., D.A.T., A.K.); Laboratory Medicine 
and Pathology (E.P.F., S.J.P.); Center for MS and Autoimmune Neurology (E.P.F., 
S.J.P., A.K.), Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(3)Departments of Ophthalmology (J.J.C., N.C.S., K.D.C., D.A.T., S.J.).
(4)Neurology (J.J.C., E.P.F., S.J.P., N.T., D.A.T., A.K.).
(5)The Permanente Medical Group (M.T.B.), Kaiser Permanente-Northern California, 
Roseville, California, USA.
(6)Departments of Ophthalmology (J.J.C., N.C.S., K.D.C., D.A.T., S.J.); 
Neurology (J.J.C., E.P.F., S.J.P., N.T., D.A.T., A.K.).
(7)Neurology (J.J.C., E.P.F., S.J.P., N.T., D.A.T., A.K.); Center for MS and 
Autoimmune Neurology (E.P.F., S.J.P., A.K.), Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, 
USA; Department of Neurology, Cleveland Clinic (A.K.), Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(8)Departments of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Neuro-Ophthalmology, Mayo Clinic 
(E.R.E.), Jacksonville, Florida, USA.
(9)Departments of Ophthalmology (M.A.D.N.); Neurosurgery, Mayo Clinic 
(M.A.D.N.), Scottsdale, AZ.
(10)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University (E.S.S., E.S.V., A.D.H.), 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(11)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University (E.S.S., E.S.V., A.D.H.), 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA; Department of Ophthalmology, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine (A.D.H.), Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(12)Department of Ophthalmology, University of California Los Angeles (A.C.A., 
L.B.), Los Angeles, California, USA.
(13)Department of Neurology & Neurological Sciences, Stanford University 
(H.E.M.), Palo Alto, California, USA; Department of Ophthalmology, Stanford 
University (H.E.M., S.E.V.N., T.P.), Palo Alto, California, USA.
(14)Department of Ophthalmology, Stanford University (H.E.M., S.E.V.N., T.P.), 
Palo Alto, California, USA.
(15)Department of Ophthalmology, Stanford University (H.E.M., S.E.V.N., T.P.), 
Palo Alto, California, USA; Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Ramathibodi Hospital (T.P.), Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(16)Department of Ophthalmology (H.S.-K.), Neuro-Ophthalmology Division, Rabin 
Medical Center and Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Israel; 
Felsenstein Medical Research Center (H.S.-K.), Tel Aviv University, Israel.
(17)Department of Neurology, Rabin Medical Center, Sackler School of Medicine 
(I.L., A.W.-Y.), Tel Aviv University, Israel.
(18)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Auckland, New Zealand, and Vision 
Research Foundation (H.D.-M., S.I.), Auckland, New Zealand.
(19)Department of Neurology, The Walton Centre NHS Foundation Trust (S.H., 
M.F.), Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(20)Department of Quantitative Health Sciences, Mayo Clinic (D.H.), 
Jacksonville, Florida.
(21)Department of Neurology, University Hospital of Marseille (P.P., J.R., 
B.A.), Marseille, France; Aix-Marseille University, CRMBM UMR 7339, CNRS (P.P., 
J.R., B.A.), Marseille, France.
(22)Department of Neurology, Pitie-Salpetriere Hospital, APHP (C.P., S.S., 
E.M.), Paris, France; Centre de référence des Maladies Inflammatoires Rares du 
Cerveau et de la Moelle (MIRCEM) (C.P., S.S., E.M.); Department of Neurology, 
Adolphe de Rothschild Foundation Hospital (C.P., M.B.d.l.M., R.D.), Paris, 
France.
(23)Department of Neurology, Pitie-Salpetriere Hospital, APHP (C.P., S.S., 
E.M.), Paris, France; Centre de référence des Maladies Inflammatoires Rares du 
Cerveau et de la Moelle (MIRCEM) (C.P., S.S., E.M.).
(24)Department of Neurology, Adolphe de Rothschild Foundation Hospital (C.P., 
M.B.d.l.M., R.D.), Paris, France.
(25)Department of Neuro-Ophthalmology, Adolphe de Rothschild Foundation Hospital 
(C.V.), Paris, France.
(26)Department of Neurology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children (Y.H.), 
London, United Kingdom; Queen Square Multiple Sclerosis Centre, UCL Institute of 
Neurology, Faculty of Brain Sciences, University College London (Y.H.), London, 
United Kingdom.
(27)Centre de Référence des Maladies Inflammatoires Rares du Cerveau et de la 
Moelle (MIRCEM), Service de Neurologie, Sclérose en Plaques, Pathologies de la 
Myéline et Neuro-inflammation, Hôpital Neurologique Pierre Wertheimer, Hospices 
Civils de Lyon (J.P., R.M.), Lyon, France.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the effectiveness of plasma exchange (PLEX) for optic 
neuritis (ON).
METHODS: We conducted an international multicenter retrospective study 
evaluating the outcomes of ON following PLEX. Outcomes were compared to raw data 
from the Optic Neuritis Treatment Trial (ONTT) using a matched subset.
RESULTS: A total of 395 ON attack treated with PLEX from 317 patients were 
evaluated. The median age was 37 years (range 9-75), and 71% were female. Causes 
of ON included multiple sclerosis (108), myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein 
antibody-associated disease (MOGAD) (92), aquaporin-4-IgG-positive neuromyelitis 
optica spectrum disorder (AQP4+NMOSD) (75), seronegative-NMOSD (34), idiopathic 
(83), and other (3). Median time from onset of vision loss to PLEX was 2.6 weeks 
(interquartile range [IQR], 1.4-4.0). Median visual acuity (VA) at the time of 
PLEX was count fingers (IQR, 20/200-hand motion), and median final VA was 20/25 
(IQR, 20/20-20/60) with no differences among etiologies except MOGAD-ON, which 
had better outcomes. In 81 (20.5%) ON attacks, the final VA was 20/200 or worse. 
Patients with poor outcomes were older (P = .002), had worse VA at the time of 
PLEX (P < .001), and longer delay to PLEX (P < .001). In comparison with the 
ONTT subset with severe corticosteroid-unresponsive ON, a final VA of worse than 
20/40 occurred in 6 of 50 (12%) PLEX-treated ON vs 7 of 19 (37%) from the ONTT 
treated with intravenous methylprednisolone without PLEX (P = .04).
CONCLUSION: Most ON attacks improved with PLEX, and outcomes were better than 
attacks with similar severity in the ONTT. The presence of severe vision loss at 
nadir, older age, and longer delay to PLEX predicted a worse outcome whereas 
MOGAD-ON had a more favorable prognosis. NOTE: Publication of this article is 
sponsored by the American Ophthalmological Society.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajo.2023.02.013
PMCID: PMC10363193
PMID: 36822570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]