---
reference_id: "PMID:2163384"
title: Depressed light emission by symbiotic Vibrio fischeri of the sepiolid squid Euprymna scolopes.
authors:
- Boettcher KJ
- Ruby EG
journal: J Bacteriol
year: '1990'
doi: 10.1128/jb.172.7.3701-3706.1990
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Depressed light emission by symbiotic Vibrio fischeri of the sepiolid squid Euprymna scolopes.
**Authors:** Boettcher KJ, Ruby EG
**Journal:** J Bacteriol (1990)
**DOI:** [10.1128/jb.172.7.3701-3706.1990](https://doi.org/10.1128/jb.172.7.3701-3706.1990)

## Content

1. J Bacteriol. 1990 Jul;172(7):3701-6. doi: 10.1128/jb.172.7.3701-3706.1990.

Depressed light emission by symbiotic Vibrio fischeri of the sepiolid squid 
Euprymna scolopes.

Boettcher KJ(1), Ruby EG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles 90089-0371.

Bioluminescent marine bacteria of the species Vibrio fischeri are the specific 
light organ symbionts of the sepiolid squid Euprymna scolopes. Although they 
share morphological and physiological characteristics with other strains of V. 
fischeri, when cultured away from the light organ association the E. scolopes 
symbionts depress their maximal luminescence over 1,000-fold. The primary cause 
of this reduced luminescence is the underproduction by these bacteria of 
luciferase autoinducer, a molecule involved in the positive transcriptional 
regulation of the V. fischeri lux operon. Such an absence of visible light 
production outside of the symbiotic association has not been previously reported 
among light organ symbionts of this or any other species of luminous bacteria. 
Levels of luminescence approaching those of the E. scolopes bacteria in the 
intact association can be restored by the addition of exogenous autoinducer to 
bacteria in laboratory culture and are affected by the presence of cyclic AMP. 
We conclude that some condition(s) specific to the internal environment of the 
light organ is necessary for maximal autoinduction of luminescence in the 
symbionts of this squid-bacterial association.

DOI: 10.1128/jb.172.7.3701-3706.1990
PMCID: PMC213346
PMID: 2163384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]