---
reference_id: "PMID:34461240"
title: Renal Artery Reconstruction for Refractory Hypertension Caused by Congenital Renal Artery Deficiency.
authors:
- Dong M
- Pan D
- Li J
- An Y
- Dong R
- Zhang J
- Yang Z
- Lv B
- Shi X
journal: Ann Vasc Surg
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.avsg.2021.05.062
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Anastomosis, Surgical"
- Antihypertensive Agents/therapeutic use
- Blood Pressure/drug effects
- Female
- Humans
- "Hypertension, Renovascular/diagnostic imaging, etiology, physiopathology, surgery"
- "Renal Artery/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging, physiopathology, surgery"
- Treatment Outcome
- Vascular Grafting
- "Vascular Malformations/complications, diagnostic imaging, physiopathology, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Renal Artery Reconstruction for Refractory Hypertension Caused by Congenital Renal Artery Deficiency.
**Authors:** Dong M, Pan D, Li J, An Y, Dong R, Zhang J, Yang Z, Lv B, Shi X
**Journal:** Ann Vasc Surg (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.avsg.2021.05.062](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.avsg.2021.05.062)

## Content

1. Ann Vasc Surg. 2021 Nov;77:352.e1-352.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.avsg.2021.05.062.
Epub  2021 Aug 27.

Renal Artery Reconstruction for Refractory Hypertension Caused by Congenital 
Renal Artery Deficiency.

Dong M(1), Pan D(2), Li J(3), An Y(4), Dong R(3), Zhang J(4), Yang Z(2), Lv 
B(3), Shi X(5).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, Hebei, China.
(2)North China University of Science and Technology, Tangshan, Hebei, China.
(3)Department of Vascular Surgery, Hebei General Hospital, Shijiazhuang, Hebei, 
China.
(4)Hebei North University, Zhangjiakou, Hebei, China.
(5)Department of Vascular Surgery, Hebei General Hospital, Shijiazhuang, Hebei, 
China. Electronic address: Shixiaoming1999@126.com.

Renovascular hypertension is a common cause of secondary hypertension. According 
to the epidemiological survey, the prevalence of renovascular hypertension 
accounts for 1-5% of the population with hypertension. Most of the cases are 
associated with atherosclerosis and Fibromuscular Dysplasia (FMD). Owing to the 
lack of standard treatment, they will eventually develop into chronic kidney 
disease, which significantly affects the patient's quality of life. Hypertension 
is considered a prerequisite for renal artery surgery; renal function research 
is used to guide the treatment of unilateral lesions because endovascular 
intervention can only slightly improve hypertension and renal function. We 
advocate open surgery for patients with congenital dysplasia of renal vascular 
hypertension, in which the most common surgical operations are aortorenal artery 
bypass, renal artery endarterectomy, and renal artery replantation. This paper 
reports a rare case of renovascular hypertension. The patient was a 13-year-old 
female, and the operation was risky and complicated. He was diagnosed with a 
congenital absence of the right renal artery. The right renal function was 
recovered, and the blood pressure was well controlled after the Aorta-Right 
Renal Artery Bypass.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.avsg.2021.05.062
PMID: 34461240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]