---
reference_id: "PMID:32086278"
title: "Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms of Kidney Injury in 2,8-Dihydroxyadenine Nephropathy."
authors:
- Klinkhammer BM
- Djudjaj S
- Kunter U
- Palsson R
- Edvardsson VO
- Wiech T
- Thorsteinsdottir M
- Hardarson S
- Foresto-Neto O
- Mulay SR
- Moeller MJ
- Jahnen-Dechent W
- Floege J
- Anders HJ
- Boor P
journal: J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1681/ASN.2019080827
keywords:
- "Adenine/analogs & derivatives, physiology"
- "Adenine Phosphoribosyltransferase/deficiency, metabolism"
- Adult
- Animals
- Cohort Studies
- Diet
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- "Kidney Diseases/etiology, pathology"
- Male
- "Metabolism, Inborn Errors/etiology, metabolism, pathology"
- Mice
- Middle Aged
- "Urolithiasis/etiology, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms of Kidney Injury in 2,8-Dihydroxyadenine Nephropathy.
**Authors:** Klinkhammer BM, Djudjaj S, Kunter U, Palsson R, Edvardsson VO, Wiech T, Thorsteinsdottir M, Hardarson S, Foresto-Neto O, Mulay SR, Moeller MJ, Jahnen-Dechent W, Floege J, Anders HJ, Boor P
**Journal:** J Am Soc Nephrol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1681/ASN.2019080827](https://doi.org/10.1681/ASN.2019080827)

## Content

1. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2020 Apr;31(4):799-816. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2019080827. Epub
2020  Feb 21.

Cellular and Molecular Mechanisms of Kidney Injury in 2,8-Dihydroxyadenine
Nephropathy.

Klinkhammer BM(1), Djudjaj S(1), Kunter U(2), Palsson R(3)(4), Edvardsson
VO(4)(5), Wiech T(6), Thorsteinsdottir M(7), Hardarson S(8), Foresto-Neto O(9),
Mulay SR(9), Moeller MJ(2), Jahnen-Dechent W(10), Floege J(2), Anders HJ(9),
Boor P(11)(2)(12).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology.
(2)Division of Nephrology and Immunology.
(3)Division of Nephrology.
(4)Faculties of Medicine and.
(5)Children's Medical Center, and.
(6)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg,
Germany; and.
(7)Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(8)Department of Pathology Landspitali-The National University Hospital of
Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(9)Division of Nephrology, Klinikum der Universität, LMU München, Munich,
Germany.
(10)Biointerface Laboratory, Helmholtz Institute for Biomedical Engineering,
and.
(11)Institute of Pathology, pboor@ukaachen.de.
(12)Department of Electron Microscopy, RWTH University Hospital Aachen, Aachen,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Hereditary deficiency of adenine phosphoribosyltransferase causes
2,8-dihydroxyadenine (2,8-DHA) nephropathy, a rare condition characterized by
formation of 2,8-DHA crystals within renal tubules. Clinical relevance of rodent
models of 2,8-DHA crystal nephropathy induced by excessive adenine intake is
unknown.
METHODS: Using animal models and patient kidney biopsies, we assessed the
pathogenic sequelae of 2,8-DHA crystal-induced kidney damage. We also used
knockout mice to investigate the role of TNF receptors 1 and 2 (TNFR1 and
TNFR2), CD44, or alpha2-HS glycoprotein (AHSG), all of which are involved in the
pathogenesis of other types of crystal-induced nephropathies.
RESULTS: Adenine-enriched diet in mice induced 2,8-DHA nephropathy, leading to
progressive kidney disease, characterized by crystal deposits, tubular injury,
inflammation, and fibrosis. Kidney injury depended on crystal size. The smallest
crystals were endocytosed by tubular epithelial cells. Crystals of variable size
were excreted in urine. Large crystals obstructed whole tubules. Medium-sized
crystals induced a particular reparative process that we term extratubulation.
In this process, tubular cells, in coordination with macrophages, overgrew and
translocated crystals into the interstitium, restoring the tubular luminal
patency; this was followed by degradation of interstitial crystals by
granulomatous inflammation. Patients with adenine phosphoribosyltransferase
deficiency showed similar histopathological findings regarding crystal
morphology, crystal clearance, and renal injury. In mice, deletion of Tnfr1
significantly reduced tubular CD44 and annexin two expression, as well as
inflammation, thereby ameliorating the disease course. In contrast, genetic
deletion of Tnfr2, Cd44, or Ahsg had no effect on the manifestations of 2,8-DHA
nephropathy.
CONCLUSIONS: Rodent models of the cellular and molecular mechanisms of 2,8-DHA
nephropathy and crystal clearance have clinical relevance and offer insight into
potential future targets for therapeutic interventions.

Copyright © 2020 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.1681/ASN.2019080827
PMCID: PMC7191925
PMID: 32086278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
