---
reference_id: "PMID:30575890"
title: "Clinical, Radiologic, and Prognostic Features of Myelitis Associated With Myelin Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein Autoantibody."
authors:
- Dubey D
- Pittock SJ
- Krecke KN
- Morris PP
- Sechi E
- Zalewski NL
- Weinshenker BG
- Shosha E
- Lucchinetti CF
- Fryer JP
- Lopez-Chiriboga AS
- Chen JC
- Jitprapaikulsan J
- McKeon A
- Gadoth A
- Keegan BM
- Tillema JM
- Naddaf E
- Patterson MC
- Messacar K
- Tyler KL
- Flanagan EP
journal: JAMA Neurol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2018.4053
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Encephalomyelitis, Acute Disseminated/diagnosis, immunology"
- Female
- Humans
- Immunoglobulin G/immunology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Myelin-Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein/immunology
- "Myelitis, Transverse/diagnosis, immunology"
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/complications, diagnosis"
- "Neuromyelitis Optica/diagnosis, immunology"
- Prognosis
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical, Radiologic, and Prognostic Features of Myelitis Associated With Myelin Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein Autoantibody.
**Authors:** Dubey D, Pittock SJ, Krecke KN, Morris PP, Sechi E, Zalewski NL, Weinshenker BG, Shosha E, Lucchinetti CF, Fryer JP, Lopez-Chiriboga AS, Chen JC, Jitprapaikulsan J, McKeon A, Gadoth A, Keegan BM, Tillema JM, Naddaf E, Patterson MC, Messacar K, Tyler KL, Flanagan EP
**Journal:** JAMA Neurol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaneurol.2018.4053](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaneurol.2018.4053)

## Content

1. JAMA Neurol. 2019 Mar 1;76(3):301-309. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2018.4053.

Clinical, Radiologic, and Prognostic Features of Myelitis Associated With Myelin
Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein Autoantibody.

Dubey D(1)(2), Pittock SJ(1)(2), Krecke KN(3), Morris PP(3), Sechi E(1),
Zalewski NL(1), Weinshenker BG(1), Shosha E(1), Lucchinetti CF(1), Fryer JP(1),
Lopez-Chiriboga AS(1)(2), Chen JC(1)(4), Jitprapaikulsan J(2), McKeon A(1)(2),
Gadoth A(1), Keegan BM(1), Tillema JM(1), Naddaf E(1), Patterson MC(1), Messacar
K(5), Tyler KL(6), Flanagan EP(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester,
Minnesota.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota.
(3)Department of Radiology (Division of Neuroradiology), Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester,
Minnesota.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora.
(6)Department of Neurology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora.

IMPORTANCE: Recognizing the characteristics of myelin oligodendrocyte
glycoprotein autoantibody (MOG-IgG) myelitis is essential for early accurate
diagnosis and treatment.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the clinical, radiologic, and prognostic features of
MOG-IgG myelitis and compare with myelitis with aquaporin-4-IgG (AQP4-IgG) and
multiple sclerosis (MS).
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: We retrospectively identified 199
MOG-IgG-positive Mayo Clinic patients from January 1, 2000, through December 31,
2017, through our neuroimmunology laboratory. Fifty-four patients met inclusion
criteria of (1) clinical myelitis; (2) MOG-IgG positivity; and (3) medical
records available. We excluded 145 patients without documented myelitis.
Myelitis of AQP4-IgG (n = 46) and MS (n = 26) were used for comparison.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Outcome variables included modified Rankin score and
need for gait aid. A neuroradiologist analyzed spine magnetic resonance imaging
of patients with MOG-IgG and control patients blinded to diagnosis.
RESULTS: Of 54 included patients with MOG-IgG myelitis, the median age was 25
years (range, 3-73 years) and 24 were women (44%). Isolated transverse myelitis
was the initial manifestation in 29 patients (54%), and 10 (19%) were initially
diagnosed as having viral/postviral acute flaccid myelitis. Cerebrospinal
fluid-elevated oligoclonal bands occurred in 1 of 38 (3%). At final follow-up
(median, 24 months; range, 2-120 months), 32 patients (59%) had developed 1 or
more relapses of optic neuritis (n = 31); transverse myelitis (n = 7); or acute
disseminated encephalomyelitis (n = 1). Clinical features favoring MOG-IgG
myelitis vs AQP4-IgG or MS myelitis included prodromal symptoms and concurrent
acute disseminated encephalomyelitis. Magnetic resonance imaging features
favoring MOG-IgG over AQP4-IgG or MS myelitis were T2-signal abnormality
confined to gray matter (sagittal line and axial H sign) and lack of
enhancement. Longitudinally extensive T2 lesions were of similar frequency in
MOG-IgG and AQP4-IgG myelitis (37 of 47 [79%] vs 28 of 34 [82%]; P = .52) but
not found in MS. Multiple spinal cord lesions and conus involvement were more
frequent with MOG-IgG than AQP4-IgG but not different from MS. Wheelchair
dependence at myelitis nadir occurred in one-third of patients with MOG-IgG and
AQP4-IgG but never with MS, although patients with MOG-IgG myelitis recovered
better than those with AQP4-IgG.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Myelitis is an early manifestation of MOG-IgG-related
disease and may have a clinical phenotype of acute flaccid myelitis. We
identified a variety of clinical and magnetic resonance imaging features that
may help clinicians identify those at risk in whom MOG-IgG should be tested.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2018.4053
PMCID: PMC6440233
PMID: 30575890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Pittock and
Mayo Clinic have a financial interest in patents #12/678350 (filed 2010) and
#12/573942 (filed 2008) that relate to functional aquaporin-4
(AQP4)/neuromyelitis optica (NMO)–IgG assays and NMO-IgG as a cancer marker; Dr
Pittock has provided consultation to Alexion Pharmaceuticals, Medimmune, and
Chugai Pharma USA but has received no personal fees or personal compensation for
these consulting activities. All compensation for consulting activities is paid
directly to Mayo Clinic. Dr Pittock has received a research grant from Alexion
Pharmaceuticals for an investigator-initiated study as well as support from the
National Institutes of Health (RO1 NS065829-01) and the Guthy Jackson Charitable
Foundation for NMO research. Dr Weinshenker receives royalties from RSR Ltd,
Oxford University, Hospices Civil de Lyon, and MVZ Labor PD Volkmann und
Kollegen for a patent of NMO-IgG as a diagnostic test for NMO and related
disorders; serves as a member of an adjudication committee for clinical trials
in NMO being conducted by MedImmune and Alexion pharmaceutical companies; is a
consultant for Caladrius Biosciences and Brainstorm Therapeutics regarding
potential clinical trials for NMO; and serves as a member of a data safety
monitoring committee for clinical trials conducted by Novartis. Dr Lucchinetti
receives grant support from Novartis, Sanofi-Synthelabo, Biogen, Mallinkrodt,
and Alexion. Dr McKeon has received research support from MedImmune and
Euroimmun. Dr Keegan has had research funded by Biogen and receives publishing
royalties for Common Pitfalls in Multiple Sclerosis and CNS Demyelinating
Diseases. Dr Tillema receives grant support from the National Institutes of
Health (NCATS; KL2 TR000136). Dr Patterson has research funded by Orphazyme; has
received grant support from National Institutes of Health (U54NS065768);
receives royalties from Elsevier (Encyclopedia of the Neurological Sciences),
Up-To-Date (Section Editor, Pediatric Neurology), and Sage Publishing (Journal
of Child Neurology and Child Neurology Open); receives a stipend as
editor-in-chief of the Journal of Child Neurology and Child Neurology Open and
travel expenses as editor of the Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease and
Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease Reports; has served as a member of data
safety monitoring committees for clinical trials conducted by Novartis and
Amicus; and has served as a consultant for Actelion, Alexion, Orphazyme, Shire,
and Vtesse. Dr Messacar receives grant support from the National Institutes of
Health (1K23AI128069-01). Dr Tyler receives grant support from the National
Institutes of Health (R01NS101208). Dr Flanagan is a site principal investigator
in a randomized placebo-controlled clinical trial of inebilizumab in
neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorders funded by MedImmune/Viela Bio.
