---
reference_id: "PMID:20123959"
title: Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis in APECED or thymoma patients correlates with autoimmunity to Th17-associated cytokines.
authors:
- Kisand K
- Bøe Wolff AS
- Podkrajsek KT
- Tserel L
- Link M
- Kisand KV
- Ersvaer E
- Perheentupa J
- Erichsen MM
- Bratanic N
- Meloni A
- Cetani F
- Perniola R
- Ergun-Longmire B
- Maclaren N
- Krohn KJ
- Pura M
- Schalke B
- Ströbel P
- Leite MI
- Battelino T
- Husebye ES
- Peterson P
- Willcox N
- Meager A
journal: J Exp Med
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1084/jem.20091669
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Neutralizing/immunology"
- "Arthritis, Rheumatoid/blood, immunology"
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- Autoimmunity
- "Candidiasis, Chronic Mucocutaneous/immunology"
- Cell Differentiation
- Humans
- "Interleukin-17/antagonists & inhibitors, immunology, metabolism"
- "Interleukins/antagonists & inhibitors, immunology, metabolism"
- "Lupus Erythematosus, Systemic/blood, immunology"
- Mutation
- "Polyendocrinopathies, Autoimmune/immunology"
- "Psoriasis/blood, immunology"
- Self Tolerance
- T-Lymphocyte Subsets/immunology
- Thymoma/immunology
- Thymus Neoplasms/immunology
- Interleukin-22
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis in APECED or thymoma patients correlates with autoimmunity to Th17-associated cytokines.
**Authors:** Kisand K, Bøe Wolff AS, Podkrajsek KT, Tserel L, Link M, Kisand KV, Ersvaer E, Perheentupa J, Erichsen MM, Bratanic N, Meloni A, Cetani F, Perniola R, Ergun-Longmire B, Maclaren N, Krohn KJ, Pura M, Schalke B, Ströbel P, Leite MI, Battelino T, Husebye ES, Peterson P, Willcox N, Meager A
**Journal:** J Exp Med (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1084/jem.20091669](https://doi.org/10.1084/jem.20091669)

## Content

1. J Exp Med. 2010 Feb 15;207(2):299-308. doi: 10.1084/jem.20091669. Epub 2010
Feb  1.

Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis in APECED or thymoma patients correlates with 
autoimmunity to Th17-associated cytokines.

Kisand K(1), Bøe Wolff AS, Podkrajsek KT, Tserel L, Link M, Kisand KV, Ersvaer 
E, Perheentupa J, Erichsen MM, Bratanic N, Meloni A, Cetani F, Perniola R, 
Ergun-Longmire B, Maclaren N, Krohn KJ, Pura M, Schalke B, Ströbel P, Leite MI, 
Battelino T, Husebye ES, Peterson P, Willcox N, Meager A.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Pathology Group, Institute of General and Molecular Pathology, 
University of Tartu, 50411 Tartu, Estonia. kai.kisand@ut.ee

Comment in
    J Exp Med. 2010 Feb 15;207(2):264-5. doi: 10.1084/jem.2072iti3.

Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (CMC) is frequently associated with T cell 
immunodeficiencies. Specifically, the proinflammatory IL-17A-producing Th17 
subset is implicated in protection against fungi at epithelial surfaces. In 
autoimmune polyendocrinopathy candidiasis ectodermal dystrophy (APECED, or 
autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome 1), CMC is often the first sign, but the 
underlying immunodeficiency is a long-standing puzzle. In contrast, the 
subsequent endocrine features are clearly autoimmune, resulting from defects in 
thymic self-tolerance induction caused by mutations in the autoimmune regulator 
(AIRE). We report severely reduced IL-17F and IL-22 responses to both Candida 
albicans antigens and polyclonal stimulation in APECED patients with CMC. 
Surprisingly, these reductions are strongly associated with neutralizing 
autoantibodies to IL-17F and IL-22, whereas responses were normal and 
autoantibodies infrequent in APECED patients without CMC. Our multicenter survey 
revealed neutralizing autoantibodies against IL-17A (41%), IL-17F (75%), and/ or 
IL-22 (91%) in >150 APECED patients, especially those with CMC. We independently 
found autoantibodies against these Th17-produced cytokines in rare thymoma 
patients with CMC. The autoantibodies preceded the CMC in all informative cases. 
We conclude that IL-22 and IL-17F are key natural defenders against CMC and that 
the immunodeficiency underlying CMC in both patient groups has an autoimmune 
basis.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.20091669
PMCID: PMC2822605
PMID: 20123959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]