---
reference_id: "PMID:23322510"
title: What affects the quality of life in autoimmune Addison's disease?
authors:
- Meyer G
- Hackemann A
- Penna-Martinez M
- Badenhoop K
journal: Horm Metab Res
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1331766
content_type: abstract_only
---

# What affects the quality of life in autoimmune Addison's disease?
**Authors:** Meyer G, Hackemann A, Penna-Martinez M, Badenhoop K
**Journal:** Horm Metab Res (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0032-1331766](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0032-1331766)

## Content

1. Horm Metab Res. 2013 Feb;45(2):92-5. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1331766. Epub 2013
Jan  15.

What affects the quality of life in autoimmune Addison's disease?

Meyer G(1), Hackemann A, Penna-Martinez M, Badenhoop K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Internal Medicine 1, University 
Hospital Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. Gesine.Meyer@kgu.de

INTRODUCTION: Several studies have shown a reduced quality of life in patients 
with Addison's disease, but little is known about the potential influences.
METHODS: We determined the quality of life in 200 patients with Addison's 
disease using an Addison's disease-specific quality-of-life questionnaire. Data 
about first symptoms, time to diagnosis and current medication were collected by 
questionnaires.
RESULTS: With increasing latency between first symptoms and diagnosis of adrenal 
insufficiency, the quality of life decreased in highly significant manner 
(p<0.001). Age at manifestation correlated negatively with quality of life 
(p=0.01). Significantly lower scores were observed in females versus males (141 
vs. 159, p<0.001). Quality of life decreased significantly with increasing 
autoimmune comorbidity (p=0.01). Coeliac disease (p=0.05), atrophic gastritis 
(p=0.01) and primary ovarian failure (p=0.01) were highly correlated with 
reduced scores.
CONCLUSIONS: Quality of life was significantly lower in female patients and in 
those with manifestation at older ages. With more autoimmune comorbidities, the 
quality of life scores dropped. The most important factor, however, was latency 
between first symptoms and diagnosis that affected patients' quality of life 
even years after manifestation of the disease. These results confirm and extend 
previous observations and emphasize the importance of a timely diagnosis. 
Therefore, medical awareness for this rare but easily treatable disorder needs 
to be sharpened.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0032-1331766
PMID: 23322510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]