---
reference_id: "PMID:40601774"
title: Ritscher-Schinzel syndrome can be characterized as an endosomal recyclinopathy.
authors:
- Kato K
- Nishio Y
- McMillan KJ
- Al-Maraghi A
- Kroes HY
- Abdel-Hamid MS
- Jones E
- Shaw S
- Yoshida A
- Otsuji S
- Murofushi Y
- Aamer W
- Bhat AA
- AlRayahi J
- Al-Shabeeb Akil AS
- Aliyev E
- van Binsbergen E
- Janssen EJ
- Mehrin KM
- Oishi H
- Kobayashi R
- Horii T
- Hatada I
- Saito A
- Hattori M
- Kawano Y
- Lewis PA
- Heesom KJ
- Takarada T
- Sawamoto K
- Matsushita M
- Ogi T
- Butkovic R
- Danson C
- Wilkinson KA
- Fakhro KA
- Zaki MS
- Saitoh S
- Cullen PJ
journal: Sci Transl Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.adt2426
keywords:
- "Endosomes/metabolism, pathology"
- Humans
- Animals
- Mice
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- Mutation/genetics
- "Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics, pathology"
- Phenotype
- Sorting Nexins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ritscher-Schinzel syndrome can be characterized as an endosomal recyclinopathy.
**Authors:** Kato K, Nishio Y, McMillan KJ, Al-Maraghi A, Kroes HY, Abdel-Hamid MS, Jones E, Shaw S, Yoshida A, Otsuji S, Murofushi Y, Aamer W, Bhat AA, AlRayahi J, Al-Shabeeb Akil AS, Aliyev E, van Binsbergen E, Janssen EJ, Mehrin KM, Oishi H, Kobayashi R, Horii T, Hatada I, Saito A, Hattori M, Kawano Y, Lewis PA, Heesom KJ, Takarada T, Sawamoto K, Matsushita M, Ogi T, Butkovic R, Danson C, Wilkinson KA, Fakhro KA, Zaki MS, Saitoh S, Cullen PJ
**Journal:** Sci Transl Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1126/scitranslmed.adt2426](https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.adt2426)

## Content

1. Sci Transl Med. 2025 Jul 2;17(805):eadt2426. doi:
10.1126/scitranslmed.adt2426.  Epub 2025 Jul 2.

Ritscher-Schinzel syndrome can be characterized as an endosomal recyclinopathy.

Kato K(1)(2), Nishio Y(2)(3)(4)(5), McMillan KJ(1)(6), Al-Maraghi A(7), Kroes 
HY(8), Abdel-Hamid MS(9), Jones E(1), Shaw S(1), Yoshida A(2), Otsuji S(2)(10), 
Murofushi Y(2), Aamer W(7), Bhat AA(11), AlRayahi J(12), Al-Shabeeb Akil AS(11), 
Aliyev E(7), van Binsbergen E(8), Janssen EJ(13), Mehrin KM(14), Oishi H(14), 
Kobayashi R(15)(16), Horii T(16), Hatada I(16)(17), Saito A(18)(19), Hattori 
M(20), Kawano Y(21), Lewis PA(22), Heesom KJ(22), Takarada T(23), Sawamoto 
K(24), Matsushita M(25), Ogi T(4), Butkovic R(1), Danson C(1), Wilkinson KA(26), 
Fakhro KA(7)(27)(28), Zaki MS(29), Saitoh S(2), Cullen PJ(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Biochemistry, Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Bristol, 
Bristol BS8 1TD, UK.
(2)Department of Pediatrics and Neonatology, Nagoya City University Graduate 
School of Medical Sciences and Medical School, Nagoya, 467-8601, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Nagoya, 466-8550, Japan.
(4)Department of Genetics, Research Institute of Environmental Medicine, Nagoya 
University, Nagoya, 464-0805, Japan.
(5)Medical Genomics Center, Nagoya University Hospital, Nagoya, 466-8550, Japan.
(6)Department of Biochemistry, Cell and Systems Biology, ISMIB, University of 
Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3BX, UK.
(7)Department of Human Genetics, Sidra Medicine, 26999, Doha, Qatar.
(8)Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, 3584 CX Utrecht, 
Netherlands.
(9)Medical Molecular Genetics Department, Human Genetics and Genome Research 
Institute, National Research Centre, Cairo, 12622, Egypt.
(10)Department of Pediatric Internal Medicine and Clinical Genetics, Aichi 
Developmental Disability Center Central Hospital, Kasugai, 480-0392, Japan.
(11)Precision Genomics and Translational Omics Lab, Metabolic and Mendelian 
Disorders Translational Research Program, Sidra Medicine, Doha, 26999, Qatar.
(12)Department of Pediatric Radiology, Sidra Medicine, Doha, 26999, Qatar.
(13)Department of Pediatrics, University Medical Centre Maastricht, MosaKids 
Children's Hospital, Maastricht, 6229 HX, Netherlands.
(14)Department of Comparative and Experimental Medicine, Nagoya City University 
Graduate School of Medical Sciences and Medical School, Nagoya, 467-8602, Japan.
(15)Department of Veterinary Medicine, School of Veterinary Medicine, Rakuno 
Gakuen University, Ebetsu, 069-0836, Japan.
(16)Laboratory of Genome Science, Biosignal Genome Resource Center, Institute 
for Molecular and Cellular Regulation, Gunma University, Gunma, 371-8511, Japan.
(17)Viral Vector Core, Gunma University Initiative for Advanced Research (GIAR), 
Gunma, 371-8512, Japan.
(18)Department of Applied Molecular Medicine, Kidney Research Center, Niigata 
University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata, 951-8510, 
Japan.
(19)Division of Clinical Nephrology and Rheumatology, Kidney Research Center, 
Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata City, 
Niigata, 951-8510, Japan.
(20)Department of Biomedical Science, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Nagoya City University, Nagoya, 467-8603, Japan.
(21)Department of Pediatrics, Toyota Memorial Hospital, Toyota, 471-8513, Japan.
(22)Bristol Proteomic Facility, School of Biochemistry, University of Bristol, 
Bristol BS8 1TD, UK.
(23)Department of Regenerative Science, Okayama University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, 700-8558, Japan.
(24)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Neurobiology, Institute of 
Brain Science, Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 
Nagoya, 467-8602, Japan.
(25)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Nagoya University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Nagoya, 466-8550, Japan.
(26)School of Physiology, Pharmacology and Neuroscience, University of Bristol, 
Bristol BS8 1TD, UK.
(27)Department of Genomic Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical College, Doha, 24144, 
Qatar.
(28)College of Health and Life Sciences, Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Doha, 
34110, Qatar.
(29)Clinical Genetics Department, Human Genetics and Genome Research Institute, 
National Research Centre, Cairo, 12622, Egypt.

Ritscher-Schinzel syndrome (RSS) is a congenital malformation syndrome 
characterized by cerebellar, cardiac, and craniofacial malformations and 
phenotypes associated with liver, skeletal, and kidney dysfunction. The genetic 
cause of RSS remains to be fully defined, and limited information is available 
regarding the root cause of the multiple tissue phenotypes. Causative mutations 
in the Commander multiprotein assembly are an emerging feature of this syndrome. 
Commander organizes the sorting nexin-17 (SNX17)-dependent recycling of hundreds 
of integral membrane proteins through the endosomal network. Here, we identify 
previously unrecognized cohorts of patients with RSS that we genetically and 
clinically analyzed to identify causative genes in the copper metabolic murr1 
domain-containing (COMMD) proteins COMMD4, COMMD9, and coiled-coil domain 
containing 93 (CCDC93) subunits of the Commander complex. Using interactome 
analysis, we determined that these mutations disrupted Commander assembly and, 
through cell surface proteomics, that this reduces tissue-specific presentation 
of cell surface integral membrane proteins essential for kidney, bone, and brain 
development. We established that these integral proteins contained ΦxNPxY/F or 
ΦxNxxY/F sorting motifs in their cytoplasmic-facing domains (where Φ is a 
hydrophobic residue and x is any residue) that are recognized by SNX17 to drive 
their Commander-dependent endosomal recycling. Last, through generation of mouse 
models of RSS, we show replication of RSS-associated clinical phenotypes 
including proteinuria, skeletal malformation, and neurological impairment. Our 
data establish RSS as a "recyclinopathy" that arises from a dysfunction in the 
Commander endosomal recycling pathway.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.adt2426
PMID: 40601774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]