---
reference_id: "PMID:34519872"
title: "Neonatal hydrocephalus: an atypical presentation of malignant infantile osteopetrosis."
authors:
- Lee A
- Cortez S
- Yang P
- Aum D
- Singh P
- Gooch C
- Smyth M
journal: Childs Nerv Syst
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00381-021-05345-y
keywords:
- Female
- Humans
- "Hydrocephalus/diagnostic imaging, etiology, surgery"
- Hyperostosis
- Infant
- "Osteopetrosis/complications, diagnostic imaging"
- Skull
- Ventriculoperitoneal Shunt
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neonatal hydrocephalus: an atypical presentation of malignant infantile osteopetrosis.
**Authors:** Lee A, Cortez S, Yang P, Aum D, Singh P, Gooch C, Smyth M
**Journal:** Childs Nerv Syst (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00381-021-05345-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00381-021-05345-y)

## Content

1. Childs Nerv Syst. 2021 Dec;37(12):3695-3703. doi: 10.1007/s00381-021-05345-y. 
Epub 2021 Sep 14.

Neonatal hydrocephalus: an atypical presentation of malignant infantile 
osteopetrosis.

Lee A(1)(2), Cortez S(3), Yang P(4), Aum D(4), Singh P(5), Gooch C(5), Smyth 
M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, 
Washington University in St Louis, Saint Louis, MO, USA. leeangela@wustl.edu.
(2)Saint Louis Children's Hospital, One Children's Place, MO, 63110, Saint 
Louis, USA. leeangela@wustl.edu.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, 
Washington University in St Louis, , Saint Louis, MO, USA.
(4)Department of Neurological Surgery and Pediatrics, St. Louis Children's 
Hospital, Washington University in St. Louis, Saint Louis, MO, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, 
Washington University in St Louis, Saint Louis, MO, USA.

PURPOSE: Autosomal recessive osteopetrosis has a variable presentation, most 
commonly including failure to thrive, hypocalcemia, seizures, 
hepatosplenomegaly, hydrocephalus, vision or hearing loss, and cytopenias. 
Multiple symptoms are usually seen at presentation. The variability of 
presentation often delays diagnosis and subsequent treatment. Here, we present a 
case of an infant with this condition who initially presented with 
triventricular hydrocephalus with Chiari I malformation. This alone is not a 
common presentation of this disease, and we present this case to highlight 
autosomal recessive osteopetrosis as a potential diagnosis in infants presenting 
with hydrocephalus and discuss the other associated symptoms, management, and 
prognosis of this condition.
CASE REPORT: The patient was a full-term infant with a routine newborn period. 
At 6 months, the infant had macrocephaly and frontal bossing with a bulging 
fontanelle. She was found to have hydrocephalus with moderate ventriculomegaly 
involving the third and lateral ventricles with an associated Chiari 1 
malformation. The infant was asymptomatic at the time. The infant was promptly 
referred to neurosurgery and underwent an uncomplicated ventriculoperitoneal 
shunt placement. Post-operative X-rays showed increased density of the skull 
with other bone changes suggestive of autosomal recessive osteopetrosis. 
Subsequent lab work and imaging studies were consistent with this condition. The 
diagnosis was confirmed by genetic testing, and the patient has undergone 
treatment with hematopoietic stem cell transplant.
CONCLUSION: Hydrocephalus is a common feature of this condition, typically seen 
in conjunction with other systemic symptoms and laboratory findings. Our patient 
had a limited initial presentation of triventricular hydrocephalus with Chiari I 
malformation and was otherwise clinically asymptomatic. There is limited 
literature of such a presentation, and we highlight this case to increase 
awareness, as timely diagnosis of these patients is critical for treatment and 
future outcomes.

© 2021. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, 
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00381-021-05345-y
PMID: 34519872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]