---
reference_id: "PMID:35286254"
title: Structural basis of dynamic P5CS filaments.
authors:
- Zhong J
- Guo CJ
- Zhou X
- Chang CC
- Yin B
- Zhang T
- Hu HH
- Lu GM
- Liu JL
journal: Elife
year: '2022'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.76107
keywords:
- Cryoelectron Microscopy
- Cytoskeleton
- Mutation
- Ornithine-Oxo-Acid Transaminase/genetics
- Proline
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Structural basis of dynamic P5CS filaments.
**Authors:** Zhong J, Guo CJ, Zhou X, Chang CC, Yin B, Zhang T, Hu HH, Lu GM, Liu JL
**Journal:** Elife (2022)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.76107](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.76107)

## Content

1. Elife. 2022 Mar 14;11:e76107. doi: 10.7554/eLife.76107.

Structural basis of dynamic P5CS filaments.

Zhong J(#)(1), Guo CJ(#)(1), Zhou X(#)(1), Chang CC(1), Yin B(1), Zhang T(1), Hu
HH(1), Lu GM(1), Liu JL(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai,
China.
(#)Contributed equally

The bifunctional enzyme Δ1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthase (P5CS) is vital to
the synthesis of proline and ornithine, playing an essential role in human
health and agriculture. Pathogenic mutations in the P5CS gene (ALDH18A1) lead to
neurocutaneous syndrome and skin relaxation connective tissue disease in humans,
and P5CS deficiency seriously damages the ability to resist adversity in plants.
We have recently found that P5CS forms cytoophidia in vivo and filaments in
vitro. However, it is difficult to appreciate the function of P5CS filamentation
without precise structures. Using cryo-electron microscopy, here we solve the
structures of Drosophila full-length P5CS in three states at resolution from 3.1
to 4.3 Å. We observe distinct ligand-binding states and conformational changes
for the GK and GPR domains, respectively. Divergent helical filaments are
assembled by P5CS tetramers and stabilized by multiple interfaces. Point
mutations disturbing those interfaces prevent P5CS filamentation and greatly
reduce the enzymatic activity. Our findings reveal that filamentation is crucial
for the coordination between the GK and GPR domains, providing a structural
basis for the catalytic function of P5CS filaments.

© 2022, Zhong et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.76107
PMCID: PMC8963878
PMID: 35286254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: JZ, CG, XZ, CC, BY, TZ, HH, GL, JL No competing
interests declared
