---
reference_id: PMID:32954065
title: "CKD-Associated Pruritus: New Insights Into Diagnosis, Pathogenesis, and Management."
authors:
- Verduzco HA
- Shirazian S
journal: Kidney Int Rep
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ekir.2020.04.027
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CKD-Associated Pruritus: New Insights Into Diagnosis, Pathogenesis, and Management.
**Authors:** Verduzco HA, Shirazian S
**Journal:** Kidney Int Rep (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ekir.2020.04.027](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ekir.2020.04.027)

## Content

1. Kidney Int Rep. 2020 May 8;5(9):1387-1402. doi: 10.1016/j.ekir.2020.04.027. 
eCollection 2020 Sep.

CKD-Associated Pruritus: New Insights Into Diagnosis, Pathogenesis, and 
Management.

Verduzco HA(1), Shirazian S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Columbia University College 
of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York, USA.

Chronic kidney disease-associated pruritus (CKD-aP) is a common, troubling and 
in some cases debilitating problem for patients with CKD and end-stage renal 
disease. Despite a prevalence rate of approximately 20% in CKD and 40% in 
end-stage renal disease, and a clear association with poorer psychosocial and 
medical outcomes, this condition is often underreported by patients and 
overlooked by health care providers. This is likely due, in part, to uncertainty 
regarding its pathogenesis and treatment. Most commonly, CKD-aP is attributed to 
toxin build-up, peripheral neuropathy, immune system dysregulation, or opioid 
dysregulation. Prior treatment studies of CKD-aP have targeted these potential 
etiologies but have been limited by noncontrolled design, small sample size, and 
non-uniform definitions of CKD-aP. Recently, several large, randomized 
controlled trials targeting opioid dysregulation have yielded promising results. 
These trials have spurred new hope for understanding and treating this 
condition.

© 2020 International Society of Nephrology. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ekir.2020.04.027
PMCID: PMC7486142
PMID: 32954065