---
reference_id: "PMID:19471313"
title: WNT10A missense mutation associated with a complete odonto-onycho-dermal dysplasia syndrome.
authors:
- Nawaz S
- Klar J
- Wajid M
- Aslam M
- Tariq M
- Schuster J
- Baig SM
- Dahl N
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.81
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Base Sequence
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/complications, genetics"
- Family
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Pedigree
- "Protein Structure, Secondary"
- Syndrome
- "Wnt Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# WNT10A missense mutation associated with a complete odonto-onycho-dermal dysplasia syndrome.
**Authors:** Nawaz S, Klar J, Wajid M, Aslam M, Tariq M, Schuster J, Baig SM, Dahl N
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2009.81](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2009.81)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2009 Dec;17(12):1600-5. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.81. Epub 2009 
May 27.

WNT10A missense mutation associated with a complete odonto-onycho-dermal 
dysplasia syndrome.

Nawaz S(1), Klar J, Wajid M, Aslam M, Tariq M, Schuster J, Baig SM, Dahl N.

Author information:
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Health Biotechnology Division, National 
Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering, Faisalabad, Pakistan.

Wnt signalling is one of a few pathways that are crucial for controlling genetic 
programs during embryonic development as well as in adult tissues. WNT10A is 
expressed in the skin and epidermis and it has shown to be critical for the 
development of ectodermal appendages. A nonsense mutation in WNT10A was recently 
identified in odonto-onycho-dermal dysplasia (OODD; MIM 257980), a rare syndrome 
characterised by severe hypodontia, nail dystrophy, smooth tongue, dry skin, 
keratoderma and hyperhydrosis of palms and soles. We identified a large 
consanguineous Pakistani pedigree comprising six individuals affected by a 
complete OODD syndrome. Autozygosity mapping using SNP array analysis showed 
that the affected individuals are homozygous for the WNT10A gene region. 
Subsequent mutation screening showed a homozygous c.392C>T transition in exon 3 
of WNT10A, which predicts a p.A131V substitution in a conserved alpha-helix 
domain. We report here on the first inherited missense mutation in WNT10A with 
associated ectodermal features.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.81
PMCID: PMC2987016
PMID: 19471313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]