---
reference_id: "PMID:29990938"
title: "A meta-analysis of the distribution, sources and health risks of arsenic-contaminated groundwater in Pakistan."
authors:
- Shahid M
- Niazi NK
- Dumat C
- Naidu R
- Khalid S
- Rahman MM
- Bibi I
journal: Environ Pollut
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2018.06.083
keywords:
- Agriculture
- Arsenic/analysis
- Arsenic Poisoning/epidemiology
- Drinking Water/analysis
- Drug Contamination
- "Environmental Exposure/statistics & numerical data"
- Environmental Monitoring
- Europe
- "Groundwater/analysis, chemistry"
- Humans
- "Hymecromone/analogs & derivatives"
- Pakistan/epidemiology
- Risk Assessment
- "Water Pollutants, Chemical/analysis"
- Water Pollution/analysis
- "Water Pollution, Chemical/statistics & numerical data"
- World Health Organization
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A meta-analysis of the distribution, sources and health risks of arsenic-contaminated groundwater in Pakistan.
**Authors:** Shahid M, Niazi NK, Dumat C, Naidu R, Khalid S, Rahman MM, Bibi I
**Journal:** Environ Pollut (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.envpol.2018.06.083](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envpol.2018.06.083)

## Content

1. Environ Pollut. 2018 Nov;242(Pt A):307-319. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2018.06.083.
 Epub 2018 Jun 28.

A meta-analysis of the distribution, sources and health risks of
arsenic-contaminated groundwater in Pakistan.

Shahid M(1), Niazi NK(2), Dumat C(3), Naidu R(4), Khalid S(5), Rahman MM(4),
Bibi I(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Sciences, COMSATS University Islamabad, Vehari
Campus, 61100, Vehari, Pakistan. Electronic address: shahidzeeshan@gmail.com.
(2)Institute of Soil and Environmental Sciences, University of Agriculture
Faisalabad, Faisalabad 38040, Pakistan; MARUM and Department of Geosciences,
University of Bremen, Bremen D, 28359, Germany; Southern Cross GeoScience,
Southern Cross University, Lismore 2480, NSW, Australia. Electronic address:
nabeelkniazi@gmail.com.
(3)Centre d'Etude et de Recherche Travail Organisation Pouvoir (CERTOP),
UMR5044, Université J. Jaurès - Toulouse II, 5 allée Antonio Machado, 31058
Toulouse Cedex 9, France.
(4)Global Centre for Environmental Remediation (GCER), Faculty of Science, The
University of Newcastle, University Drive, Callaghan, NSW 2308, Australia;
Cooperative Research Centre for Contamination Assessment and Remediation of the
Environment (CRC CARE), The University of Newcastle, University Drive,
Callaghan, NSW 2308, Australia.
(5)Department of Environmental Sciences, COMSATS University Islamabad, Vehari
Campus, 61100, Vehari, Pakistan.
(6)Institute of Soil and Environmental Sciences, University of Agriculture
Faisalabad, Faisalabad 38040, Pakistan; MARUM and Department of Geosciences,
University of Bremen, Bremen D, 28359, Germany.

Globally, millions of people who rely on groundwater for potable purposes and
agriculture have been inadvertently exposed to toxic arsenic (As) because of its
natural occurrence in groundwater in several countries of Asia, Europe and
America. While the presence of As in groundwater and its impacts on human health
have been documented in many countries, there is little information on As
contamination in Pakistan. This review highlights, for the first time, the
extent and severity of As-induced problems in Pakistan based on relevant
published papers; discusses possible sources of As contamination of aquifers;
and estimates As-induced potential health hazards in the country in relation to
global data. Data from 43 studies (>9882 groundwater samples) were used to
describe As variability in groundwater of Pakistan and for comparison with
global data. The mean groundwater As content reported in these studies was
120 μg/L (range: 0.1-2090 μg/L; SD: ±307). About 73% of the values for mean As
contents in the 43 studies were higher than the World Health Organization (WHO)
permissible limit (10 μg/L) for drinking water, while 41% were higher than the
permissible limit of As in Pakistan (50 μg/L). It was observed that groundwater
samples in some areas of Punjab and Sindh provinces contained high As
concentrations which were almost equal to concentrations reported in the most
contaminated areas of the world. We predicted that the mean values of ADD, HQ
and CR were 4.4 μg kg-1day-1 (range: 0-77 μg kg-1day-1), 14.7 (range: 0-256) and
0.0029 (range: 0-0.0512), respectively, based on mean As concentrations reported
in Pakistan. In addition, this article proposes some integrated sustainable
solutions and future perspectives keeping in view the regional and global
context, as well as the on-ground reality of the population drinking
As-contaminated water, planning issues, awareness among civil society and role
of the government bodies. Based on available data, it is predicted that almost
47 million people in Pakistan are residing in areas where more than 50% of
groundwater wells contain As concentrations above the WHO recommended limit of
As in drinking water.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envpol.2018.06.083
PMID: 29990938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
