---
reference_id: "PMID:25454609"
title: Effect of BRCA Mutations on Metastatic Relapse and Cause-specific Survival After Radical Treatment for Localised Prostate Cancer.
authors:
- Castro E
- Goh C
- Leongamornlert D
- Saunders E
- Tymrakiewicz M
- Dadaev T
- Govindasami K
- Guy M
- Ellis S
- Frost D
- Bancroft E
- Cole T
- Tischkowitz M
- Kennedy MJ
- Eason J
- Brewer C
- Evans DG
- Davidson R
- Eccles D
- Porteous ME
- Douglas F
- Adlard J
- Donaldson A
- Antoniou AC
- Kote-Jarai Z
- Easton DF
- Olmos D
- Eeles R
journal: Eur Urol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2014.10.022
keywords:
- BRCA1 Protein/genetics
- BRCA2 Protein/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Disease-Free Survival
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Humans
- Kallikreins/blood
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Multivariate Analysis
- Neoplasm Metastasis
- Phenotype
- Proportional Hazards Models
- Prostate-Specific Antigen/blood
- "Prostatectomy/adverse effects, mortality"
- "Prostatic Neoplasms/blood, genetics, mortality, pathology, therapy"
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Assessment
- Risk Factors
- Time Factors
- Treatment Outcome
- United Kingdom
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of BRCA Mutations on Metastatic Relapse and Cause-specific Survival After Radical Treatment for Localised Prostate Cancer.
**Authors:** Castro E, Goh C, Leongamornlert D, Saunders E, Tymrakiewicz M, Dadaev T, Govindasami K, Guy M, Ellis S, Frost D, Bancroft E, Cole T, Tischkowitz M, Kennedy MJ, Eason J, Brewer C, Evans DG, Davidson R, Eccles D, Porteous ME, Douglas F, Adlard J, Donaldson A, Antoniou AC, Kote-Jarai Z, Easton DF, Olmos D, Eeles R
**Journal:** Eur Urol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.eururo.2014.10.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eururo.2014.10.022)

## Content

1. Eur Urol. 2015 Aug;68(2):186-93. doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2014.10.022. Epub 2014
Nov 6.

Effect of BRCA Mutations on Metastatic Relapse and Cause-specific Survival After
Radical Treatment for Localised Prostate Cancer.

Castro E(1), Goh C(2), Leongamornlert D(2), Saunders E(2), Tymrakiewicz M(2),
Dadaev T(2), Govindasami K(2), Guy M(2), Ellis S(3), Frost D(3), Bancroft E(2),
Cole T(4), Tischkowitz M(5), Kennedy MJ(6), Eason J(7), Brewer C(8), Evans
DG(9), Davidson R(10), Eccles D(11), Porteous ME(12), Douglas F(13), Adlard
J(14), Donaldson A(15), Antoniou AC(3), Kote-Jarai Z(2), Easton DF(3), Olmos
D(16), Eeles R(2).

Author information:
(1)Prostate Cancer Unit, Clinical Research Programme, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain; Oncogenetics Team, The Institute of
Cancer Research and Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, Sutton, UK. Electronic
address: ecastro@cnio.es.
(2)Oncogenetics Team, The Institute of Cancer Research and Royal Marsden NHS
Foundation Trust, Sutton, UK.
(3)Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Public Health and
Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(4)West Midlands Regional Genetics Service, Birmingham Women's Hospital
Healthcare NHS Trust, Edgbaston, Birmingham, UK.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(6)Academic Unit of Clinical and Molecular Oncology, Trinity College Dublin and
St. James's Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(7)Nottingham Clinical Genetics Service, Nottingham University Hospitals NHS
Trust, Nottingham, UK.
(8)Department of Clinical Genetics, Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, Exeter, UK.
(9)Genetic Medicine, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, Central
Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, UK.
(10)Ferguson-Smith Centre for Clinical Genetics, Yorkhill Hospitals, Glasgow,
UK.
(11)University of Southampton Faculty of Medicine, Southampton University
Hospitals NHS Trust, Southampton, UK.
(12)South East of Scotland Regional Genetics Service, Western General Hospital,
Edinburgh, UK.
(13)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Centre for Life, Newcastle Upon Tyne
Hospitals NHS Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(14)Yorkshire Regional Genetics Service, Leeds, UK.
(15)Clinical Genetics Department, St. Michael's Hospital, Bristol, UK.
(16)Prostate Cancer Unit, Clinical Research Programme, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: dolmos@cnio.es.

Comment in
    Eur Urol. 2015 Aug;68(2):194-5. doi: 10.1016/j.eururo.2014.11.005.

BACKGROUND: Germline BRCA mutations are associated with worse prostate cancer
(PCa) outcomes; however, the most appropriate management for mutation carriers
has not yet been investigated.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the response of BRCA carriers to conventional treatments
for localised PCa by analysing metastasis-free survival (MFS) and cause-specific
survival (CSS) following radical prostatectomy (RP) or external-beam radiation
therapy (RT).
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Tumour features and outcomes of 1302 patients
with local/locally advanced PCa (including 67 BRCA mutation carriers) were
analysed. RP was undergone by 535 patients (35 BRCA); 767 received RT (32 BRCA).
Median follow-up was 64 mo.
OUTCOME MEASUREMENTS AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS: Median survival and 3-, 5-, and
10-yr survival rates were estimated using the Kaplan-Meier method. Generated
survival curves were compared using the log-rank test. Cox regression analyses
were used to assess the prognostic value of BRCA mutations.
RESULTS AND LIMITATIONS: A total of 67 BRCA carriers and 1235 noncarriers were
included. At 3, 5, and 10 yr after treatment, 97%, 94%, and 84% of noncarriers
and 90%, 72%, and 50% of carriers were free from metastasis (p<0.001). The 3-,
5- and 10-yr CSS rates were significantly better in the noncarrier cohort (99%,
97%, and 85%, respectively) than in carriers (96%, 76%, and 61%, respectively;
p<0.001). Multivariate analysis confirmed BRCA mutations as an independent
prognostic factor for MFS (hazard ratio [HR]: 2.36; 95% confidence interval
[CI], 1.38-4.03; p=0.002) and CSS (HR: 2.17; 95% CI, 1.16-4.07; p=0.016).
CONCLUSIONS: BRCA carriers had worse outcomes than noncarriers when
conventionally treated for local/locally advanced PCa.
PATIENT SUMMARY: Prostate cancer patients with germline BRCA mutations had worse
outcomes than noncarriers when conventionally treated with surgery or radiation
therapy.

Copyright © 2014 European Association of Urology. Published by Elsevier B.V. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.eururo.2014.10.022
PMID: 25454609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
