---
reference_id: "PMID:21289515"
title: von Willebrand disease.
authors:
- James PD
- Goodeve AC
journal: Genet Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3182035931
content_type: abstract_only
---

# von Willebrand disease.
**Authors:** James PD, Goodeve AC
**Journal:** Genet Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1097/GIM.0b013e3182035931](https://doi.org/10.1097/GIM.0b013e3182035931)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2011 May;13(5):365-76. doi: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3182035931.

von Willebrand disease.

James PD(1), Goodeve AC.

Author information:
(1)Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada. jamesp@queensu.ca

von Willebrand disease is a common inherited bleeding disorder characterized by 
excessive mucocutaneous bleeding. Characteristic bleeding symptoms include 
epistaxis, easy bruising, oral cavity bleeding, menorrhagia, bleeding after 
dental extraction, surgery, and/or childbirth, and in severe cases, bleeding 
into joints and soft tissues. There are three subtypes: types 1 and 3 represent 
quantitative variants and type 2 is a group of four qualitative variants: (1) 
type 2A-characterized by defective von Willebrand factor-dependent platelet 
adhesion because of decreased high-molecular-weight von Willebrand factor 
multimers, (2) type 2B-caused by pathologically increased von Willebrand 
factor-platelet interactions, (3) type 2M-caused by decreased von Willebrand 
factor-platelet interactions not based on the loss of high-molecular-weight 
multimers, and (4) type 2N-characterized by reduced binding of von Willebrand 
factor to factor VIII. The diagnosis of von Willebrand disease requires 
specialized assays of von Willebrand factor and/or molecular genetic testing of 
von Willebrand factor. Severe bleeding episodes can be prevented or controlled 
with intravenous infusions of virally inactivated plasma-derived clotting factor 
concentrates containing both von Willebrand factor and factor VIII. Depending on 
the von Willebrand disease type, mild bleeding episodes usually respond to 
intravenous or subcutaneous treatment with desmopressin, a vasopressin analog. 
Other treatments that can reduce symptoms include fibrinolytic inhibitors and 
hormones for menorrhagia.

DOI: 10.1097/GIM.0b013e3182035931
PMCID: PMC3832952
PMID: 21289515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST STATEMENT The authors 
declare no conflict of interest