---
reference_id: PMID:16404622
title: "Renal tubular damage/dysfunction: key to the formation of kidney stones."
authors:
- Khan SR
journal: Urol Res
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1007/s00240-005-0016-2
keywords:
- Animals
- Calcium Oxalate/urine
- Crystallization
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- "Kidney Calculi/etiology, metabolism"
- "Kidney Tubules/pathology, physiopathology"
- "Models, Biological"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Renal tubular damage/dysfunction: key to the formation of kidney stones.
**Authors:** Khan SR
**Journal:** Urol Res (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00240-005-0016-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00240-005-0016-2)

## Content

1. Urol Res. 2006 Apr;34(2):86-91. doi: 10.1007/s00240-005-0016-2. Epub 2006 Jan 
11.

Renal tubular damage/dysfunction: key to the formation of kidney stones.

Khan SR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Center for the Study of Lithiasis, College of 
Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA. khan@pathology.ufl.edu

Supersaturation is the driving force behind crystal formation in the kidneys. It 
can, however, result only in the formation of crystals which can be harmlessly 
expelled. For stone formation, crystals must form in the kidneys and be retained 
there, which is indeed a rare occurrence. Crystalluria is common while stone 
formation is not. Only pathological changes in the kidneys including renal 
injury and dysfunction can accomplish crystal retention. Lethal epithelial 
cellular injury promotes crystal nucleation, aggregation and retention. 
Sub-lethal injury or dysfunctional cells may produce ineffective crystallization 
modulators and localized areas of supersaturation in the interstitium. The 
former will affect crystallization in the urine while the latter may cause 
precipitation in the interstitium and development of Randall's plaques.

DOI: 10.1007/s00240-005-0016-2
PMID: 16404622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]