---
reference_id: "PMID:33818887"
title: Ewing sarcoma.
authors:
- Eaton BR
- Claude L
- Indelicato DJ
- Vatner R
- Yeh B
- Schwarz R
- Laack N
journal: Pediatr Blood Cancer
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/pbc.28355
keywords:
- "Bone Neoplasms/pathology, therapy"
- Child
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Humans
- Prognosis
- "Sarcoma, Ewing/pathology, therapy"
- Survival Rate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ewing sarcoma.
**Authors:** Eaton BR, Claude L, Indelicato DJ, Vatner R, Yeh B, Schwarz R, Laack N
**Journal:** Pediatr Blood Cancer (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/pbc.28355](https://doi.org/10.1002/pbc.28355)

## Content

1. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2021 May;68 Suppl 2:e28355. doi: 10.1002/pbc.28355.

Ewing sarcoma.

Eaton BR(1), Claude L(2), Indelicato DJ(3), Vatner R(4), Yeh B(5), Schwarz R(6),
Laack N(7).

Author information:
(1)Radiation Oncology, Winship Cancer Institute of Emory University, Atlanta,
Georgia.
(2)Radiation Oncology, Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France.
(3)Radiation Oncology, University of Florida College of Medicine, Jacksonville,
Florida.
(4)Radiation Oncology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(5)Radiation Oncology, Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, New York.
(6)Radiotherapy and Radiooncology, Outpatient Center, University Medical Center
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
(7)Radiation Oncology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.

Ewing sarcoma is a rare tumor that requires complex multidisciplinary
management. This report describes the general management and standard
radiotherapy guidelines in both North America (Children's Oncology Group) and
Europe (International Society of Pediatric Oncology). Standard treatment
involves multiagent induction chemotherapy followed by local treatment with
surgery, definitive radiation, or a combination of surgery and radiation
followed by additional chemotherapy and consolidation local treatment to
metastatic sites. The data supporting the role of chemotherapy, surgery, and
radiation and specific radiation therapy guidelines are presented.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/pbc.28355
PMID: 33818887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
