---
reference_id: "PMID:38154678"
title: "Molecular characterization of large cell calcifying sertoli cell tumors: A multi-institutional study of 6 benign and 2 malignant tumors."
authors:
- Abdulfatah E
- Al-Obaidy KI
- Robinson D
- Wu YM
- Heider A
- Idrees MT
- Ulbright TM
- Kunju LP
- Wu A
journal: Hum Pathol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2023.12.008
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- "Sertoli Cell Tumor/genetics, pathology"
- "Carney Complex/genetics, pathology"
- "Testicular Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- Syndrome
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Molecular characterization of large cell calcifying sertoli cell tumors: A multi-institutional study of 6 benign and 2 malignant tumors.
**Authors:** Abdulfatah E, Al-Obaidy KI, Robinson D, Wu YM, Heider A, Idrees MT, Ulbright TM, Kunju LP, Wu A
**Journal:** Hum Pathol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.humpath.2023.12.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humpath.2023.12.008)

## Content

1. Hum Pathol. 2024 Feb;144:15-21. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2023.12.008. Epub 2023 
Dec 27.

Molecular characterization of large cell calcifying sertoli cell tumors: A 
multi-institutional study of 6 benign and 2 malignant tumors.

Abdulfatah E(1), Al-Obaidy KI(2), Robinson D(3), Wu YM(3), Heider A(4), Idrees 
MT(5), Ulbright TM(5), Kunju LP(4), Wu A(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
MI, USA. Electronic address: aeman@med.umich.edu.
(2)Department of Pathology, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI, USA.
(3)Michigan Center for Translational Pathology, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
MI, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

Large cell calcifying Sertoli cell tumors (LCCSCTs) are rare testicular tumors, 
representing <1 % of all testicular neoplasms. Almost 40 % of patients with 
LCCSCTs will present in the context of the inherited tumor predisposition 
syndrome, the Carney complex. While most LCCSCTs are benign, 10-20 % have 
malignant behavior. The aim of our study was to analyze LCCSCTs for novel 
molecular alterations in addition to PRKAR1A mutations and to identify potential 
drivers for malignant progression. Eight LCCSCTs diagnosed at two institutions 
were included. Two patients had the Carney complex confirmed on subsequent 
genetic testing, and two tumors had several adverse pathological findings. One 
patient presented with metastatic disease at the time of initial diagnosis. 
Targeted next-generation sequencing detected PRKAR1A alterations in all cases, 
with heterozygous PRKAR1A mutations in 5 tumors, germline 
Carney-complex-associated PRKAR1A mutation in 2 patients, and PRKAR1A fusion in 
1 tumor. Additionally, sequencing the metastatic case identified CDKN1B and TERT 
promoter gene mutations. All tumors showed a low tumoral mutational burden and 
unremarkable copy number alterations except for frequent LOH of 17q24 
encompassing the PRKAR1A locus. RNA expression analysis showed increased 
expression of several markers including novel PRUNE2, and usual markers like 
inhibin and calretinin. Our study showed that while LCCSCTs have been reported 
in the setting of cancer predisposition syndromes, the majority of these tumors 
occur sporadically. PRKAR1A alterations were present in all cases and appear to 
be the major driver in LCCSCTs. It remains to be determined whether malignant 
progression may be caused by additional driver mutations.

Copyright © 2024 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2023.12.008
PMID: 38154678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.