---
reference_id: "PMID:15176765"
title: "Supportive therapy for schizophrenia: possible mechanisms and implications for adjunctive psychosocial treatments."
authors:
- Penn DL
- Mueser KT
- Tarrier N
- Gloege A
- Cather C
- Serrano D
- Otto MW
journal: Schizophr Bull
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.schbul.a007055
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Supportive therapy for schizophrenia: possible mechanisms and implications for adjunctive psychosocial treatments.
**Authors:** Penn DL, Mueser KT, Tarrier N, Gloege A, Cather C, Serrano D, Otto MW
**Journal:** Schizophr Bull (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1093/oxfordjournals.schbul.a007055](https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.schbul.a007055)

## Content

1. Schizophr Bull. 2004;30(1):101-12. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.schbul.a007055.

Supportive therapy for schizophrenia: possible mechanisms and implications for 
adjunctive psychosocial treatments.

Penn DL(1), Mueser KT, Tarrier N, Gloege A, Cather C, Serrano D, Otto MW.

Author information:
(1)University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, Department of Psychology, 
27599-3270, USA. dpenn@email.unc.edu

This article posits that the positive findings for supportive therapy (ST) in 
recent trials may indicate an important but undervalued aspect of psychosocial 
interventions for schizophrenia. In developing this thesis, we consider the 
possible mechanisms underlying the beneficial effects of ST observed in recent 
trials of cognitive behavioral therapy for schizophrenia. We place this evidence 
in the context of a review of psychological models of mental health, the 
therapeutic alliance, and research on social cognition and social support in 
schizophrenia. We conclude this article by describing a new theoretically driven 
intervention for schizophrenia, functional cognitive-behavioral therapy (FCBT), 
which improves functional outcomes by integrating evidence-based advances in 
cognitive behavioral therapy with the strengths of ST approaches.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.schbul.a007055
PMID: 15176765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]