---
reference_id: "PMID:35052318"
title: Artificial Intelligence Analysis of Gene Expression Predicted the Overall Survival of Mantle Cell Lymphoma and a Large Pan-Cancer Series.
authors:
- Carreras J
- Nakamura N
- Hamoudi R
journal: Healthcare (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/healthcare10010155
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Artificial Intelligence Analysis of Gene Expression Predicted the Overall Survival of Mantle Cell Lymphoma and a Large Pan-Cancer Series.
**Authors:** Carreras J, Nakamura N, Hamoudi R
**Journal:** Healthcare (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/healthcare10010155](https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare10010155)

## Content

1. Healthcare (Basel). 2022 Jan 14;10(1):155. doi: 10.3390/healthcare10010155.

Artificial Intelligence Analysis of Gene Expression Predicted the Overall 
Survival of Mantle Cell Lymphoma and a Large Pan-Cancer Series.

Carreras J(1), Nakamura N(1), Hamoudi R(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Tokai University School of 
Medicine, 143 Shimokasuya, Isehara 259-1193, Japan.
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Medicine, University of Sharjah, 
Sharjah P.O. Box 27272, United Arab Emirates.
(3)Division of Surgery and Interventional Science, University College London, 
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK.

Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is a subtype of mature B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma 
characterized by a poor prognosis. First, we analyzed a series of 123 cases 
(GSE93291). An algorithm using multilayer perceptron artificial neural network, 
radial basis function, gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA), and conventional 
statistics, correlated 20,862 genes with 28 MCL prognostic genes for 
dimensionality reduction, to predict the patients' overall survival and 
highlight new markers. As a result, 58 genes predicted survival with high 
accuracy (area under the curve = 0.9). Further reduction identified 10 genes: 
KIF18A, YBX3, PEMT, GCNA, and POGLUT3 that associated with a poor survival; and 
SELENOP, AMOTL2, IGFBP7, KCTD12, and ADGRG2 with a favorable survival. 
Correlation with the proliferation index (Ki67) was also made. Interestingly, 
these genes, which were related to cell cycle, apoptosis, and metabolism, also 
predicted the survival of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (GSE10846, n = 414), and 
a pan-cancer series of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA, n = 7289), which included 
the most relevant cancers (lung, breast, colorectal, prostate, stomach, liver, 
etcetera). Secondly, survival was predicted using 10 oncology panels 
(transcriptome, cancer progression and pathways, metabolic pathways, 
immuno-oncology, and host response), and TYMS was highlighted. Finally, using 
machine learning, C5 tree and Bayesian network had the highest accuracy for 
prediction and correlation with the LLMPP MCL35 proliferation assay and RGS1 was 
made. In conclusion, artificial intelligence analysis predicted the overall 
survival of MCL with high accuracy, and highlighted genes that predicted the 
survival of a large pan-cancer series.

DOI: 10.3390/healthcare10010155
PMCID: PMC8775707
PMID: 35052318

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.