---
reference_id: "PMID:24003924"
title: "Infectious triggers in type 1 diabetes: is there a case for epitope mimicry?"
authors:
- Afonso G
- Mallone R
journal: Diabetes Obes Metab
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1111/dom.12166
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Infectious triggers in type 1 diabetes: is there a case for epitope mimicry?
**Authors:** Afonso G, Mallone R
**Journal:** Diabetes Obes Metab (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/dom.12166](https://doi.org/10.1111/dom.12166)

## Content

1. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2013 Sep;15 Suppl 3:82-8. doi: 10.1111/dom.12166.

Infectious triggers in type 1 diabetes: is there a case for epitope mimicry?

Afonso G(1), Mallone R.

Author information:
(1)Cochin Institute, INSERM U1016, DeAR Lab Avenir, Paris, France.

Environmental factors are the main contributors to type 1 diabetes (T1D) 
pathogenesis, yet they remain unidentified. Enteroviruses are proposed candidate 
triggers due to temporal correlations between infection and T1D autoimmunity and 
to detection of viral proteins in diseased islets. However, such correlations 
are not universal and may be relatively uncommon. Furthermore, evidence of a 
cause-effect relationship is lacking, as infection of non-obese diabetic mice 
with Coxsackie enteroviruses can either trigger or blunt disease. The proposed 
mechanisms are either non-antigen-specific (i.e. β-cell destruction and release 
of sequestered antigens, islet inflammation) or antigen-specific (i.e. epitope 
mimicry, by which immune responses to enteroviruses may be diverted against 
homologous β-cell antigens). The case for the latter mechanisms is even less 
stringent, as there is little evidence of promiscuous antigen recognition at the 
single T-cell level. Other infectious agents may thus be implicated. 
Demonstration of their role will require fulfilling the Koch's postulates, 
namely isolation of the agent preferentially in T1D patients, including before 
disease onset; and T1D induction when the agent is inoculated into mice. The 
same is needed for cross-reactive T cells to support epitope mimicry mechanisms. 
Generation of alternative (humanized) mouse models that could be challenged with 
candidate microbes is needed.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/dom.12166
PMID: 24003924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]