---
reference_id: "PMID:38292042"
title: "Efficacy and safety of pegzilarginase in arginase 1 deficiency (PEACE): a phase 3, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multi-centre trial."
authors:
- Russo RS
- Gasperini S
- Bubb G
- Neuman L
- Sloan LS
- Diaz GA
- Enns GM
- PEACE Investigators
journal: EClinicalMedicine
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2023.102405
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of pegzilarginase in arginase 1 deficiency (PEACE): a phase 3, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multi-centre trial.
**Authors:** Russo RS, Gasperini S, Bubb G, Neuman L, Sloan LS, Diaz GA, Enns GM, PEACE Investigators
**Journal:** EClinicalMedicine (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.eclinm.2023.102405](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eclinm.2023.102405)

## Content

1. EClinicalMedicine. 2024 Jan 12;68:102405. doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2023.102405. 
eCollection 2024 Feb.

Efficacy and safety of pegzilarginase in arginase 1 deficiency (PEACE): a phase 
3, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, multi-centre trial.

Russo RS(1), Gasperini S(2), Bubb G(3), Neuman L(3), Sloan LS(3), Diaz GA(4), 
Enns GM(5); PEACE Investigators.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
GA, United States.
(2)Paediatric Department, Fondazione IRCSS San Gerardo dei Tintori, Monza, 
Italy.
(3)Aeglea BioTherapeutics, Inc., Austin, TX, United States.
(4)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York City, NY, United States.
(5)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University 
School of Medicine and Lucille Packard Children's Hospital, Stanford, CA, United 
States.

BACKGROUND: Arginase 1 Deficiency (ARG1-D) is a rare debilitating, progressive, 
inherited, metabolic disease characterized by marked increases in plasma 
arginine (pArg) and its metabolites, with increased morbidity, substantial 
reductions in quality of life, and premature mortality. Effective treatments 
that can lower arginine and improve clinical outcomes is currently lacking. 
Pegzilarginase is a novel human arginase 1 enzyme therapy. The present trial 
aimed to demonstrate efficacy of pegzilarginase on pArg and key mobility 
outcomes.
METHODS: This Phase 3 randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 
parallel-group clinical trial (clinicaltrials.govNCT03921541, EudraCT 
2018-004837-34), randomized patients with ARG1-D 2:1 to 
intravenously/subcutaneously once-weekly pegzilarginase or placebo in 
conjunction with their individualized disease management. It was conducted in 7 
countries; United States, United Kingdom, Canada, Austria, France, Germany, 
Italy. Primary endpoint was change from baseline in pArg after 24 weeks; key 
secondary endpoints were change from baseline at Week 24 in Gross Motor Function 
Measure part E (GMFM-E) and 2-min walk test (2MWT). Full Analysis Set was used 
for the analyses.
FINDINGS: From 01 May 2019 to 29 March 2021, 32 patients were enrolled and 
randomized (pegzilarginase, n = 21; placebo, n = 11). Pegzilarginase lowered 
geometric mean pArg from 354.0 μmol/L to 86.4 μmol/L at Week 24 vs 464.7 to 
426.6 μmol/L for placebo (95% CI: -67.1%, -83.5%; p < 0.0001) and normalized 
levels in 90.5% of patients (vs 0% with placebo). In addition, clinically 
relevant functional mobility improvements were demonstrated with pegzilarginase 
treatment. These effects were sustained long-term through additional 24 weeks of 
subsequent exposure. Pegzilarginase was well-tolerated, with adverse events 
being mostly transient and mild/moderate in severity.
INTERPRETATION: These results support pegzilarginase as the first potential 
treatment to normalize pArg in ARG1-D and achieve clinically meaningful 
improvements in functional mobility.
FUNDING: Aeglea BioTherapeutics.

© 2023 Immedica Pharma AB.

DOI: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2023.102405
PMCID: PMC10825663
PMID: 38292042

Conflict of interest statement: Dr Sanchez Russo has received travel support 
from Aeglea BioTherapeutics. Dr Gasperini has served on advisory boards for 
Aeglea BioTherapeutics and Immedica Pharma AB. Dr Neuman and Dr Bubb are former 
employees of Aeglea BioTherapeutics and owns stocks or equity in the company. Dr 
Sloan is former employee of Aeglea BioTherapeutics. Dr Diaz has received travel 
support from and served on advisory boards and speakers bureaus for Aeglea 
BioTherapeutics. Dr Enns has served on advisory boards for Aeglea 
BioTherapeutics, and performed consulting services for Horizon Therapeutics. 
Aeglea BioTherapeutics funded the trial and provided medical writing support. 
Immedica Pharma provided scientific editing and medical writing support.