---
reference_id: "PMID:10053007"
title: "Cyclic ichthyosis with epidermolytic hyperkeratosis: A phenotype conferred by mutations in the 2B domain of keratin K1."
authors:
- Sybert VP
- Francis JS
- Corden LD
- Smith LT
- Weaver M
- Stephens K
- McLean WH
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1086/302278
keywords:
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- Humans
- "Hyperkeratosis, Epidermolytic/complications, genetics, pathology"
- "Keratins/genetics, physiology"
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Point Mutation
- "Skin/pathology, ultrastructure"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cyclic ichthyosis with epidermolytic hyperkeratosis: A phenotype conferred by mutations in the 2B domain of keratin K1.
**Authors:** Sybert VP, Francis JS, Corden LD, Smith LT, Weaver M, Stephens K, McLean WH
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1086/302278](https://doi.org/10.1086/302278)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1999 Mar;64(3):732-8. doi: 10.1086/302278.

Cyclic ichthyosis with epidermolytic hyperkeratosis: A phenotype conferred by
mutations in the 2B domain of keratin K1.

Sybert VP(1), Francis JS, Corden LD, Smith LT, Weaver M, Stephens K, McLean WH.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Children's Hospital and Medical Center, Division of Dermatology, CH-25, 4800
Sand Point Way NE, P.O. Box 5371, Seattle, WA 98105, USA flk01@u.washington.edu
Julie S.

Bullous congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma (BCIE) is characterized by
blistering and erythroderma in infancy and by erythroderma and ichthyosis
thereafter. Epidermolytic hyperkeratosis is a hallmark feature of light and
electron microscopy. Here we report on four individuals from two families with a
unique clinical disorder with histological findings of epidermolytic
hyperkeratosis. Manifesting erythema and superficial erosions at birth, which
improved during the first few months of life, affected individuals later
developed palmoplantar hyperkeratosis with patchy erythema and scale elsewhere
on the body. Three affected individuals exhibit dramatic episodic flares of
annular, polycyclic erythematous plaques with scale, which coalesce to involve
most of the body surface. The flares last weeks to months. In the interim
periods the skin may be normal, except for palmoplantar hyperkeratosis. Abnormal
keratin-filament aggregates were observed in suprabasal keratinocytes from both
probands, suggesting that the causative mutation might reside in keratin K1 or
keratin K10. In one proband, sequencing of K1 revealed a heterozygous mutation,
1436T-->C, predicting a change of isoleucine to threonine in the highly
conserved helix-termination motif. In the second family, a heterozygous
mutation, 1435A-->T, was found in K1, predicting an isoleucine-to-phenylalanine
substitution in the same codon. Both mutations were excluded in both a control
population and all unaffected family members tested. These findings reveal that
a clinical phenotype distinct from classic BCIE but with similar histology can
result from K1 mutations and that mutations at this codon give rise to a
clinically unique condition.

DOI: 10.1086/302278
PMCID: PMC1377790
PMID: 10053007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
