---
reference_id: "PMID:31050279"
title: Eculizumab in Aquaporin-4-Positive Neuromyelitis Optica Spectrum Disorder.
authors:
- Pittock SJ
- Berthele A
- Fujihara K
- Kim HJ
- Levy M
- Palace J
- Nakashima I
- Terzi M
- Totolyan N
- Viswanathan S
- Wang KC
- Pace A
- Fujita KP
- Armstrong R
- Wingerchuk DM
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1900866
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Eculizumab in Aquaporin-4-Positive Neuromyelitis Optica Spectrum Disorder.
**Authors:** Pittock SJ, Berthele A, Fujihara K, Kim HJ, Levy M, Palace J, Nakashima I, Terzi M, Totolyan N, Viswanathan S, Wang KC, Pace A, Fujita KP, Armstrong R, Wingerchuk DM
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1900866](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1900866)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2019 Aug 15;381(7):614-625. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1900866. Epub
2019  May 3.

Eculizumab in Aquaporin-4-Positive Neuromyelitis Optica Spectrum Disorder.

Pittock SJ(1), Berthele A(1), Fujihara K(1), Kim HJ(1), Levy M(1), Palace J(1), 
Nakashima I(1), Terzi M(1), Totolyan N(1), Viswanathan S(1), Wang KC(1), Pace 
A(1), Fujita KP(1), Armstrong R(1), Wingerchuk DM(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN (S.J.P.); Klinikum Rechts der Isar, 
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany (A.B.); Tohoku University 
Graduate School of Medicine (K.F., I.N.) and Tohoku Medical and Pharmaceutical 
University (I.N.), Sendai, School of Medicine, Fukushima Medical University, 
Fukushima City (K.F.), and Southern Tohoku Research Institute for Neuroscience, 
Koriyama (K.F.) - all in Japan; Research Institute and Hospital, National Cancer 
Center, Goyang, South Korea (H.J.K.); Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore 
(M.L.); Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School (M.L.) and 
Alexion Pharmaceuticals (A.P., K.P.F., R.A.) - all in Boston; John Radcliffe 
Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom (J.P.); Ondokuz Mayis University, Samsun, 
Turkey (M.T.); First Pavlov State Medical University of St. Petersburg, St. 
Petersburg, Russia (N.T.); Kuala Lumpur Hospital, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia (S.V.); 
Cheng-Hsin General Hospital and School of Medicine, National Yang Ming 
University, Taipei, Taiwan (K.-C.W.); and the Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ 
(D.M.W.).

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2019 Jul;15(7):368. doi: 10.1038/s41582-019-0206-0.

BACKGROUND: Neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD) is a relapsing, 
autoimmune, inflammatory disorder that typically affects the optic nerves and 
spinal cord. At least two thirds of cases are associated with aquaporin-4 
antibodies (AQP4-IgG) and complement-mediated damage to the central nervous 
system. In a previous small, open-label study involving patients with 
AQP4-IgG-positive disease, eculizumab, a terminal complement inhibitor, was 
shown to reduce the frequency of relapse.
METHODS: In this randomized, double-blind, time-to-event trial, 143 adults were 
randomly assigned in a 2:1 ratio to receive either intravenous eculizumab (at a 
dose of 900 mg weekly for the first four doses starting on day 1, followed by 
1200 mg every 2 weeks starting at week 4) or matched placebo. The continued use 
of stable-dose immunosuppressive therapy was permitted. The primary end point 
was the first adjudicated relapse. Secondary outcomes included the adjudicated 
annualized relapse rate, quality-of-life measures, and the score on the Expanded 
Disability Status Scale (EDSS), which ranges from 0 (no disability) to 10 
(death).
RESULTS: The trial was stopped after 23 of the 24 prespecified adjudicated 
relapses, given the uncertainty in estimating when the final event would occur. 
The mean (±SD) annualized relapse rate in the 24 months before enrollment was 
1.99±0.94; 76% of the patients continued to receive their previous 
immunosuppressive therapy during the trial. Adjudicated relapses occurred in 3 
of 96 patients (3%) in the eculizumab group and 20 of 47 (43%) in the placebo 
group (hazard ratio, 0.06; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.02 to 0.20; P<0.001). 
The adjudicated annualized relapse rate was 0.02 in the eculizumab group and 
0.35 in the placebo group (rate ratio, 0.04; 95% CI, 0.01 to 0.15; P<0.001). The 
mean change in the EDSS score was -0.18 in the eculizumab group and 0.12 in the 
placebo group (least-squares mean difference, -0.29; 95% CI, -0.59 to 0.01). 
Upper respiratory tract infections and headaches were more common in the 
eculizumab group. There was one death from pulmonary empyema in the eculizumab 
group.
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with AQP4-IgG-positive NMOSD, those who received 
eculizumab had a significantly lower risk of relapse than those who received 
placebo. There was no significant between-group difference in measures of 
disability progression. (Funded by Alexion Pharmaceuticals; PREVENT 
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT01892345; EudraCT number, 2013-001150-10.).

Copyright © 2019 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1900866
PMID: 31050279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]