---
reference_id: "PMID:39569876"
title: (TTTCA)exp Drives the Genotype-Phenotype Correlation and Genetic Anticipation in FCMTE1.
authors:
- Chen X
- Wang B
- Xia H
- Wang H
- Yang D
- Chen M
- Yu H
- Zhang F
- Kang Y
- Chen Y
- Jin N
- Wang L
- Liu P
- Xie F
- Fu A
- Hu B
- Ouyang Z
- Wu S
- Ding Y
- Ji J
- Wang S
- Luo W
- Cen Z
journal: Mov Disord
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1002/mds.30057
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- Female
- Adult
- "Epilepsies, Myoclonic/genetics"
- Genetic Association Studies
- "Anticipation, Genetic/genetics"
- Middle Aged
- Phenotype
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Genotype
- DNA Repeat Expansion/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Aged
content_type: abstract_only
---

# (TTTCA)exp Drives the Genotype-Phenotype Correlation and Genetic Anticipation in FCMTE1.
**Authors:** Chen X, Wang B, Xia H, Wang H, Yang D, Chen M, Yu H, Zhang F, Kang Y, Chen Y, Jin N, Wang L, Liu P, Xie F, Fu A, Hu B, Ouyang Z, Wu S, Ding Y, Ji J, Wang S, Luo W, Cen Z
**Journal:** Mov Disord (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.30057](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.30057)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 2025 Feb;40(2):315-323. doi: 10.1002/mds.30057. Epub 2024 Nov 21.

(TTTCA)exp Drives the Genotype-Phenotype Correlation and Genetic Anticipation in 
FCMTE1.

Chen X(1), Wang B(1), Xia H(1), Wang H(1), Yang D(1), Chen M(1)(2), Yu H(3), 
Zhang F(1), Kang Y(1), Chen Y(1), Jin N(1), Wang L(1), Liu P(4), Xie F(5), Fu 
A(6), Hu B(7), Ouyang Z(1), Wu S(1), Ding Y(1)(8), Ji J(9), Wang S(1)(8), Luo 
W(1), Cen Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Zhuji Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical 
University, Zhuji, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Huzhou Third Municipal Hospital, Hangzhou, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Taizhou Central Hospital (Taizhou University 
Hospital), Taizhou, China.
(5)Department of Neurology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(6)Shanghai Dgensee Medical Technology Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China.
(7)Center for Tumor Precision Diagnosis, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, 
Wuhan, China.
(8)Epilepsy Center, Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of 
Medicine, Hangzhou, China.
(9)Center of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Zhejiang University School of 
Medicine, Hangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: The pentanucleotide (TTTCA) repeat expansion (exp) insertion, along 
with the accompanying (TTTTA)exp, causes familial cortical myoclonic tremor with 
epilepsy (FCMTE). The genotype-phenotype correlations and intergenerational 
instabilities related to (TTTCA)exp and (TTTTA)exp are still unclear.
OBJECTIVE: The aim was to investigate the genotype-phenotype correlations and 
intergenerational instabilities related to (TTTCA)exp and (TTTTA)exp in FCMTE1.
METHODS: We performed targeted long-read sequencing on 77 FCMTE1 patients. After 
quality control, metrics such as total repeat count, respective (TTTTA)exp and 
(TTTCA)exp count, and interruptions were assessed in 73 patients. Correlations 
between metrics and the patients' clinical features, as well as repeat 
instability during parental transmission, were analyzed.
RESULTS: Among 73 alleles, the average total repeat counts were 848 ± 152 units, 
with (TTTTA)exp and (TTTCA)exp averaging 498 ± 196 units and 356 ± 110 units, 
respectively. (TTTCA)exp counts were inversely correlated with the age at onset 
for cortical tremor (Spearman's rho = -0.348, P = 0.005) and epilepsy 
(Spearman's rho = -0.424, P = 0.003). A negative correlation was found between 
(TTTCA)exp counts and relatively moderate seizure pattern with prodrome (odds 
ratio = 0.988, 95% confidence interval: 0.980-0.995, P = 0.002). During parental 
transmission, (TTTCA)exp counts increased significantly (P = 0.007), with 
maternal transmission showing a significantly larger increase compared to 
paternal transmission (P = 0.013).
CONCLUSION: The (TTTCA)exp insertion serves as the length-dependent pathogenic 
component within the two-motif repeat expansion. Its differential expanding 
nature during parental transmissions is highly associated with the genetic 
anticipation in FCMTE1. © 2024 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder 
Society.

© 2024 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.30057
PMID: 39569876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]