---
reference_id: "PMID:27124796"
title: PERIPHERAL RETINAL VASCULOPATHY IN COCKAYNE SYNDROME.
authors:
- Trese MGJ
- Nudleman ED
- Besirli CG
journal: Retin Cases Brief Rep
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1097/ICB.0000000000000328
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Cockayne Syndrome/complications
- Fluorescein Angiography/methods
- Fundus Oculi
- Humans
- Male
- Retina/pathology
- "Retinal Diseases/diagnosis, etiology"
- Retinal Vessels/pathology
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence/methods"
- Visual Acuity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PERIPHERAL RETINAL VASCULOPATHY IN COCKAYNE SYNDROME.
**Authors:** Trese MGJ, Nudleman ED, Besirli CG
**Journal:** Retin Cases Brief Rep (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1097/ICB.0000000000000328](https://doi.org/10.1097/ICB.0000000000000328)

## Content

1. Retin Cases Brief Rep. 2017 Summer;11(3):232-235. doi: 
10.1097/ICB.0000000000000328.

PERIPHERAL RETINAL VASCULOPATHY IN COCKAYNE SYNDROME.

Trese MGJ(1), Nudleman ED, Besirli CG.

Author information:
(1)*Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Michigan, Ann 
Arbor, Michigan; and †Department of Ophthalmology, Shiley Eye Center and Jacobs 
Retina Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California.

PURPOSE: To present peripheral retinal vasculopathy and foveal ellipsoid zone 
abnormalities as novel fundus manifestations of Cockayne syndrome (CS), a rare 
autosomal recessive condition with well-described ophthalmic associations.
METHODS: Clinical examination, wide-field fundus photography, wide-field fundus 
autofluorescence, wide-field fluorescein angiography, and spectral domain 
optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) were used to diagnose and document the 
patient's clinical presentation.
RESULTS: Our patient presented with postnatal growth delay, neurologic 
dysfunction, premature aging, dental anomalies, sensory neural hearing loss, and 
pigmentary retinopathy. This constellation of clinical features satisfies the 
clinical diagnostic criteria of CS Type 1. In addition to these well-known 
features, we used multimodal retinal imaging to perform an in-depth analysis of 
the retinal manifestations of CS and report peripheral vasculopathy and 
ellipsoid zone abnormality as two novel features which have not previously been 
described in conjunction with CS.
CONCLUSION: This case report is intended to assist physicians in making the 
correct diagnosis of this rare condition by reviewing the clinical diagnostic 
criteria and providing the most comprehensive fundus imaging of CS available in 
the literature to date.

DOI: 10.1097/ICB.0000000000000328
PMID: 27124796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]