---
reference_id: "PMID:20514360"
title: Effects of arsenic exposure on DNA methylation and epigenetic gene regulation.
authors:
- Reichard JF
- Puga A
journal: Epigenomics
year: '2010'
doi: 10.2217/epi.09.45
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effects of arsenic exposure on DNA methylation and epigenetic gene regulation.
**Authors:** Reichard JF, Puga A
**Journal:** Epigenomics (2010)
**DOI:** [10.2217/epi.09.45](https://doi.org/10.2217/epi.09.45)

## Content

1. Epigenomics. 2010 Feb;2(1):87-104. doi: 10.2217/epi.09.45.

Effects of arsenic exposure on DNA methylation and epigenetic gene regulation.

Reichard JF(1), Puga A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Health & Center for Environmental Genetics, 
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 3223 Eden Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 
45267-0056, USA. John.Reichard@uc.edu

Arsenic is a nonmutagenic human carcinogen that induces tumors through unknown 
mechanisms. A growing body of evidence suggests that its carcinogenicity results 
from epigenetic changes, particularly in DNA methylation. Changes in gene 
methylation status, mediated by arsenic, have been proposed to activate oncogene 
expression or silence tumor suppressor genes, leading to long-term changes in 
the activity of genes controlling cell transformation. Mostly descriptive, and 
often contradictory, studies have demonstrated that arsenic exposure is 
associated with both hypo- and hyper-methylation at various genetic loci in vivo 
or in vitro. This ambiguity has made it difficult to assess whether the changes 
induced by arsenic are causally involved in the transformation process or are 
simply a reflection of the altered physiology of rapidly dividing cancer cells. 
Here, we discuss the evidence supporting changes in DNA methylation as a cause 
of arsenic carcinogenesis and highlight the strengths and limitations of these 
studies, as well as areas where consistencies and inconsistencies exist.

DOI: 10.2217/epi.09.45
PMCID: PMC2877392
PMID: 20514360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]