---
reference_id: "PMID:31116142"
title: "Update on empty nose syndrome: disease mechanisms, diagnostic tools, and treatment strategies."
authors:
- Gill AS
- Said M
- Tollefson TT
- Steele TO
journal: Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1097/MOO.0000000000000544
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update on empty nose syndrome: disease mechanisms, diagnostic tools, and treatment strategies.
**Authors:** Gill AS, Said M, Tollefson TT, Steele TO
**Journal:** Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MOO.0000000000000544](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOO.0000000000000544)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2019 Aug;27(4):237-242. doi: 
10.1097/MOO.0000000000000544.

Update on empty nose syndrome: disease mechanisms, diagnostic tools, and 
treatment strategies.

Gill AS(1), Said M(2), Tollefson TT(1), Steele TO(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, University of 
California Davis, Davis.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, University of 
California Davis School of Medicine.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, VA Northern California 
Healthcare System, Sacramento, California, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To discuss the proposed pathophysiology of empty nose 
syndrome (ENS), summarize and evaluate the role of validated diagnostic tools in 
the diagnosis of ENS, and review the medical and surgical treatment strategies 
for patients with ENS.
RECENT FINDINGS: Historically, ENS has been associated with a reduction in nasal 
turbinate size; new data suggest that impaired trigeminal nerve function may 
also play a role in the pathophysiology of the disease. The newly validated 
empty nose syndrome 6 item questionnaires and Cotton test are steps forward to 
standardize the diagnosis of ENS. Finally, there has been a marked increase in 
surgical treatment strategies to reconstitute turbinate volume with various 
implant materials.
SUMMARY: The diagnosis of ENS remains controversial but the last several years 
have seen a rejuvenation of interest in this disease entity. The validated empty 
nose syndrome 6 item questionnaires and Cotton test provide a standardized and 
objective means by which to characterize ENS. Prevention of iatrogenic ENS 
through avoidance of excessive turbinate reduction remains critical in 
preventing paradoxical nasal obstruction. Nasal humidification, patient 
education, and treatment of possible concomitant medical conditions (e.g., 
depression) constitute first lines of treatment. We support the cautious use of 
these screening tools as adjuncts to clinical decision-making. Although 
injectable implants to augment turbinate volume show promise as a therapeutic 
surgical technique, there is insufficient data to fully support their use at 
this time.

DOI: 10.1097/MOO.0000000000000544
PMID: 31116142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]