---
reference_id: "PMID:11807147"
title: CHOP chemotherapy plus rituximab compared with CHOP alone in elderly patients with diffuse large-B-cell lymphoma.
authors:
- Coiffier B
- Lepage E
- Briere J
- Herbrecht R
- Tilly H
- Bouabdallah R
- Morel P
- Van Den Neste E
- Salles G
- Gaulard P
- Reyes F
- Lederlin P
- Gisselbrecht C
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa011795
keywords:
- Aged
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Murine-Derived"
- "Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Cyclophosphamide/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Disease-Free Survival
- "Doxorubicin/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Female
- Humans
- "Lymphoma, B-Cell/drug therapy"
- "Lymphoma, Large B-Cell, Diffuse/drug therapy"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Prednisone/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Recurrence
- Rituximab
- Survival Analysis
- "Vincristine/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CHOP chemotherapy plus rituximab compared with CHOP alone in elderly patients with diffuse large-B-cell lymphoma.
**Authors:** Coiffier B, Lepage E, Briere J, Herbrecht R, Tilly H, Bouabdallah R, Morel P, Van Den Neste E, Salles G, Gaulard P, Reyes F, Lederlin P, Gisselbrecht C
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa011795](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa011795)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2002 Jan 24;346(4):235-42. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa011795.

CHOP chemotherapy plus rituximab compared with CHOP alone in elderly patients 
with diffuse large-B-cell lymphoma.

Coiffier B(1), Lepage E, Briere J, Herbrecht R, Tilly H, Bouabdallah R, Morel P, 
Van Den Neste E, Salles G, Gaulard P, Reyes F, Lederlin P, Gisselbrecht C.

Author information:
(1)Hospices Civils de Lyon and the Université Claude Bernard, Lyons, France. 
bertrand.coiffier@chu-lyon.fr

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2002 Jan 24;346(4):280-2. doi: 10.1056/NEJM200201243460411.
    N Engl J Med. 2002 Jun 6;346(23):1830-1; author reply 1830-1. doi: 
10.1056/NEJM200206063462317.

BACKGROUND: The standard treatment for patients with diffuse large-B-cell 
lymphoma is cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (CHOP). 
Rituximab, a chimeric monoclonal antibody against the CD20 B-cell antigen, has 
therapeutic activity in diffuse large-B-cell lymphoma. We conducted a randomized 
trial to compare CHOP chemotherapy plus rituximab with CHOP alone in elderly 
patients with diffuse large-B-cell lymphoma.
METHODS: Previously untreated patients with diffuse large-B-cell lymphoma, 60 to 
80 years old, were randomly assigned to receive either eight cycles of CHOP 
every three weeks (197 patients) or eight cycles of CHOP plus rituximab given on 
day 1 of each cycle (202 patients).
RESULTS: The rate of complete response was significantly higher in the group 
that received CHOP plus rituximab than in the group that received CHOP alone (76 
percent vs. 63 percent, P=0.005). With a median follow-up of two years, 
event-free and overall survival times were significantly higher in the 
CHOP-plus-rituximab group (P<0.001 and P=0.007, respectively). The addition of 
rituximab to standard CHOP chemotherapy significantly reduced the risk of 
treatment failure and death (risk ratios, 0.58 [95 percent confidence interval, 
0.44 to 0.77] and 0.64 [0.45 to 0.89], respectively). Clinically relevant 
toxicity was not significantly greater with CHOP plus rituximab.
CONCLUSIONS: The addition of rituximab to the CHOP regimen increases the 
complete-response rate and prolongs event-free and overall survival in elderly 
patients with diffuse large-B-cell lymphoma, without a clinically significant 
increase in toxicity.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa011795
PMID: 11807147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]