---
reference_id: "PMID:38428029"
title: Large animal models of pressure overload-induced cardiac left ventricular hypertrophy to study remodelling of the human heart with aortic stenosis.
authors:
- Beslika E
- Leite-Moreira A
- De Windt LJ
- da Costa Martins PA
journal: Cardiovasc Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvae045
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Large animal models of pressure overload-induced cardiac left ventricular hypertrophy to study remodelling of the human heart with aortic stenosis.
**Authors:** Beslika E, Leite-Moreira A, De Windt LJ, da Costa Martins PA
**Journal:** Cardiovasc Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cvr/cvae045](https://doi.org/10.1093/cvr/cvae045)

## Content

1. Cardiovasc Res. 2024 Apr 30;120(5):461-475. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvae045.

Large animal models of pressure overload-induced cardiac left ventricular 
hypertrophy to study remodelling of the human heart with aortic stenosis.

Beslika E(1), Leite-Moreira A(1), De Windt LJ(2), da Costa Martins PA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Cardiovascular R&D Centre-UnIC@RISE, Department of Surgery and Physiology, 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Alameda Prof. Hernâni Monteiro, 
4200-319 Porto, Portugal.
(2)CARIM School for Cardiovascular Diseases, Faculty of Health, Medicine and 
Life Sciences, Maastricht University, Universiteitssingel 50, 6200 MD 
Maastricht, Netherlands.

Pathologic cardiac hypertrophy is a common consequence of many cardiovascular 
diseases, including aortic stenosis (AS). AS is known to increase the pressure 
load of the left ventricle, causing a compensative response of the cardiac 
muscle, which progressively will lead to dilation and heart failure. At a 
cellular level, this corresponds to a considerable increase in the size of 
cardiomyocytes, known as cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, while their proliferation 
capacity is attenuated upon the first developmental stages. Cardiomyocytes, in 
order to cope with the increased workload (overload), suffer alterations in 
their morphology, nuclear content, energy metabolism, intracellular homeostatic 
mechanisms, contractile activity, and cell death mechanisms. Moreover, 
modifications in the cardiomyocyte niche, involving inflammation, immune 
infiltration, fibrosis, and angiogenesis, contribute to the subsequent events of 
a pathologic hypertrophic response. Considering the emerging need for a better 
understanding of the condition and treatment improvement, as the only available 
treatment option of AS consists of surgical interventions at a late stage of the 
disease, when the cardiac muscle state is irreversible, large animal models have 
been developed to mimic the human condition, to the greatest extend. Smaller 
animal models lack physiological, cellular and molecular mechanisms that 
sufficiently resemblance humans and in vitro techniques yet fail to provide 
adequate complexity. Animals, such as the ferret (Mustello purtorius furo), 
lapine (rabbit, Oryctolagus cunigulus), feline (cat, Felis catus), canine (dog, 
Canis lupus familiaris), ovine (sheep, Ovis aries), and porcine (pig, Sus 
scrofa), have contributed to research by elucidating implicated cellular and 
molecular mechanisms of the condition. Essential discoveries of each model are 
reported and discussed briefly in this review. Results of large animal 
experimentation could further be interpreted aiming at prevention of the disease 
progress or, alternatively, at regression of the implicated pathologic 
mechanisms to a physiologic state. This review summarizes the important aspects 
of the pathophysiology of LV hypertrophy and the applied surgical large animal 
models that currently better mimic the condition.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
European Society of Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1093/cvr/cvae045
PMCID: PMC11060489
PMID: 38428029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: P.D.C.M. and L.D.W. are 
co-founders and stockholders of Mirabilis Therapeutics BV. The remaining authors 
declare no competing interests.