---
reference_id: "PMID:10888887"
title: Defects in TCIRG1 subunit of the vacuolar proton pump are responsible for a subset of human autosomal recessive osteopetrosis.
authors:
- Frattini A
- Orchard PJ
- Sobacchi C
- Giliani S
- Abinun M
- Mattsson JP
- Keeling DJ
- Andersson AK
- Wallbrandt P
- Zecca L
- Notarangelo LD
- Vezzoni P
- Villa A
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1038/77131
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defects in TCIRG1 subunit of the vacuolar proton pump are responsible for a subset of human autosomal recessive osteopetrosis.
**Authors:** Frattini A, Orchard PJ, Sobacchi C, Giliani S, Abinun M, Mattsson JP, Keeling DJ, Andersson AK, Wallbrandt P, Zecca L, Notarangelo LD, Vezzoni P, Villa A
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/77131](https://doi.org/10.1038/77131)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2000 Jul;25(3):343-6. doi: 10.1038/77131.

Defects in TCIRG1 subunit of the vacuolar proton pump are responsible for a 
subset of human autosomal recessive osteopetrosis.

Frattini A(1), Orchard PJ, Sobacchi C, Giliani S, Abinun M, Mattsson JP, Keeling 
DJ, Andersson AK, Wallbrandt P, Zecca L, Notarangelo LD, Vezzoni P, Villa A.

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Tecnologie Biomediche Avanzate, Consiglio Nazionale delle 
Ricerche, Segrate, Italy.

Osteopetrosis includes a group of inherited diseases in which inadequate bone 
resorption is caused by osteoclast dysfunction. Although molecular defects have 
been described for many animal models of osteopetrosis, the gene responsible for 
most cases of the severe human form of the disease (infantile malignant 
osteopetrosis) is unknown. Infantile malignant autosomal recessive osteopetrosis 
(MIM 259700) is a severe bone disease with a fatal outcome, generally within the 
first decade of life. Osteoclasts are present in normal or elevated numbers in 
individuals affected by autosomal recessive osteopetrosis, suggesting that the 
defect is not in osteoclast differentiation, but in a gene involved in the 
functional capacity of mature osteoclasts. Some of the mouse mutants have a 
decreased number of osteoclasts, which suggests that the defect directly 
interferes with osteoclast differentiation. In other mutants, it is the function 
of the osteoclast that seems to be affected, as they show normal or elevated 
numbers of non-functioning osteoclasts. Here we show that TCIRG1, encoding the 
osteoclast-specific 116-kD subunit of the vacuolar proton pump, is mutated in 
five of nine patients with a diagnosis of infantile malignant osteopetrosis. Our 
data indicate that mutations in TCIRG1 are a frequent cause of autosomal 
recessive osteopetrosis in humans.

DOI: 10.1038/77131
PMID: 10888887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]