---
reference_id: "PMID:25422282"
title: Clinical characteristics of keratosis obturans and external auditory canal cholesteatoma.
authors:
- Park SY
- Jung YH
- Oh JH
journal: Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1177/0194599814559384
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical characteristics of keratosis obturans and external auditory canal cholesteatoma.
**Authors:** Park SY, Jung YH, Oh JH
**Journal:** Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0194599814559384](https://doi.org/10.1177/0194599814559384)

## Content

1. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2015 Feb;152(2):326-30. doi: 
10.1177/0194599814559384. Epub 2014 Nov 24.

Clinical characteristics of keratosis obturans and external auditory canal 
cholesteatoma.

Park SY(1), Jung YH(1), Oh JH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, College of Medicine, The 
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, College of Medicine, The 
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea ojhent@catholic.ac.kr.

OBJECTIVE: Keratosis obturans (KO) and external auditory canal cholesteatoma 
(EACC) have been considered separate entities. While the disorders are distinct, 
they share many overlapping characteristics, making a correct diagnosis 
difficult. In the present study, we compared their clinical characteristics and 
radiological features to clarify the diagnostic criteria.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective case series.
SETTING: Academic medical center.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: The clinical data of 23 cases of EACC and KO were 
retrospectively reviewed. The following clinical characteristics were compared 
between the 2 groups: sex, age, onset of symptoms, follow-up period, audiometric 
results, and imaging findings on temporal bone computed tomography including 
bilaterality, location, and the presence of extension to adjacent tissue.
RESULTS: The mean age of the EACC group was significantly older than that of the 
KO group. All of the cases of EACC occurred unilaterally, and bilateral 
occurrences of KO were observed in 4 of 9 cases. All of the lesions in the KO 
group were circumferential, and no lesion in the EACC group invaded the superior 
canal wall. No significant differences in symptoms, such as acute otalgia, 
otorrhea, and hearing loss, were noted between the 2 groups. The incidence of 
conductive hearing impairment more than 10 dB was higher in the KO group than in 
the EACC group.
CONCLUSION: Thus, KO and EACC are 2 distinct disease entities that share common 
features in clinical characteristics except for predominant age and 
bilaterality. Conservative treatment with meticulous cleaning of the lesion was 
successful in most cases with a long-term follow-up.

© American Academy of Otolaryngology—Head and Neck Surgery Foundation 2014.

DOI: 10.1177/0194599814559384
PMID: 25422282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]