---
reference_id: "PMID:820813"
title: "Nutritional status: a determinant of severity of diarrhea in patients with cholera."
authors:
- Palmer DL
- Koster FT
- Alam AK
- Islam MR
journal: J Infect Dis
year: '1976'
doi: 10.1093/infdis/134.1.8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nutritional status: a determinant of severity of diarrhea in patients with cholera.
**Authors:** Palmer DL, Koster FT, Alam AK, Islam MR
**Journal:** J Infect Dis (1976)
**DOI:** [10.1093/infdis/134.1.8](https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/134.1.8)

## Content

1. J Infect Dis. 1976 Jul;134(1):8-14. doi: 10.1093/infdis/134.1.8.

Nutritional status: a determinant of severity of diarrhea in patients with 
cholera.

Palmer DL, Koster FT, Alam AK, Islam MR.

The severity of diarrhea and nutritional status were measured in a prospective 
study of 97 patients hospitalized with cholera in Dacca, Bangladesh. Ninety-five 
percent of both adults and children were below their respective medians in 
weight as related to height; greater than 15% of each group showed second-degree 
protein-calorie malnutrition. Duration of diarrhea, but no volume of stool per 
hour, was prolonged by 30%-70% in those adults and children suffering from more 
severe malnutrition. The increased stool loss was unrelated to antibiotic usage, 
to presence of intestinal parasites, or to the refeeding diet given. It is 
suggested that the prolongation of diarrhea represents the continued effect of 
cholera toxin that is irreversibly bound to intestinal mucosal cells, the 
replacement of which would be retarded under conditions of poor nutrition.

PIP: This study investigates the severity of cholera as related to status of 
protein-calorie nutrition in both tetracycline-treated and 
non-antibiotic-treated male patients (n=97) at the Cholera Research Hospital in 
Dacca, Bangladesh during the cholera epidemic of October through December 1974. 
Stool and urine samples were analyzed. 54 of the patients were severely 
dehydrated (plasma specific gravity, 1.034) and 43 were moderately dehydrated 
(plasma specific gravity, 1.030-1.034). Results show that 95% of both adults and 
children patients were below their median in weight as related to height and 
that more than 15% of each group showed 2nd degree protein-calorie malnutrition. 
Prolongation of diarrhea was marked in all patients. 30 to 70% increase in 
duration of diarrhea was seen in patients with severe malnutrition. Increased 
stool loss was not associated with antibiotic usage, presence of intestinal 
parasites, or to refeeding diet given. The findings show that malnutrition 
enhances risk of infection and particularly of diarrheal illness, which in turn 
produces more profound malnutrition. Increased stool losses and prolonged 
diarrhea in malnourished patients may result in large increases in fluid, 
electrolyte and nursing needs.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/134.1.8
PMID: 820813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]