---
reference_id: "PMID:15753536"
title: Cigarette smoking accelerates progression of alcoholic chronic pancreatitis.
authors:
- Maisonneuve P
- Lowenfels AB
- Müllhaupt B
- Cavallini G
- Lankisch PG
- Andersen JR
- Dimagno EP
- Andrén-Sandberg A
- Domellöf L
- Frulloni L
- Ammann RW
journal: Gut
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1136/gut.2004.039263
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cigarette smoking accelerates progression of alcoholic chronic pancreatitis.
**Authors:** Maisonneuve P, Lowenfels AB, Müllhaupt B, Cavallini G, Lankisch PG, Andersen JR, Dimagno EP, Andrén-Sandberg A, Domellöf L, Frulloni L, Ammann RW
**Journal:** Gut (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1136/gut.2004.039263](https://doi.org/10.1136/gut.2004.039263)

## Content

1. Gut. 2005 Apr;54(4):510-4. doi: 10.1136/gut.2004.039263.

Cigarette smoking accelerates progression of alcoholic chronic pancreatitis.

Maisonneuve P(1), Lowenfels AB, Müllhaupt B, Cavallini G, Lankisch PG, Andersen 
JR, Dimagno EP, Andrén-Sandberg A, Domellöf L, Frulloni L, Ammann RW.

Author information:
(1)Epidemiology Unit, European Institute of Oncology, Via Ripamonti 435, 20141 
Milan, Italy. patrick.maisonneuve@ieo.it

Comment in
    Gut. 2005 Apr;54(4):446-7. doi: 10.1136/gut.2004.048785.
    Gastroenterology. 2005 Nov;129(5):1796-8; discussion 1798. doi: 
10.1053/j.gastro.2005.07.062.

BACKGROUND: Smoking is a recognised risk factor for pancreatic cancer and has 
been associated with chronic pancreatitis and also with type II diabetes.
AIMS: The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of tobacco on the age 
of diagnosis of pancreatitis and progression of disease, as measured by the 
appearance of calcification and diabetes.
PATIENTS: We used data from a retrospective cohort of 934 patients with chronic 
alcoholic pancreatitis where information on smoking was available, who were 
diagnosed and followed in clinical centres in five countries.
METHODS: We compared age at diagnosis of pancreatitis in smokers versus 
non-smokers, and used the Cox proportional hazards model to evaluate the effects 
of tobacco on the development of calcification and diabetes, after adjustment 
for age, sex, centre, and alcohol consumption.
RESULTS: The diagnosis of pancreatitis was made, on average, 4.7 years earlier 
in smokers than in non-smokers (p = 0.001). Tobacco smoking increased 
significantly the risk of pancreatic calcifications (hazard ratio (HR) 4.9 (95% 
confidence interval (CI) 2.3-10.5) for smokers v non-smokers) and to a lesser 
extent the risk of diabetes (HR 2.3 (95% CI 1.2-4.2)) during the course of 
pancreatitis.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, tobacco smoking was associated with earlier 
diagnosis of chronic alcoholic pancreatitis and with the appearance of 
calcifications and diabetes, independent of alcohol consumption.

DOI: 10.1136/gut.2004.039263
PMCID: PMC1774435
PMID: 15753536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]