---
reference_id: "PMID:38521841"
title: Aortitis after switching short-acting granulocyte colony-stimulating factors in a lymphoma patient with HLA-B52.
authors:
- Tane M
- Kosako H
- Hosoi H
- Furuya Y
- Hori Y
- Yamashita Y
- Murata S
- Mushino T
- Sonoki T
journal: Int J Hematol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s12185-024-03744-w
keywords:
- Humans
- Male
- "Granulocyte Colony-Stimulating Factor/adverse effects, administration & dosage"
- Middle Aged
- "Lymphoma, Large B-Cell, Diffuse/drug therapy"
- "Aortitis/chemically induced, etiology"
- HLA-B52 Antigen/adverse effects
- "Filgrastim/adverse effects, administration & dosage"
- Lenograstim
- Drug Substitution
- "Recombinant Proteins/adverse effects, administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aortitis after switching short-acting granulocyte colony-stimulating factors in a lymphoma patient with HLA-B52.
**Authors:** Tane M, Kosako H, Hosoi H, Furuya Y, Hori Y, Yamashita Y, Murata S, Mushino T, Sonoki T
**Journal:** Int J Hematol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12185-024-03744-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12185-024-03744-w)

## Content

1. Int J Hematol. 2024 May;119(5):608-612. doi: 10.1007/s12185-024-03744-w. Epub
2024 Mar 23.

Aortitis after switching short-acting granulocyte colony-stimulating factors in
a lymphoma patient with HLA-B52.

Tane M(1), Kosako H(1)(2), Hosoi H(3), Furuya Y(4), Hori Y(1), Yamashita
Y(1)(4), Murata S(1), Mushino T(1), Sonoki T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Wakayama Medical University, Kimiidera
811-1, Wakayama, 641-8510, Japan.
(2)Department of Hematology, Kinan Hospital, Wakayama, Japan.
(3)Department of Hematology/Oncology, Wakayama Medical University, Kimiidera
811-1, Wakayama, 641-8510, Japan. h-hosoi@wakayama-med.ac.jp.
(4)Department of Hematology, Naga Municipal Hospital, Wakayama, Japan.

Aortitis is a rare adverse event of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
(G-CSF) treatment. Several previous studies have described recurrent aortitis
caused by re-administration of the same G-CSF. However, no previous studies have
examined the safety of switching between short-acting G-CSFs in patients who
develop aortitis. We report the case of a 55-year-old man with refractory
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, who developed G-CSF-associated aortitis. The
aortitis was triggered by filgrastim and recurred after treatment with
lenograstim. The patient possessed human leukocyte antigen B52, which has been
implicated in Takayasu arteritis. In addition, a drug-induced lymphocyte
stimulation test for lenograstim performed upon detection of recurrent
G-CSF-associated aortitis produced a positive result. Our case suggests that
switching from one short-acting G-CSF to another does not prevent recurrence of
G-CSF-associated aortitis. Although the etiology of G-CSF-associated aortitis
has not been fully elucidated, our case also suggests that some patients may be
genetically predisposed to aortitis.

© 2024. Japanese Society of Hematology.

DOI: 10.1007/s12185-024-03744-w
PMID: 38521841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
