---
reference_id: "PMID:23929416"
title: Early-onset foveal involvement in retinitis punctata albescens with mutations in RLBP1.
authors:
- Dessalces E
- Bocquet B
- Bourien J
- Zanlonghi X
- Verdet R
- Meunier I
- Hamel CP
journal: JAMA Ophthalmol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2013.4476
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Carrier Proteins/genetics
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Dark Adaptation
- Disease Progression
- Electroretinography
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- Fovea Centralis/pathology
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Ophthalmoscopy
- Pedigree
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Retinal Cone Photoreceptor Cells/pathology
- "Retinal Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Tomography, Optical Coherence"
- Visual Acuity
- Visual Fields
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early-onset foveal involvement in retinitis punctata albescens with mutations in RLBP1.
**Authors:** Dessalces E, Bocquet B, Bourien J, Zanlonghi X, Verdet R, Meunier I, Hamel CP
**Journal:** JAMA Ophthalmol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2013.4476](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2013.4476)

## Content

1. JAMA Ophthalmol. 2013 Oct;131(10):1314-23. doi:
10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2013.4476.

Early-onset foveal involvement in retinitis punctata albescens with mutations in
RLBP1.

Dessalces E(1), Bocquet B, Bourien J, Zanlonghi X, Verdet R, Meunier I, Hamel
CP.

Author information:
(1)Genetics of Sensory Diseases, Centre Hospitalier Régional Universitaire de
Montpellier, Montpellier, France.

IMPORTANCE: Retinitis punctata albescens (RPA) is an autosomal recessive form of
retinitis pigmentosa characterized by white dotlike deposits in the fundus, in
most cases caused by mutations in RLBP1.
OBJECTIVE: To study disease progression and visual function in RPA.
DESIGN: We performed clinical and molecular investigations in patients with RPA
at various ages, from November 5, 2003, through June 20, 2012, with no planned
patient follow-up.
SETTING: The National Reference Center for Genetic Sensory Diseases
(Montpellier).
PARTICIPANTS: Eleven patients with RPA (mean age, 24 [range, 3-39] years) from 7
families and 11 control subjects undergoing evaluation.
EXPOSURE: Optical coherence tomography measurements.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Screening for mutations by polymerase chain reaction
sequencing of the 9 RLBP1 exons. Patients underwent standard ophthalmic
examination, fundus imaging, autofluorescence testing, Goldmann visual field
measurement, optical coherence tomography, adaptive optics-based infrared fundus
ophthalmoscopy, dark adaptometry, and electroretinography.
RESULTS: We found 2 novel RLBP1 mutations (p.Tyr111X and p.Arg9Cys), and 8
patients from Morocco were homozygous for the recurrent 7.36-kilobase RLBP1
deletion of exons 7 through 9. All patients had night blindness (before age 6
years in 10). The dotlike deposits were generally dense but could be rare,
appearing in adaptive optics as elongated structures with variable orientation
and no foveal involvement. We found no specific refractive error, and visual
acuity varied widely from normal (1.2) to counting fingers. Variable degrees of
visual field impairment were present, and all patients had severely decreased
electroretinographic responses with predominant rod impairment. No correlation
between visual acuity (P = .27) or visual field and age (P = .08) was present.
On optical coherence tomography, the mean (SD) central foveal (122 [23] vs 187
[30] µm in controls) and foveal (147 [19] vs 217 [17] µm) thicknesses were
significantly (P < .01) decreased, independently of age, whereas the retinal
thickness at the 3- and 6-mm rings around the fovea progressively decreased with
age. Mean (SD) cone number was normal in 1 patient aged 13 years (21,000/mm²
[2000/mm²]) but dropped to 10,500/mm² (5244/mm²), 8667/mm² (2944/mm²), and
5833/mm² (983/mm²) in 3 other patients aged 39, 32, and 29 years, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Patients with RPA show variable degrees of foveal
cone death, even at an early stage. This finding has implications for future
treatment.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2013.4476
PMID: 23929416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
