---
reference_id: "PMID:24288038"
title: "Abetalipoproteinemia and homozygous hypobetalipoproteinemia: a framework for diagnosis and management."
authors:
- Lee J
- Hegele RA
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-013-9665-4
keywords:
- "Abetalipoproteinemia/diagnosis, therapy"
- Apolipoproteins B/genetics
- Homozygote
- Humans
- "Hypobetalipoproteinemias/diagnosis, therapy"
- Mutation
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abetalipoproteinemia and homozygous hypobetalipoproteinemia: a framework for diagnosis and management.
**Authors:** Lee J, Hegele RA
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-013-9665-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-013-9665-4)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2014 May;37(3):333-9. doi: 10.1007/s10545-013-9665-4.
Epub  2013 Nov 28.

Abetalipoproteinemia and homozygous hypobetalipoproteinemia: a framework for
diagnosis and management.

Lee J(1), Hegele RA.

Author information:
(1)Robarts Research Institute, Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry,
University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.

Abetalipoproteinemia (ABL; OMIM 200100) and homozygous hypobetalipoproteinemia
(HHBL; OMIM 107730) are rare diseases characterized by hypocholesterolemia and
malabsorption of lipid-soluble vitamins leading to retinal degeneration,
neuropathy and coagulopathy. Hepatic steatosis is also common. The root cause of
both disorders is improper packaging and secretion of apolipoprotein (apo)
B-containing lipoprotein particles due to mutations either in both alleles of
the MTP (alias MTTP) gene encoding microsomal triglyceride transfer protein
(MTP) or both alleles of the APOB gene itself in the case of ABL and HHBL,
respectively. Clinical diagnosis is based on signs and symptoms, acanthocytosis
on blood smear, and virtually absent apo B-containing lipoproteins, including
chylomicrons, very low density lipoprotein and low density lipoprotein. Obligate
heterozygote parents of ABL patients usually have normal lipids consistent with
autosomal recessive inheritance, while heterozygous parents of HHBL patients
typically have half normal levels of apo B-containing lipoproteins consistent
with autosomal co-dominant inheritance. Definitive diagnosis involves sequencing
the MTP and APOB genes, for which >30 and >60 mutations have been described for
ABL and HHBL, respectively. Follow-up includes monitoring for ophthalmologic,
neurologic, hematologic, and hepatic complications, as well as compliance with
treatment. Investigations include lipid profile, serum transaminases, markers
for lipid-soluble vitamins, and periodic instrumental assessment of ocular and
neurological function. Mainstays of treatment include adherence to a low-fat
diet, and supplementation with essential fatty acids and high oral doses of fat
soluble vitamins. Prognosis is variable, but early diagnosis and strict
adherence to treatment can recover normal neurological function and halt disease
progression.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-013-9665-4
PMID: 24288038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
