---
reference_id: "PMID:36138666"
title: Extended Overview of Ocular Phenotype with Recent Advances in Hypohidrotic Ectodermal Dysplasia.
authors:
- Callea M
- Bignotti S
- Semeraro F
- Cammarata-Scalisi F
- El-Feghaly J
- Morabito A
- Romano V
- Willoughby CE
journal: Children (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/children9091357
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Extended Overview of Ocular Phenotype with Recent Advances in Hypohidrotic Ectodermal Dysplasia.
**Authors:** Callea M, Bignotti S, Semeraro F, Cammarata-Scalisi F, El-Feghaly J, Morabito A, Romano V, Willoughby CE
**Journal:** Children (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/children9091357](https://doi.org/10.3390/children9091357)

## Content

1. Children (Basel). 2022 Sep 6;9(9):1357. doi: 10.3390/children9091357.

Extended Overview of Ocular Phenotype with Recent Advances in Hypohidrotic 
Ectodermal Dysplasia.

Callea M(1), Bignotti S(2), Semeraro F(2), Cammarata-Scalisi F(3), El-Feghaly 
J(4), Morabito A(5), Romano V(2), Willoughby CE(6).

Author information:
(1)Pediatric Dentistry and Special Dental Care Unit, Meyer Children's Hospital, 
50139 Florence, Italy.
(2)Department of Medical and Surgical Specialties, Radiological Sciences, and 
Public Health, Ophthalmology Clinic, University of Brescia, 25121 Brescia, 
Italy.
(3)Regional Hospital of Antofagasta, Azapa, Antofagasta 5935, Chile.
(4)Departments of Dermatology and Pediatrics, University of Rochester, 
Rochester, NY 14627, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Meyer Children's Hospital, 50139 Florence, 
Italy.
(6)Genomic Medicine, Biomedical Sciences Research Institute, Ulster University, 
Coleraine BT52 1SA, UK.

The term ectodermal dysplasias (EDs) describes a heterogeneous group of 
inherited developmental disorders that affect several tissues of ectodermal 
origin. The most common form of EDs is hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED), 
which is characterized by hypodontia, hypotrichosis, and partial or total 
eccrine sweat gland deficiency. HED is estimated to affect at least 1 in 17,000 
people worldwide. Patients with HED have characteristic facies with periorbital 
hyperpigmentation, depressed nasal bridge, malar hypoplasia, and absent or 
sparse eyebrows and eyelashes. The common ocular features of HED include 
madarosis, trichiasis, and ocular chronic surface disease due to dry eye 
syndrome, which manifests clinically with discomfort, photophobia, and redness. 
Dry eye is common in HED and results from a combination of ocular surface 
defects: mucus abnormalities (abnormal conjunctival mucinous glands), aqueous 
tear deficiency (abnormalities in the lacrimal gland) and lipid deficiency (due 
to the partial or total absence of the meibomian glands; modified sebaceous 
glands with the tarsal plate). Sight-threatening complications result from 
ocular surface disease, including corneal ulceration and perforation with 
subsequent corneal scarring and neovascularization. Rare ocular features have 
been reported and include bilateral or unilateral congenital cataracts, 
bilateral glaucoma, chorioretinal atrophy and atresia of the nasolacrimal duct. 
Recognition of the ocular manifestations of HED is required to perform clinical 
surveillance, instigate supportive and preventative treatment, and manage ocular 
complications.

DOI: 10.3390/children9091357
PMCID: PMC9497858
PMID: 36138666

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.