---
reference_id: "PMID:32716032"
title: ROM1 contributes to phenotypic heterogeneity in PRPH2-associated retinal disease.
authors:
- Strayve D
- Makia MS
- Kakakhel M
- Sakthivel H
- Conley SM
- Al-Ubaidi MR
- Naash MI
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddaa160
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Eye Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation/genetics
- Peripherins/genetics
- Retina/metabolism
- "Retinal Cone Photoreceptor Cells/metabolism, pathology"
- "Retinal Degeneration/genetics, pathology"
- Tetraspanins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ROM1 contributes to phenotypic heterogeneity in PRPH2-associated retinal disease.
**Authors:** Strayve D, Makia MS, Kakakhel M, Sakthivel H, Conley SM, Al-Ubaidi MR, Naash MI
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddaa160](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddaa160)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2020 Sep 29;29(16):2708-2722. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddaa160.

ROM1 contributes to phenotypic heterogeneity in PRPH2-associated retinal
disease.

Strayve D(1), Makia MS(1), Kakakhel M(1), Sakthivel H(1), Conley SM(2)(3),
Al-Ubaidi MR(1)(4)(5), Naash MI(1)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Houston, Houston, TX
77204, USA.
(2)Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.
(3)Oklahoma Center for Neurosciences, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences
Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.
(4)College of Optometry, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77004, USA.
(5)Depatment of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, TX
77204-5001, USA.

Peripherin 2 (PRPH2) is a retina-specific tetraspanin protein essential for the
formation of rod and cone photoreceptor outer segments (OS). Patients with
mutations in PRPH2 exhibit severe retinal degeneration characterized by vast
inter- and intra-familial phenotypic heterogeneity. To help understand
contributors to this within-mutation disease variability, we asked whether the
PRPH2 binding partner rod OS membrane protein 1 (ROM1) could serve as a
phenotypic modifier. We utilized knockin and transgenic mouse models to evaluate
the structural, functional and biochemical effects of eliminating one allele of
Rom1 (Rom1+/-) in three different Prph2 models which mimic human disease: C213Y
Prph2 (Prph2C/+), K153Del Prph2 (Prph2K/+) and R172W (Prph2R172W). Reducing Rom1
in the absence of Prph2 mutations (Rom1+/-) had no effect on retinal structure
or function. However, the effects of reducing Rom1 in the presence of Prph2
mutations were highly variable. Prph2K/+/Rom1+/- mice had improved rod and cone
function compared with Prph2K/+ as well as amelioration of K153Del-associated
defects in PRPH2/ROM1 oligomerization. In contrast, Prph2R172W/Rom1+/- animals
had worsened rod and cone function and exacerbated retinal degeneration compared
with Prph2R172W animals. Removing one allele of Rom1 had no effect in Prph2C/+.
Combined, our findings support a role for non-pathogenic ROM1 null variants in
contributing to phenotypic variability in mutant PRPH2-associated retinal
degeneration. Since the effects of Rom1 reduction are variable, our data suggest
that this contribution is specific to the type of Prph2 mutation.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved.
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddaa160
PMCID: PMC7530533
PMID: 32716032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
