---
reference_id: "PMID:34969871"
title: Epidemiology of cardiomyopathies and incident heart failure in a population-based cohort study.
authors:
- Brownrigg JR
- Leo V
- Rose J
- Low E
- Richards S
- Carr-White G
- Elliott PM
journal: Heart
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2021-320181
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of cardiomyopathies and incident heart failure in a population-based cohort study.
**Authors:** Brownrigg JR, Leo V, Rose J, Low E, Richards S, Carr-White G, Elliott PM
**Journal:** Heart (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1136/heartjnl-2021-320181](https://doi.org/10.1136/heartjnl-2021-320181)

## Content

1. Heart. 2022 Aug 11;108(17):1383-1391. doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2021-320181.

Epidemiology of cardiomyopathies and incident heart failure in a 
population-based cohort study.

Brownrigg JR(1), Leo V(1), Rose J(2), Low E(3), Richards S(3), Carr-White G(4), 
Elliott PM(5).

Author information:
(1)Rare Diseases, Pfizer Ltd, Tadworth, UK.
(2)Cardiomyopathy UK, Chesham, UK.
(3)Amyloidosis Research Consortium, Edinburgh, UK.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Guy's and St. Thomas' Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(5)Institute of Cardiovascular Science, University College London, London, UK 
perry.elliott@ucl.ac.uk.

AIMS: The population prevalence of cardiomyopathies and the natural history of 
symptomatic heart failure (HF) and arrhythmia across cardiomyopathy phenotypes 
is poorly understood. Study aims were to estimate the population-diagnosed 
prevalence of cardiomyopathies and describe the temporal relationship between a 
diagnosis of cardiomyopathy with HF and arrhythmia.
METHODS: People with cardiomyopathy (n=4116) were identified from linked 
electronic health records (~9 million individuals; 2000-2018) and categorised 
into hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), 
arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC), restrictive 
cardiomyopathy (RCM) and cardiac amyloidosis (CA). Cardiomyopathy point 
prevalence, rates of symptomatic HF and arrhythmia and timing relative to a 
diagnosis of cardiomyopathy were determined.
RESULTS: In 2018, DCM was the most common cardiomyopathy. DCM and HCM were twice 
as common among men, with the reverse trend for ARVC. Between 2010 and 2018, 
prevalence increased for ARVC by 180% and HCM by 9%. At diagnosis, more patients 
with CA (66%), DCM (56%) and RCM (62%) had pre-existing HF compared with ARVC 
(29%) and HCM (27%). Among those free of HF at diagnosis of cardiomyopathy, 
annualised HF incidence was greatest in CA and DCM. Diagnoses of all 
cardiomyopathies clustered around the time of HF onset.
CONCLUSIONS: The recorded prevalence of all cardiomyopathies increased over the 
past decade. Recognition of CA is generally preceded by HF, whereas individuals 
with ARVC or HCM more often developed HF after their cardiomyopathy diagnosis 
suggesting a more indolent course or better asymptomatic recognition. The 
clustering of HF and cardiomyopathy diagnoses suggests opportunities for 
presymptomatic or earlier diagnosis.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2022. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/heartjnl-2021-320181
PMID: 34969871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: JRWB, SR, EL, GC-W and PME 
received compensation from Pfizer for their services as a member of the study 
Steering Committee. PME and GC-W have also received educational and/or research 
grants from Pfizer. PME has consultancy agreements from Alnylam, Sanofi, Genzyme 
and MyoKardia. JRWB at the time of this analysis was a full-time employee of 
Pfizer and holds stock and/or stock options. VL was a paid contractor to Pfizer 
in connection with the development of this manuscript.