---
reference_id: "PMID:17925777"
title: "[Whipple's disease]."
authors:
- Seguy D
journal: Gastroenterol Clin Biol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/s0399-8320(07)91935-1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Whipple's disease].
**Authors:** Seguy D
**Journal:** Gastroenterol Clin Biol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0399-8320(07)91935-1](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0399-8320(07)91935-1)

## Content

1. Gastroenterol Clin Biol. 2007 Aug-Sep;31(8-9 Pt 1):729-39. doi: 
10.1016/s0399-8320(07)91935-1.

[Whipple's disease].

[Article in French]

Seguy D(1).

Author information:
(1)Service de nutrition, CHRU de Lille. dseguy@univ-lille2.fr

For many years, Whipple's disease was considered a rare, mainly intestinal 
disease causing malabsorption. At present, however, it appears to be 
multivisceral mainly occuring in subjects with specific and subtle cell-mediated 
immunity defects. Until recently, diagnosis and follow-up of treatment efficacy 
depended on PAS positive macrophage inclusions in duodenal biopsies. New 
diagnostic methods based on PCR gene amplification and immunohistochemistry are 
now available by DNA sequencing and culture, respectively, of the causal 
bacteria, which was recently renamed Tropheryma whipplei. Although results are 
still empirical, and the first randomized study is in progress, an evolution in 
the choice and duration of antibiotic treatment of this normally fatal disease 
has led to a marked reduction in clinical relapses, especially for neurological 
manifestations. The present review shows how recent medical advances have 
completely transformed the understanding of a disease first described a century 
ago.

DOI: 10.1016/s0399-8320(07)91935-1
PMID: 17925777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]