---
reference_id: "PMID:23548761"
title: "Renal involvement in AA amyloidosis: clinical outcomes and survival."
authors:
- Yilmaz M
- Unsal A
- Sokmen M
- Kaptanogullari OH
- Alkim C
- Kabukcuoglu F
- Ozagari A
- Bor E
journal: Kidney Blood Press Res
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1159/000343398
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Renal involvement in AA amyloidosis: clinical outcomes and survival.
**Authors:** Yilmaz M, Unsal A, Sokmen M, Kaptanogullari OH, Alkim C, Kabukcuoglu F, Ozagari A, Bor E
**Journal:** Kidney Blood Press Res (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000343398](https://doi.org/10.1159/000343398)

## Content

1. Kidney Blood Press Res. 2013;37(1):33-42. doi: 10.1159/000343398. Epub 2013
Mar  12.

Renal involvement in AA amyloidosis: clinical outcomes and survival.

Yilmaz M(1), Unsal A, Sokmen M, Kaptanogullari OH, Alkim C, Kabukcuoglu F, 
Ozagari A, Bor E.

Author information:
(1)Nephrology Department, Bakirkoy Dr. Sadi Konuk Training and Research 
Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey. murvetyilmaz@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: The natural history of AA amyloidosis is typically progressive, 
leading to multiple organ failure and death. We analyzed the etiology as well as 
clinical and laboratory features of patients with biopsy-proven AA amyloidosis 
and evaluated the ultimate outcome.
METHODS: Seventy-three patients (24 female; mean age 41.85±15.89 years) were 
analyzed retrospectively. Demographic, clinical and laboratory features were 
studied and the outcome was assessed.
RESULTS: Familial Mediterranean Fever and tuberculosis were the most frequent 
causes of amyloidosis. Mean serum creatinine and proteinuria at diagnosis were 
4.65±4.89 mg/dl and 8.04±6.09 g/day, respectively; and stage I, II, III, IV and 
V renal disease were present in 19.2%, 13.7%, 16.4%, 11%, and 39.7% of the 
patients, respectively. ESRD developed in 16 patients during the follow-up 
period. All of the ESRD patients started a dialysis programme. Thirty patients 
(41%) died during the follow-up period; median patient survival was 35.9±6.12 
months. Old age, tuberculosis etiology, advanced renal disease and low serum 
albumin levels were associated with a worse prognosis. Serum albumin was a 
predictor of mortality in logistic regression analysis.
CONCLUSION: The ultimate outcome of the patients with AA amyloidosis is poor, 
possibly due to the late referral to the nephrology clinics. Early referral may 
be helpful to improve prognosis.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000343398
PMID: 23548761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]