---
reference_id: "PMID:28670357"
title: Raising Awareness Among Healthcare Providers about Epidermolysis Bullosa and Advancing Toward a Cure.
authors:
- Tabor A
- Pergolizzi JV Jr
- Marti G
- Harmon J
- Cohen B
- Lequang JA
journal: J Clin Aesthet Dermatol
year: '2017'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Raising Awareness Among Healthcare Providers about Epidermolysis Bullosa and Advancing Toward a Cure.
**Authors:** Tabor A, Pergolizzi JV Jr, Marti G, Harmon J, Cohen B, Lequang JA
**Journal:** J Clin Aesthet Dermatol (2017)

## Content

1. J Clin Aesthet Dermatol. 2017 May;10(5):36-48. Epub 2017 May 1.

Raising Awareness Among Healthcare Providers about Epidermolysis Bullosa and 
Advancing Toward a Cure.

Tabor A(1), Pergolizzi JV Jr(2), Marti G(3), Harmon J(3), Cohen B(4), Lequang 
JA(1).

Author information:
(1)GenArmor, Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
(2)NEMA Research, Inc, Naples, Florida.
(3)Department of Surgery and Hendrix Burn/Wound Laboratory, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland.

Objective: Epidermolysis bullosa (EB) is an orphan disease that affects about 
half a million people worldwide, but may not be familiar to all clinicians. The 
authors' goal was to present a short description of this condition and current 
research in the form of a narrative review. Methods: The authors reviewed the 
literature on epidermolysis bullosa in order to describe the condition and 
current genetic research. Results: There are at least 31 subtypes of EB, 
including junctional EB, dystrophic EB, and Kindler syndrome. Genetic research 
is crucial in finding strategies to manage and possibly cure EB, which is often 
undiagnosed or misdiagnosed. EB may present in newborns and may persist over the 
course of a lifetime. Serious complications can occur with EB, including chronic 
blisters, wounds, ulcers, pruritus, clubbing of hands and feet, and amputations. 
Pain is frequently reported. About 80 percent of patients with recessive 
dystrophic EB will succumb to squamous cell carcinoma by age 55. Promising 
directions for future research include genome editing, gene therapy, and 
cell-based therapies. Conclusion: Our growing understanding of genetics and cell 
therapies may lead to promising therapeutic advances to treat this challenging 
condition.

PMCID: PMC5479476
PMID: 28670357

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure:The authors report no relevant 
conflicts of interest.Disclosure:The authors report no relevant conflicts of 
interest.