---
reference_id: "PMID:37403138"
title: Phenotype and genotype heterogeneity of PLA2G6-associated neurodegeneration in a cohort of pediatric and adult patients.
authors:
- Dehnavi AZ
- Bemanalizadeh M
- Kahani SM
- Ashrafi MR
- Rohani M
- Toosi MB
- Heidari M
- Hosseinpour S
- Amini B
- Zokaei S
- Rezaei Z
- Aryan H
- Amanat M
- Vahidnezhad H
- Mohammadi P
- Garshasbi M
- Tavasoli AR
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02780-9
keywords:
- Adult
- Child
- Humans
- Genotype
- Group VI Phospholipases A2/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Neuroaxonal Dystrophies/genetics
- Parkinsonian Disorders/genetics
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Phenotype and genotype heterogeneity of PLA2G6-associated neurodegeneration in a cohort of pediatric and adult patients.
**Authors:** Dehnavi AZ, Bemanalizadeh M, Kahani SM, Ashrafi MR, Rohani M, Toosi MB, Heidari M, Hosseinpour S, Amini B, Zokaei S, Rezaei Z, Aryan H, Amanat M, Vahidnezhad H, Mohammadi P, Garshasbi M, Tavasoli AR
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-02780-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-02780-9)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 Jul 5;18(1):177. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02780-9.

Phenotype and genotype heterogeneity of PLA2G6-associated neurodegeneration in a 
cohort of pediatric and adult patients.

Dehnavi AZ(#)(1), Bemanalizadeh M(#)(1)(2), Kahani SM(3), Ashrafi MR(1), Rohani 
M(4)(5), Toosi MB(6)(7), Heidari M(1), Hosseinpour S(1), Amini B(1), Zokaei 
S(8)(9), Rezaei Z(1), Aryan H(8)(10), Amanat M(11), Vahidnezhad H(12)(13), 
Mohammadi P(3)(14), Garshasbi M(15), Tavasoli AR(16)(17)(18).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Neurology, Children's Medical 
Center, Pediatrics Center of Excellence, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 
Tehran, Iran.
(2)Child Growth and Development Research Center, Research Institute for 
Primordial Prevention of Non-Communicable Disease, Isfahan University of Medical 
Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
(3)Faculty of Medical Sciences, Department of Medical Genetics, Tarbiat Modares 
University, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Skull Base Research Center, The Five Senses Health Institute, Rasoul Akram 
Hospital, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Department of Neurology, Rasoul Akram Hospital, Iran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Mashhad University of Medical 
Sciences, Mashhad, Iran.
(7)Neuroscience Research Center, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, 
Mashhad, Iran.
(8)Dr. Farhud's Genetic Clinic, Tehran, Iran.
(9)School of Advanced Medical Science, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Iran.
(10)National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran.
(11)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(12)Jefferson Institute of Molecular Medicine, Thomas Jefferson University, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(13)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Sidney Kimmel Medical 
College, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(14)Pediatric Neurology Division, Children's Medical Center, Pediatrics Center 
of Excellence, Ataxia Clinic, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Iran.
(15)Faculty of Medical Sciences, Department of Medical Genetics, Tarbiat Modares 
University, Tehran, Iran. Masoud.garshasbi@modares.ac.ir.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Neurology, Children's 
Medical Center, Pediatrics Center of Excellence, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran. alirezatavasoli236@gmail.com.
(17)Jefferson Institute of Molecular Medicine, Thomas Jefferson University, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA. alirezatavasoli236@gmail.com.
(18)Pediatric Neurology Division, Children's Medical Center, Pediatrics Center 
of Excellence, Ataxia Clinic, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, 
Iran. alirezatavasoli236@gmail.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 Jul 17;18(1):190. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02794-3.

BACKGROUND: Phospholipase-associated neurodegeneration (PLAN) caused by 
mutations in the PLA2G6 gene is a rare neurodegenerative disorder that presents 
with four sub-groups. Infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy (INAD) and PLA2G6-related 
dystonia-parkinsonism are the main two subtypes. In this cohort, we reviewed 
clinical, imaging, and genetic features of 25 adult and pediatric patients 
harboring variants in the PLA2G6.
METHODS: An extensive review of the patients' data was carried out. Infantile 
Neuroaxonal Dystrophy Rating Scale (INAD-RS) was used for evaluating the 
severity and progression of INAD patients. Whole-exome sequencing was used to 
determine the disease's underlying etiology followed by co-segregation analysis 
using Sanger sequencing. In silico prediction analysis based on the ACMG 
recommendation was used to assess the pathogenicity of genetic variants. We 
aimed to survey a genotype-genotype correlation in PLA2G6 considering all 
reported disease-causing variants in addition to our patients using the HGMD 
database and the chi-square statistical approach.
RESULTS: Eighteen cases of INAD and 7 cases of late-onset PLAN were enrolled. 
Among 18 patients with INAD, gross motor regression was the most common 
presenting symptom. Considering the INAD-RS total score, the mean rate of 
progression was 0.58 points per month of symptoms (Standard error 0.22, lower 
95% - 1.10, and upper 95% - 0.15). Sixty percent of the maximum potential loss 
in the INAD-RS had occurred within 60 months of symptom onset in INAD patients. 
Among seven adult cases of PLAN, hypokinesia, tremor, ataxic gate, and cognitive 
impairment were the most frequent clinical features. Various brain imaging 
abnormalities were also observed in 26 imaging series of these patients with 
cerebellar atrophy being the most common finding in more than 50%. Twenty unique 
variants in 25 patients with PLAN were detected including nine novel variants. 
Altogether, 107 distinct disease-causing variants from 87 patient were analyzed 
to establish a genotype-phenotype correlation. The P value of the chi-square 
test did not indicate a significant relationship between age of disease onset 
and the distribution of reported variants on PLA2G6.
CONCLUSION: PLAN presents with a wide spectrum of clinical symptoms from infancy 
to adulthood. PLAN should be considered in adult patients with parkinsonism or 
cognition decline. Based on the current knowledge, it is not possible to foresee 
the age of disease onset based on the identified genotype.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-02780-9
PMCID: PMC10320940
PMID: 37403138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors declare no conflict of interest.