---
reference_id: "PMID:23588108"
title: Meta-analysis of the association between dopamine transporter genotype and response to methylphenidate treatment in ADHD.
authors:
- Kambeitz J
- Romanos M
- Ettinger U
journal: Pharmacogenomics J
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1038/tpj.2013.9
keywords:
- "3' Untranslated Regions/genetics"
- "Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/drug therapy, genetics"
- Dopamine Plasma Membrane Transport Proteins/genetics
- "Dopamine Uptake Inhibitors/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Genotype
- Humans
- "Methylphenidate/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- Tandem Repeat Sequences
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Meta-analysis of the association between dopamine transporter genotype and response to methylphenidate treatment in ADHD.
**Authors:** Kambeitz J, Romanos M, Ettinger U
**Journal:** Pharmacogenomics J (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/tpj.2013.9](https://doi.org/10.1038/tpj.2013.9)

## Content

1. Pharmacogenomics J. 2014 Feb;14(1):77-84. doi: 10.1038/tpj.2013.9. Epub 2013
Apr  16.

Meta-analysis of the association between dopamine transporter genotype and
response to methylphenidate treatment in ADHD.

Kambeitz J(1), Romanos M(2), Ettinger U(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(2)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, University Hospital of
Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a prevalent childhood-onset
neuropsychiatric disorder. Treatment with methylphenidate, which blocks dopamine
and noradrenaline transporters, is clinically efficacious in reducing the
symptoms of ADHD. However, a considerable proportion of patients show no or only
insufficient response to methylphenidate. Following a pharmacogenetic approach,
a number of studies have suggested that heterogeneity in treatment response
across subjects might to some extent be due to genetic factors. In particular, a
variable number tandem repeat (VNTR) polymorphism in the 3' untranslated region
of the SLC6A3 gene, which codes for the dopamine transporter, has been
considered as a predictor of treatment success. However, the literature has so
far been inconsistent. Here we present results of a meta-analysis of studies
investigating the moderating effect of the SLC6A3 VNTR on response to
methylphenidate treatment in subjects with ADHD. Outcome measures from 16
studies including data from 1572 subjects were entered into a random-effects
model. There was no significant summary effect for the SLC6A3 VNTR on the
response to methylphenidate treatment (P>0.5) and no effect on specific symptom
dimensions of hyperactivity/impulsivity and inattention (all P>0.2). However, in
a subanalysis of naturalistic trials, we observed a significant effect of
d=-0.36 (P=0.03), indicating that 10R homozygotes show less improvement in
symptoms following treatment than the non-10/10 carriers. This meta-analysis
indicates that SLC6A3 VNTR is not a reliable predictor of methylphenidate
treatment success in ADHD. Our study leaves unanswered the question of whether
other genetic polymorphisms or nongenetic factors may contribute to the observed
heterogeneity in treatment response across ADHD subjects.

DOI: 10.1038/tpj.2013.9
PMID: 23588108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
