---
reference_id: "PMID:37326450"
title: "Neonatal screening for primary and central congenital hypothyroidism: is it time to go Dutch?"
authors:
- Boelen A
- Zwaveling-Soonawala N
- Heijboer AC
- van Trotsenburg ASP
journal: Eur Thyroid J
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1530/ETJ-23-0041
keywords:
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Humans
- Congenital Hypothyroidism/diagnosis
- Neonatal Screening
- Thyrotropin
- Thyroxine
- Thyroid Hormones
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neonatal screening for primary and central congenital hypothyroidism: is it time to go Dutch?
**Authors:** Boelen A, Zwaveling-Soonawala N, Heijboer AC, van Trotsenburg ASP
**Journal:** Eur Thyroid J (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1530/ETJ-23-0041](https://doi.org/10.1530/ETJ-23-0041)

## Content

1. Eur Thyroid J. 2023 Jul 27;12(4):e230041. doi: 10.1530/ETJ-23-0041.

Neonatal screening for primary and central congenital hypothyroidism: is it time 
to go Dutch?

Boelen A(1)(2)(3), Zwaveling-Soonawala N(2)(4), Heijboer AC(1)(2)(3)(5), van 
Trotsenburg ASP(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Endocrine Laboratory, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Amsterdam UMC, 
location University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Amsterdam Gastroenterology Endocrinology Metabolism, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Amsterdam Reproduction & Development Research Institute, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Emma Children's Hospital, Amsterdam 
UMC, location University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Endocrine Laboratory, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Amsterdam UMC, 
location Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Thyroid hormone (TH) is indispensable for brain development in utero and during 
the first 2-3 years of life, and the negative effects of TH deficiency on brain 
development are irreversible. Detection of TH deficiency early in life by 
neonatal screening allows early treatment, thereby preventing brain damage. 
Inborn shortage of TH, also named congenital hypothyroidism (CH), can be the 
result of defective thyroid gland development or TH synthesis (primary or 
thyroidal CH (CH-T)). Primary CH is characterized by low blood TH and elevated 
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) concentrations. Less frequently, CH is due to 
insufficient stimulation of the thyroid gland because of disturbed hypothalamic 
or pituitary function (central CH). Central CH is characterized by low TH 
concentrations, while TSH is normal, low or slightly elevated. Most newborn 
screening (NBS) programs for CH are primarily TSH based and thereby do not 
detect central CH. Only a few NBS programs worldwide aim to detect both forms of 
CH by different strategies. In the Netherlands, we have a unique 
T4-TSH-thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG) NBS algorithm for CH, which enables the 
detection of primary and central CH. Although the necessity of central CH 
detection by NBS is still under debate, it has been shown that most central CH 
patients have moderate-to-severe hypothyroidism instead of mild and that early 
detection of central CH by NBS probably improves its clinical outcome and 
clinical care for central CH patients with multiple pituitary hormone 
deficiency. We are therefore convinced that detection of central CH by NBS is of 
utmost importance.

DOI: 10.1530/ETJ-23-0041
PMCID: PMC10388664
PMID: 37326450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: We declare that there is no conflict of interest 
that could be perceived as prejudicing the impartiality of this review.