---
reference_id: "PMID:17600106"
title: "Impact of clinical reminder redesign on learnability, efficiency, usability, and workload for ambulatory clinic nurses."
authors:
- Saleem JJ
- Patterson ES
- Militello L
- Anders S
- Falciglia M
- Wissman JA
- Roth EM
- Asch SM
journal: J Am Med Inform Assoc
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1197/jamia.M2163
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of clinical reminder redesign on learnability, efficiency, usability, and workload for ambulatory clinic nurses.
**Authors:** Saleem JJ, Patterson ES, Militello L, Anders S, Falciglia M, Wissman JA, Roth EM, Asch SM
**Journal:** J Am Med Inform Assoc (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1197/jamia.M2163](https://doi.org/10.1197/jamia.M2163)

## Content

1. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2007 Sep-Oct;14(5):632-40. doi: 10.1197/jamia.M2163.
Epub  2007 Jun 28.

Impact of clinical reminder redesign on learnability, efficiency, usability, and 
workload for ambulatory clinic nurses.

Saleem JJ(1), Patterson ES, Militello L, Anders S, Falciglia M, Wissman JA, Roth 
EM, Asch SM.

Author information:
(1)Veterans Association Getting at Patient Safety (GAPS) Center, VAMC, 
Cincinnati, OH, USA. jsaleem@iupui.edu

Comment in
    J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2007 Sep-Oct;14(5):684-5. doi: 10.1197/j.jamia.m2529.

OBJECTIVE: Computerized clinical reminders (CRs) were designed to reduce 
clinicians' reliance on their memory and to present evidence-based guidelines at 
point of care. However, the literature indicates that CR adoption and 
effectiveness has been variable. We examined the impact of four design 
modifications to CR software on learnability, efficiency, usability, and 
workload for intake nursing personnel in an outpatient clinic setting. These 
modifications were included in a redesign primarily to address barriers to 
effective CR use identified during a previous field study.
DESIGN: In a simulation experiment, 16 nurses used prototypes of the current and 
redesigned system in a within-subject comparison for five simulated patient 
encounters. Prior to the experimental session, participants completed an 
exploration session, where "learnability" of the current and redesigned systems 
was assessed.
MEASUREMENTS: Time, performance, and survey data were analyzed in conjunction 
with semi-structured debrief interview data.
RESULTS: The redesign was found to significantly increase learnability for 
first-time users as measured by time to complete the first CR, efficiency as 
measured by task completion time for two of five patient scenarios, usability as 
determined by all three groupings of questions taken from a commonly used survey 
instrument, and two of six workload subscales of the NASA Task Load Index (TLX) 
survey: mental workload and frustration.
CONCLUSION: Modest design modifications to existing CR software positively 
impacted variables that likely would increase the willingness for first-time 
nursing personnel to adopt and consistently use CRs.

DOI: 10.1197/jamia.M2163
PMCID: PMC1975803
PMID: 17600106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]