---
reference_id: "PMID:35534916"
title: Randomised controlled trial of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficient versus non-deficient red blood cell transfusion in patients with hypoproliferative anaemia.
authors:
- Krajibthong S
- Sahntipurna V
- Parnsamut C
- Pitakpolrat P
- Pattanapongsak W
- Watanaboonyongcharoen P
- Rojnuckarin P
journal: Transfus Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/tme.12871
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Randomised controlled trial of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficient versus non-deficient red blood cell transfusion in patients with hypoproliferative anaemia.
**Authors:** Krajibthong S, Sahntipurna V, Parnsamut C, Pitakpolrat P, Pattanapongsak W, Watanaboonyongcharoen P, Rojnuckarin P
**Journal:** Transfus Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/tme.12871](https://doi.org/10.1111/tme.12871)

## Content

1. Transfus Med. 2022 Aug;32(4):293-298. doi: 10.1111/tme.12871. Epub 2022 May 9.

Randomised controlled trial of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficient 
versus non-deficient red blood cell transfusion in patients with 
hypoproliferative anaemia.

Krajibthong S(1), Sahntipurna V(2), Parnsamut C(3), Pitakpolrat P(3), 
Pattanapongsak W(4), Watanaboonyongcharoen P(2)(3), Rojnuckarin P(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Transfusion Medicine Unit, King Chulalongkorn Memorial Hospital, Bangkok, 
Thailand.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn 
University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(4)National Blood Centre, Thai Red Cross Society, Bangkok, Thailand.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies revealed the glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
(G-6-PD) deficiency prevalence of 7.7-10% among Thai blood donors. Transfusion 
of red blood cells (RBCs) from these subjects potentially causes haemolysis in 
recipients.
METHODS: RBC units from the National Blood Centre were sampled to assess G-6-PD 
levels using spectrophotometry. Patients with pure underproduction anaemia 
requiring blood transfusion were randomised to receive G-6-PD-deficient versus 
normal ABO-matched RBCs. Pre- and 48-h post-transfusion indirect bilirubin, 
haemoglobin, haematocrit, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and haptoglobin were 
measured.
RESULTS: From April 2020 to March 2021, 374 RBC units were tested for G-6-PD, 
and that 25 were found to be G-6-PD deficient. Twelve units of G-6-PD-deficient 
RBCs and 14 units of normal RBCs were given to patients who met the inclusion 
criteria. The median (interquartile range) increases of indirect bilirubin in 
G-6-PD-deficient (N = 11) versus normal RBCs (N = 13) were + 0.12 (0.27) 
versus + 0.01 (1.3) mg/dl, p = 0.030), respectively. The median increases of 
haemoglobin were 1.00 (0.50) versus + 0.80 (0.95), p = 0.910, respectively. The 
increases in haematocrit were 2.59 (1.9) versus 2.29 (2.1), p = 0.733, 
respectively. There were no significant differences in changes of LDH and 
haptoglobin levels and no transfusion reactions.
DISCUSSION: G-6-PD-deficient packed red cells were associated with mildly 
elevated indirect bilirubin after transfusion, but there was no observed 
clinical symptoms.

© 2022 British Blood Transfusion Society.

DOI: 10.1111/tme.12871
PMID: 35534916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]