---
reference_id: "PMID:26504080"
title: Mutant B-Raf(V600E) Promotes Melanoma Paracellular Transmigration by Inducing Thrombin-mediated Endothelial Junction Breakdown.
authors:
- Zhang P
- Feng S
- Liu G
- Wang H
- Zhu H
- Ren Q
- Bai H
- Fu C
- Dong C
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.696419
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutant B-Raf(V600E) Promotes Melanoma Paracellular Transmigration by Inducing Thrombin-mediated Endothelial Junction Breakdown.
**Authors:** Zhang P, Feng S, Liu G, Wang H, Zhu H, Ren Q, Bai H, Fu C, Dong C
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M115.696419](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M115.696419)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2016 Jan 29;291(5):2087-106. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.696419. Epub 
2015 Oct 26.

Mutant B-Raf(V600E) Promotes Melanoma Paracellular Transmigration by Inducing 
Thrombin-mediated Endothelial Junction Breakdown.

Zhang P(1), Feng S(2), Liu G(3), Wang H(3), Zhu H(2), Ren Q(2), Bai H(2), Fu 
C(4), Dong C(4).

Author information:
(1)From the Key Laboratory of Luminescence and Real Time Analytical Chemistry, 
Ministry of Education, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Southwest University, 
Chongqing 400715, China, the Department of Bioengineering, Pennsylvania State 
University, University Park, Pennsylvania 16801, and pxz122@swu.edu.cn.
(2)From the Key Laboratory of Luminescence and Real Time Analytical Chemistry, 
Ministry of Education, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Southwest University, 
Chongqing 400715, China.
(3)the Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, 507 
Zhengmin Road, Shanghai 200433, China.
(4)the Department of Bioengineering, Pennsylvania State University, University 
Park, Pennsylvania 16801, and.

Tumor invasiveness depends on the ability of tumor cells to breach endothelial 
barriers. In this study, we investigated the mechanism by which the adhesion of 
melanoma cells to endothelium regulates adherens junction integrity and 
modulates tumor transendothelial migration (TEM) by initiating thrombin 
generation. We found that the B-Raf(V600E) mutation in metastatic melanoma cells 
up-regulated tissue factor (TF) expression on cell membranes and promoted 
thrombin production. Co-culture of endothelial monolayers with metastatic 
melanoma cells mediated the opening of inter-endothelial spaces near melanoma 
cell contact sites in the presence of platelet-free plasma (PFP). By using small 
interfering RNA (siRNA), we demonstrated that B-Raf(V600E) and TF silencing 
attenuated the focal disassembly of adherens junction induced by tumor contact. 
Vascular endothelial-cadherin (VE-cadherin) disassembly was dependent on 
phosphorylation of p120-catenin on Ser-879 and VE-cadherin on Tyr-658, Tyr-685, 
and Tyr-731, which can be prevented by treatment with the thrombin inhibitor, 
hirudin, or by silencing the thrombin receptor, protease-activated receptor-1, 
in endothelial cells. We also provided strong evidence that tumor-derived 
thrombin enhanced melanoma TEM by inducing ubiquitination-coupled VE-cadherin 
internalization, focal adhesion formation, and actin assembly in endothelium. 
Confocal microscopic analysis of tumor TEM revealed that junctions transiently 
opened and resealed as tumor cells accomplished TEM. In addition, in the 
presence of PFP, tumor cells preferentially transmigrated via paracellular 
routes. PFP supported melanoma transmigration under shear conditions via a 
B-Raf(V600E)-thrombin-dependent mechanism. We concluded that the activation of 
thrombin generation by cancer cells in plasma is an important process regulating 
melanoma extravasation by disrupting endothelial junction integrity.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M115.696419
PMCID: PMC4732197
PMID: 26504080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]