---
reference_id: "PMID:24011643"
title: Executive functions in clinical and preclinical Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Allain P
- Etcharry-Bouyx F
- Verny C
journal: Rev Neurol (Paris)
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.neurol.2013.07.020
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Executive functions in clinical and preclinical Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Allain P, Etcharry-Bouyx F, Verny C
**Journal:** Rev Neurol (Paris) (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neurol.2013.07.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurol.2013.07.020)

## Content

1. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2013 Oct;169(10):695-708. doi:
10.1016/j.neurol.2013.07.020.  Epub 2013 Sep 5.

Executive functions in clinical and preclinical Alzheimer's disease.

Allain P(1), Etcharry-Bouyx F, Verny C.

Author information:
(1)Unité de neuropsychologie, département de neurologie, CHU d'Angers, 4, rue 
Larrey, 49033 Angers cedex 01, France; Centre mémoire de ressources et de 
recherche, CHU d'Angers, 4, rue Larrey, 49033 Angers cedex 01, France; 
Laboratoire de psychologie des Pays-de-Loire (EA 4638), université d'Angers, 
maison des sciences humaines, 5 bis, boulevard Lavoisier, 49045 Angers cedex 1, 
France. Electronic address: phallain@chu-angers.fr.

Executive functions is an umbrella term describing a wide range of higher order 
processes that allow the flexible modification of thought and behaviour in 
response to changing cognitive or environmental contexts. Impairment of 
executive functions is common in neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's 
disease. These deficits negatively affect everyday activities and hamper the 
ability to cope with other cognitive or behavioural disorders. In this paper, we 
propose a synthesis of the knowledge on executive impairments in clinical and 
preclinical Alzheimer's disease, mostly leaning on the current studies made in 
this domain. We made some propositions for neuropsychological assessment of 
executive functions in preclinical and clinical phases of Alzheimer's disease. 
We hope that this overview will provide a useful insight into an area that is 
still insufficiently explored in the field of the neuropsychology of Alzheimer's 
disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurol.2013.07.020
PMID: 24011643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]