---
reference_id: "PMID:35829882"
title: "Inorganic arsenic induces MDM2, p53, and their phosphorylation and affects the MDM2/p53 complex in vitro."
authors:
- Yin J
- Zhou Q
- Tan J
- Che W
- He Y
journal: Environ Sci Pollut Res Int
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s11356-022-21986-1
keywords:
- Humans
- Arsenic/metabolism
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/metabolism
- Phosphorylation
- Arsenicals/metabolism
- Cacodylic Acid/metabolism
- Arsenic Poisoning
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-mdm2/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inorganic arsenic induces MDM2, p53, and their phosphorylation and affects the MDM2/p53 complex in vitro.
**Authors:** Yin J, Zhou Q, Tan J, Che W, He Y
**Journal:** Environ Sci Pollut Res Int (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11356-022-21986-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-022-21986-1)

## Content

1. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2022 Dec;29(58):88078-88088. doi:
10.1007/s11356-022-21986-1. Epub 2022 Jul 12.

Inorganic arsenic induces MDM2, p53, and their phosphorylation and affects the
MDM2/p53 complex in vitro.

Yin J(1), Zhou Q(1), Tan J(1), Che W(2), He Y(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health, Kunming Medical University, No.1168 Chunrongxi Road
Chenggong District, Kunming, Yunnan Province, China.
(2)Department of Occupational Health, Kunming Center for Disease Control and
Prevention, No. 4, Ziyun Road, Xishan District, Kunming, Yunnan, 650228,
People's Republic of China.
(3)School of Public Health, Kunming Medical University, No.1168 Chunrongxi Road
Chenggong District, Kunming, Yunnan Province, China. heyuefeng@kmmu.edu.cn.

Arsenic, as a human carcinogen, has posed a certain threat to environmental
health globally. However, the underlying mechanism of the arsenic carcinogenic
effect remains largely undetermined. The up-regulation of MDM2 seems to play a
crucial part in tumors in especial carcinomas of the diffuse type. The
interaction of MDM2 and p53 is closely relevant to the pathogenesis of tumors.
In this study, we aimed to investigate the effect on MDM2, p53, and their
phosphorylation after As(III). In the epidemiological study, we investigated
that MDM2 expression was up-regulation and was positively linked to methylated
metabolites (monomethylarsonic acid (MMA) and dimethylarsinic acid (DMA)) after
As(III)-exposure. In vitro studies employing A549 and 16HBE cells confirmed the
epidemiological data. Studies on MDM2 phosphorylation sites consisting of
Ser166, Ser260, and Ser394 in response to arsenic exposure, which have not been
studied presently, indicated that As(III) could induce the expression of MDM2
phosphorylation. Moreover, we studied the alterations of p53 and its N-terminus
phosphorylation sites of Ser9, Ser15, and Ser33, which demonstrated that p53 and
its phosphorylation were highly expressed after As(III) exposure. Subsequently,
Co-immunoprecipitation assays validated our hypothesis that the bonding of MDM2
and p53 was altered by arsenic exposure. What's more, outcomes coming from
different cell types of A549, 16HBE, and 60 T-16HBE revealed that MDM2 and its
phosphorylation expression existed a significant difference. The study provides
evidence that As(III) and its methylated metabolites modulate the expression of
MDM2, p53, and their phosphorylation and then affect the interaction between
MDM2 and p53.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s11356-022-21986-1
PMID: 35829882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
