---
reference_id: "PMID:29636225"
title: NDUFA4 (Renamed COXFA4) Is a Cytochrome-c Oxidase Subunit.
authors:
- Pitceathly RDS
- Taanman JW
journal: Trends Endocrinol Metab
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.tem.2018.03.009
keywords:
- Animals
- Electron Transport Complex IV
- Mammals
- Mitochondria
- Oxidoreductases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# NDUFA4 (Renamed COXFA4) Is a Cytochrome-c Oxidase Subunit.
**Authors:** Pitceathly RDS, Taanman JW
**Journal:** Trends Endocrinol Metab (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tem.2018.03.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tem.2018.03.009)

## Content

1. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2018 Jul;29(7):452-454. doi:
10.1016/j.tem.2018.03.009.  Epub 2018 Apr 7.

NDUFA4 (Renamed COXFA4) Is a Cytochrome-c Oxidase Subunit.

Pitceathly RDS(1), Taanman JW(2).

Author information:
(1)MRC Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases, UCL Institute of Neurology and 
National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, London, UK.
(2)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK. 
Electronic address: j.taanman@ucl.ac.uk.

Comment on
    Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2017 Nov;28(11):761-770. doi: 
10.1016/j.tem.2017.09.003.

Groundbreaking work by Kadenbach and colleagues in the 1980s revealed the 
presence of 13 subunits in the mammalian mitochondrial cytochrome-c oxidase 
(COX; Complex IV). This observation stood the test of time until 2012 when it 
was demonstrated that NDUFA4, a polypeptide previously attributed to 
mitochondrial Complex I, was a 14th subunit of COX. In his recent opinion 
article, Kadenbach argued that NDUFA4 is not a subunit of COX. However, based on 
the findings that NDUFA4 deficiency results in a severe loss of COX activity and 
that NDUFA4 represents a stoichiometric component of the individual COX complex, 
we reason that NDUFA4 is a bona fide COX subunit and propose renaming it as COX 
subunit FA4 (COXFA4).

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tem.2018.03.009
PMID: 29636225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]