---
reference_id: "PMID:35092359"
title: Exome sequencing and RNA analysis identify two novel CPLANE1 variants causing Joubert syndrome.
authors:
- Fei H
- Wu Y
- Wang Y
- Zhang J
journal: Mol Genet Genomic Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.1877
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exome sequencing and RNA analysis identify two novel CPLANE1 variants causing Joubert syndrome.
**Authors:** Fei H, Wu Y, Wang Y, Zhang J
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomic Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mgg3.1877](https://doi.org/10.1002/mgg3.1877)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2022 Mar;10(3):e1877. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.1877. Epub 2022
 Jan 29.

Exome sequencing and RNA analysis identify two novel CPLANE1 variants causing 
Joubert syndrome.

Fei H(1), Wu Y(1), Wang Y(1), Zhang J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Reproductive Genetics, International Peace Maternity and Child 
Health Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 
China.

BACKGROUND: Joubert syndrome (JS) is a genetically heterogeneous disorder; its 
genetic etiology involves more than 35 genes, and a limited number of studies 
have investigated the pathogenic mechanism of variants in patients with JS. RNA 
splicing analysis is critical to determine the functional significance for 
noncanonical splicing variants.
METHODS: Whole exome sequencing was performed to screen the causative gene 
variants in a JS family. Sanger sequencing was used to verify the variants. cDNA 
PCR products were analyzed and functional experiments were performed to 
determine the pathogenicity of the variants.
RESULTS: The clinical phenotypes and CPLANE1 variants in the JS patient were 
analyzed and proved consistent. We identified two novel heterozygous variants of 
CPLANE1 in the proband first, including c.4459del (frameshift variant) and 
c.7534-14G > A (intronic variant). We analyzed the pathogenic consequences of 
the 2 variants and classified the c.4459del as likely pathogenic according to 
the ACMG/AMP guidelines; however, the pathogenic significance of c.7534-14G > A 
was uncertain. Furthermore, we performed RNA splicing analysis and revealed that 
the noncanonical splicing variant (c.7534-14G > A) caused aberrant exon 37 
skipping. It produced an aberrant transcript that was predicted to encode a 
C-terminal truncated protein.
CONCLUSIONS: The genetic variation spectrum of JS caused by CPLANE1 was updated. 
Two novel variants further deepened our insight into the disease's molecular 
mechanism and confirmed the significance of diagnostic whole-exome sequencing.

© 2022 The Authors. Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.1877
PMCID: PMC8922956
PMID: 35092359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.