---
reference_id: "PMID:36578769"
title: Diagnosis and Emerging Treatment Strategies for Mucopolysaccharidosis VII (Sly Syndrome).
authors:
- Poswar FO
- Henriques Nehm J
- Kubaski F
- Poletto E
- Giugliani R
journal: Ther Clin Risk Manag
year: '2022'
doi: 10.2147/TCRM.S351300
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosis and Emerging Treatment Strategies for Mucopolysaccharidosis VII (Sly Syndrome).
**Authors:** Poswar FO, Henriques Nehm J, Kubaski F, Poletto E, Giugliani R
**Journal:** Ther Clin Risk Manag (2022)
**DOI:** [10.2147/TCRM.S351300](https://doi.org/10.2147/TCRM.S351300)

## Content

1. Ther Clin Risk Manag. 2022 Dec 22;18:1143-1155. doi: 10.2147/TCRM.S351300. 
eCollection 2022.

Diagnosis and Emerging Treatment Strategies for Mucopolysaccharidosis VII (Sly 
Syndrome).

Poswar FO(1)(2)(3)(4), Henriques Nehm J(1), Kubaski F(5), Poletto E(6), 
Giugliani R(1)(2)(3)(4)(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Group in Medical Genetics, Clinical Research Center, 
Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(2)Medical Genetics Service, Hospital de Clinicas de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre, 
RS, Brazil.
(3)Postgraduate Program in Genetics and Molecular Biology, UFRGS, Porto Alegre, 
RS, Brazil.
(4)DR Brasil Research Group, HCPA, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(5)Greenwood Genetic Center, Biochemical Genetics Laboratory, Greenwood, SC, 
USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
CA, USA.
(7)Department of Genetics, UFRGS, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(8)DASA Genômica, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
(9)Casa dos Raros, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.

Mucopolysaccharidosis VII (MPS VII, Sly syndrome) is an ultra-rare lysosomal 
disease caused by a deficiency of the enzyme β-glucuronidase (GUS). The 
diagnosis is suspected based on a range of symptoms that are common to many 
other MPS types, and it is confirmed through biochemical and molecular studies. 
Besides supportive treatment, current and emerging treatments include enzyme 
replacement therapy, hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, and gene therapy. 
This review summarizes the clinical manifestations, diagnosis, and emerging 
treatments for MPS VII.

© 2022 Poswar et al.

DOI: 10.2147/TCRM.S351300
PMCID: PMC9791935
PMID: 36578769

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest 
related to this work.