---
reference_id: "PMID:38947644"
title: "Granulomatosis With Polyangiitis as an Etiology of Silent Sinus Syndrome: A Case Report."
authors:
- Kramer N
- Manthei B
- Speier L
- Bigcas JM
- Manthei S
journal: Cureus
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.61442
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Granulomatosis With Polyangiitis as an Etiology of Silent Sinus Syndrome: A Case Report.
**Authors:** Kramer N, Manthei B, Speier L, Bigcas JM, Manthei S
**Journal:** Cureus (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.61442](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.61442)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2024 May 31;16(5):e61442. doi: 10.7759/cureus.61442. eCollection 2024 
May.

Granulomatosis With Polyangiitis as an Etiology of Silent Sinus Syndrome: A Case 
Report.

Kramer N(1), Manthei B(1), Speier L(1), Bigcas JM(2), Manthei S(3).

Author information:
(1)College of Osteopathic Medicine, Touro University Nevada, Henderson, USA.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Kerkorian School of 
Medicine at the University of Nevada Las Vegas, Las Vegas, USA.
(3)Department of Otolaryngology, Nevada Ear and Sinus Institute, Las Vegas, USA.

Silent sinus syndrome (SSS) is a rare condition characterized by the collapse of 
the maxillary sinus and the sinking of the eye socket (enophthalmos). Only 
around 100 cases of SSS have been reported so far. The underlying cause of this 
condition is the chronic obstruction of the osteomeatal complex, which leads to 
sinus contraction. In this case, we present a novel finding linking SSS with 
granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA). The patient described is a 39-year-old 
male who was diagnosed with SSS after a prolonged period of sinus pressure, 
headaches, epistaxis, and generalized congestion. Additionally, the patient 
reported a significant autoimmune history, including a previous occurrence of 
ANCA-mediated glomerulonephritis. Surgical intervention revealed the presence of 
significant granulation tissue, while histopathological examination identified 
areas of necrosis, vasculitis, and multinucleated giant cells consistent with 
GPA. This finding was further supported by the detection of positive blood 
c-ANCA. This case is particularly noteworthy as it is the first reported 
instance of GPA causing SSS. It serves as an excellent example to illustrate the 
underlying pathophysiology of SSS.

Copyright © 2024, Kramer et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.61442
PMCID: PMC11214768
PMID: 38947644

Conflict of interest statement: Human subjects: Consent was obtained or waived 
by all participants in this study. Conflicts of interest: In compliance with the 
ICMJE uniform disclosure form, all authors declare the following: 
Payment/services info: All authors have declared that no financial support was 
received from any organization for the submitted work. Financial relationships: 
All authors have declared that they have no financial relationships at present 
or within the previous three years with any organizations that might have an 
interest in the submitted work. Other relationships: All authors have declared 
that there are no other relationships or activities that could appear to have 
influenced the submitted work.