---
reference_id: "PMID:25421688"
title: Detection of epigenetic aberrations in the development of hepatocellular carcinoma.
authors:
- Zhang Y
journal: Methods Mol Biol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-1804-1_37
keywords:
- Animals
- Carcinogenesis/genetics
- "Carcinoma, Hepatocellular/genetics, pathology"
- "Epigenesis, Genetic"
- Epigenomics/methods
- Humans
- "Liver Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Detection of epigenetic aberrations in the development of hepatocellular carcinoma.
**Authors:** Zhang Y
**Journal:** Methods Mol Biol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-1-4939-1804-1_37](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-1804-1_37)

## Content

1. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1238:709-31. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-1804-1_37.

Detection of epigenetic aberrations in the development of hepatocellular
carcinoma.

Zhang Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Mailman School of Public Health
and Cancer Center of Columbia University, Room 1608, 630 West 168th Street, New
York, NY, 10032, USA, yz6@columbia.edu.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third most common cause of cancer death
worldwide. Hepatocarcinogenesis is a complex, multistep process. It is now
recognized that HCC is a both genetic and epigenetic disease; genetic and
epigenetic components cooperate at all stages of hepatocarcinogenesis.
Epigenetic changes involve aberrant DNA methylation, posttranslational histone
modifications and aberrant expression of microRNAs all of which can affect the
expression of oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes and other tumor-related genes
and alter the pathways in cancer development. Several risk factors for HCC,
including hepatitis B and C virus infections and exposure to the chemical
carcinogen aflatoxin B1 have been found to influence epigenetic changes. Their
interactions could play an important role in the initiation and progression of
HCC. Discovery and detection of biomarkers for epigenetic changes is a promising
area for early diagnosis and risk prediction of HCC.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4939-1804-1_37
PMID: 25421688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
