---
reference_id: "PMID:21837767"
title: "Digenic inheritance of mutations in FOXC1 and PITX2 : correlating transcription factor function and Axenfeld-Rieger disease severity."
authors:
- Kelberman D
- Islam L
- Holder SE
- Jacques TS
- Calvas P
- Hennekam RC
- Nischal KK
- Sowden JC
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/humu.21550
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Digenic inheritance of mutations in FOXC1 and PITX2 : correlating transcription factor function and Axenfeld-Rieger disease severity.
**Authors:** Kelberman D, Islam L, Holder SE, Jacques TS, Calvas P, Hennekam RC, Nischal KK, Sowden JC
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.21550](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.21550)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2011 Oct;32(10):1144-52. doi: 10.1002/humu.21550. Epub 2011 Sep 8.

Digenic inheritance of mutations in FOXC1 and PITX2 : correlating transcription 
factor function and Axenfeld-Rieger disease severity.

Kelberman D(1), Islam L, Holder SE, Jacques TS, Calvas P, Hennekam RC, Nischal 
KK, Sowden JC.

Author information:
(1)Ulverscroft Vision Research Group, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, 
United Kingdom.

Disease-causing mutations affecting either one of the transcription factor 
genes, PITX2 or FOXC1, have been previously identified in patients with 
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (AR). We identified a family who segregate novel 
mutations in both PITX2 (p.Ser233Leu) and FOXC1 (c.609delC). The most severely 
affected individual, who presented with an atypical phenotype of corneal 
opacification, lens extrusion, persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHPV), 
and subsequent bilateral retinal detachment, inherited mutations in both genes, 
whereas the single heterozygous mutations caused mild AR phenotypes. This is the 
first report of such digenic inheritance. By analyzing cognate targets of each 
gene, we showed that FOXC1 and PITX2 can independently regulate their own and 
each other's target gene promoters and do not show synergistic action in vitro. 
Mutation in either gene caused reduced transcriptional activation to different 
extents on the FOXO1 and PLOD1 promoters, whereas both mutations in combination 
showed the lowest level of activation. These data show how the compensatory 
activity of one factor, when the other is impaired, may lessen the phenotypic 
impact of developmental anomalies, yet reduced activity of both transcription 
factors increased disease severity. This suggests an under-reported mechanism 
for phenotypic variability whereby single mutations cause mild AR phenotypes, 
whereas digenic inheritance increases phenotypic severity.

© 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.21550
PMID: 21837767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]