---
reference_id: "PMID:37625240"
title: Efficacy of PD-1 inhibitors for colorectal cancer and polyps in Lynch syndrome patients.
authors:
- Yu JH
- Xiao BY
- Tang JH
- Li DD
- Wang F
- Ding Y
- Han K
- Kong LH
- Ling YH
- Mei WJ
- Hong ZG
- Liao LE
- Yang WJ
- Pan ZZ
- Zhang XS
- Jiang W
- Ding PR
journal: Eur J Cancer
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2023.113253
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of PD-1 inhibitors for colorectal cancer and polyps in Lynch syndrome patients.
**Authors:** Yu JH, Xiao BY, Tang JH, Li DD, Wang F, Ding Y, Han K, Kong LH, Ling YH, Mei WJ, Hong ZG, Liao LE, Yang WJ, Pan ZZ, Zhang XS, Jiang W, Ding PR
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejca.2023.113253](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2023.113253)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer. 2023 Oct;192:113253. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2023.113253. Epub 2023 
Jul 25.

Efficacy of PD-1 inhibitors for colorectal cancer and polyps in Lynch syndrome 
patients.

Yu JH(1), Xiao BY(1), Tang JH(1), Li DD(2), Wang F(3), Ding Y(2), Han K(1), Kong 
LH(1), Ling YH(4), Mei WJ(1), Hong ZG(1), Liao LE(1), Yang WJ(1), Pan ZZ(1), 
Zhang XS(2), Jiang W(1), Ding PR(5).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation 
Center for Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, PR 
China; Department of Colorectal Surgery, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, 
Guangzhou, PR China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation 
Center for Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, PR 
China; Department of Biological Therapy Center, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer 
Center, Guangzhou, PR China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation 
Center for Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, PR 
China; Department of Molecular Diagnosis, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, 
Guangzhou, PR China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation 
Center for Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, PR 
China; Department of Pathology, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, 
PR China.
(5)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation 
Center for Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, PR 
China; Department of Colorectal Surgery, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, 
Guangzhou, PR China. Electronic address: dingpr@sysucc.org.cn.

BACKGROUND: Programmed death-1 (PD-1) inhibitor is effective for colorectal 
cancer (CRC) with deficient mismatch repair (dMMR) or high microsatellite 
instability (MSI-H). We aimed to explore its effects on CRCs and colonic polyps 
in Lynch syndrome (LS) patients.
METHODS: LS patients with CRC who had evaluable tumours and received at least 2 
cycles of PD-1 inhibitors were retrospectively included. PD-1 inhibitors were 
given as a monotherapy or in combination with other therapies, including 
anticytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated antigen-4 treatment, radiotherapy, 
chemotherapy, and targeted therapy. Correlations of treatment responses with 
clinicopathological characteristics and genomic profiles were analysed.
RESULTS: A total of 75 LS patients were included, with a median age of 39 years. 
The median duration of follow-up was 27 months (range, 3-71). The objective 
response rate (ORR) was 70.7%, including 28.0% (n = 21) complete responses and 
42.7% (n = 32) partial responses. Four of five cases of LS CRCs displaying 
proficient MMR (pMMR) or microsatellite stable (MSS) were not responsive. 
Mucinous/signet-ring cell differentiation was associated with a lower ORR 
(P = 0.013). The 3-year overall survival and progression-free survival were 
91.2% and 82.2%, respectively. A polyp was detected in 26 patients during 
surveillance. Seven adenomas disappeared after treatment, and they were all 
larger than 7 mm.
CONCLUSION: PD-1 inhibitors are highly effective for dMMR and MSI-H LS CRCs, but 
not for pMMR or MSS LS CRCs or mucinous/signet-ring cell CRC. Large LS adenomas 
may also be eliminated by anti-PD-1 treatment.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT: Due to the privacy of patients, the related data 
cannot be available for public access but can be obtained from Pei-Rong Ding 
(dingpr@sysucc.org.cn) upon reasonable request. The key raw data have been 
uploaded to the Research Data Deposit public platform (www.researchdata.org.cn).

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2023.113253
PMID: 37625240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.