---
reference_id: "PMID:41721480"
title: "Children and Young People With First Relapse or Progression of Upfront Metastatic Rhabdomyosarcoma: An Analysis of Clinical Features and Outcomes From the INternational Soft Tissue saRcoma ConsorTium (INSTRuCT)."
authors:
- Wasti AT
- Bisogno G
- Coppadoro B
- Zanetti I
- Ebinger M
- Heinz AT
- Mandeville HC
- Alaggio R
- Casanova M
- van Scheltinga SEJT
- van Rijn RR
- Minard-Colin V
- Orbach D
- Collins NB
- Xue W
- Venkatramani R
- Merks JHM
- Chisholm JC
journal: Cancer Med
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1002/cam4.71524
keywords:
- Humans
- Child
- Adolescent
- "Child, Preschool"
- Male
- Female
- "Rhabdomyosarcoma/mortality, therapy, pathology, secondary"
- Infant
- Young Adult
- Disease Progression
- Adult
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/pathology, mortality"
- Prognosis
- Neoplasm Metastasis
- Survival Rate
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Children and Young People With First Relapse or Progression of Upfront Metastatic Rhabdomyosarcoma: An Analysis of Clinical Features and Outcomes From the INternational Soft Tissue saRcoma ConsorTium (INSTRuCT).
**Authors:** Wasti AT, Bisogno G, Coppadoro B, Zanetti I, Ebinger M, Heinz AT, Mandeville HC, Alaggio R, Casanova M, van Scheltinga SEJT, van Rijn RR, Minard-Colin V, Orbach D, Collins NB, Xue W, Venkatramani R, Merks JHM, Chisholm JC
**Journal:** Cancer Med (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cam4.71524](https://doi.org/10.1002/cam4.71524)

## Content

1. Cancer Med. 2026 Mar;15(3):e71524. doi: 10.1002/cam4.71524.

Children and Young People With First Relapse or Progression of Upfront
Metastatic Rhabdomyosarcoma: An Analysis of Clinical Features and Outcomes From
the INternational Soft Tissue saRcoma ConsorTium (INSTRuCT).

Wasti AT(1), Bisogno G(2)(3), Coppadoro B(2), Zanetti I(3), Ebinger M(4), Heinz
AT(4)(5), Mandeville HC(1)(6), Alaggio R(7)(8), Casanova M(9), van Scheltinga
SEJT(10), van Rijn RR(11), Minard-Colin V(12), Orbach D(13), Collins NB(14), Xue
W(15), Venkatramani R(16), Merks JHM(10), Chisholm JC(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, UK.
(2)Department of Women and Children's Health, University of Padova, Padova,
Italy.
(3)Pediatric Hematology Oncology Division, University Hospital of Padova,
Padova, Italy.
(4)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Children's
Hospital, Tübingen, Germany.
(5)Stuttgart Cancer Center, Zentrum für Kinder-, Jugend- und Frauenmedizin
(Olgahospital), Pädiatrie 5 (Pädiatrische Onkologie, Hämatologie, Immunologie),
Klinikum der Landeshauptstadt Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany.
(6)Children and Young People's Unit, Royal Marsden Hospital, Sutton, UK.
(7)Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico, Bambino Gesù Children's
Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(8)Department of Medico-Surgical Sciences and Biotechnologies, Università
Sapienza, Rome, Italy.
(9)Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale dei Tumori, Milan, Italy.
(10)Princess Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(11)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, University of Amsterdam,
Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(12)Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Oncology, INSERM U1015, Gustave
Roussy, Université Paris-Saclay, Villejuif, France.
(13)SIREDO Oncology Center (Care, Innovation and Research for Children,
Adolescents and Young Adults With Cancer), PSL University, Institut Curie,
Paris, France.
(14)Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(15)Department of Biostatistics, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida,
USA.
(16)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Hematology Oncology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA.

INTRODUCTION: We evaluated the survival rate/survivor characteristics following
first progression/relapse of metastatic rhabdomyosarcoma (M1 RMS), using pooled
European and US collaborative group data from the INternational Soft Tissue
saRcoma ConsorTium (INSTRuCT).
METHODS: Patients with first diagnosis of M1 RMS aged 0-40 years were identified
within the INSTRuCT database (Upfront Cohort; UC). The First Event Cohort (FEC)
included UC patients with first event of disease progression/relapse. Clinical
features and survival of FEC patients were described.
RESULTS: UC included 1095 eligible M1 RMS patients. 5-year Overall and Event
Free Survival were 32.0% (95% Confidence Interval (CI) 29.2-34.9) and 27.5% (95%
CI 24.8-30.2) respectively. Median time to event was 13.9 months (range
1 day-172.6 months). Among UC patients, 727 with first event of
progression/relapse were included in FEC. 3-year Overall Survival for FEC from
first event was 8.0% (95% CI 6.1-10.2). Thirty-four (4.7%) FEC patients were
alive with > 3 years follow up ("disease free") and 16 (2.2%) with < 3 years
follow up. FEC patients alive > 3 years were significantly more likely than
deceased FEC patients to have: younger age (p = 0.0031); no locoregional lymph
node involvement (p = 0.0013); fewer metastatic sites (p = 0.006); no bone
and/or bone marrow disease (p < 0.001 for each); lower Oberlin scores
(p < 0.0001); time to first event > 18 months (p < 0.0001). Univariate and
multivariable analyses conducted in FEC to investigate factors impacting OS
showed that Oberlin score ≥ 2 (Hazard Ratio (HR) 1.295, 95% Confidence Limits
(CL) 1.07-1.57, p = 0.0074) and involvement of loco-regional lymph nodes at
diagnosis (HR 1.28, 95% CL 1.08-1.52, p = 0.0053) were associated with worse
outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: Outcomes following first progression/relapse of M1 RMS are dismal.
Survivors had fewer adverse prognostic features at first presentation and later
first events. Further work is required to predict survivors of first relapse
more reliably.

© 2026 The Author(s). Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cam4.71524
PMCID: PMC12927941
PMID: 41721480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
