---
reference_id: "PMID:22784367"
title: Pathophysiology of thrombosis and pregnancy morbidity in the antiphospholipid syndrome.
authors:
- Oku K
- Amengual O
- Atsumi T
journal: Eur J Clin Invest
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2362.2012.02697.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathophysiology of thrombosis and pregnancy morbidity in the antiphospholipid syndrome.
**Authors:** Oku K, Amengual O, Atsumi T
**Journal:** Eur J Clin Invest (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-2362.2012.02697.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2362.2012.02697.x)

## Content

1. Eur J Clin Invest. 2012 Oct;42(10):1126-35. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2362.2012.02697.x. Epub 2012 Jul 12.

Pathophysiology of thrombosis and pregnancy morbidity in the antiphospholipid 
syndrome.

Oku K(1), Amengual O, Atsumi T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, Hokkaido University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

In patients with the antiphospholipid syndrome (APS), the presence of a group of 
pathogenic autoantibodies called antiphospholipid antibodies causes 
arteriovenous thrombosis and pregnancy complications. To date, the pathogenicity 
of the antiphospholipid antibodies has been the focus of analysis. Recently, the 
antibodies were reported to be capable of direct cell activation, and research 
on the underlying mechanism is ongoing. The antiphospholipid antibodies bind to 
the membranes of vascular endothelial cells, monocytes and platelets, provoking 
tissue factor expression and platelet aggregation. This activation functions as 
intracellular signalling, independent of the cell type, to activate p38MAPK and 
the transcription factor NFκB. Currently, there are multiple candidates for the 
membrane receptors of the antiphospholipid antibodies that are being tested for 
potential in specific therapy. Recently, APS was reported to have significant 
comorbidity with complement activation, and it was proposed that this results in 
placental damage and cell activation and, therefore, could be the primary factor 
for the onset of pregnancy complications and thrombosis. The detailed mechanism 
of complement activation remains unknown; however, an inflammation-inducing 
substance called anaphylatoxin, which appears during the activation process of 
the classical complement pathway, is thought to be a key molecule. Complement 
activation occurs in tandem, regardless of the pathology of APS or the type of 
antiphospholipid antibody, and it is thought that this completely new 
understanding of the mechanism will contribute greatly to comprehension of the 
pathology of APS.

© 2012 The Authors. European Journal of Clinical Investigation © 2012 Stichting 
European Society for Clinical Investigation Journal Foundation.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2362.2012.02697.x
PMID: 22784367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]