---
reference_id: "PMID:32445930"
title: Impact of Sun Exposure and Tanning Patterns on Next-Generation Sequencing Mutations in Melanoma.
authors:
- Loo K
- Soliman I
- Renzetti M
- Li T
- Wu H
- Reddy S
- Olszanski AJ
- Farma JM
journal: J Surg Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2020.04.021
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Cyclin-Dependent Kinase Inhibitor p16/genetics
- Female
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- Male
- "Melanoma/epidemiology, genetics"
- Middle Aged
- Mutation/genetics
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- "Skin Neoplasms/epidemiology, genetics"
- "Sunbathing/statistics & numerical data"
- Sunburn/genetics
- Sunlight/adverse effects
- Tanning
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/genetics
- Ultraviolet Rays/adverse effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of Sun Exposure and Tanning Patterns on Next-Generation Sequencing Mutations in Melanoma.
**Authors:** Loo K, Soliman I, Renzetti M, Li T, Wu H, Reddy S, Olszanski AJ, Farma JM
**Journal:** J Surg Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jss.2020.04.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2020.04.021)

## Content

1. J Surg Res. 2020 Oct;254:147-153. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2020.04.021. Epub 2020
May  21.

Impact of Sun Exposure and Tanning Patterns on Next-Generation Sequencing
Mutations in Melanoma.

Loo K(1), Soliman I(2), Renzetti M(1), Li T(3), Wu H(4), Reddy S(2), Olszanski
AJ(5), Farma JM(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania; Lewis Katz School of Medicine at Temple University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.
(2)Department of Surgical Oncology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.
(3)Department of Statistics, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.
(4)Department of Pathology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(5)Department of Medical Oncology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.
(6)Department of Surgical Oncology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. Electronic address: Jeffrey.Farma@fccc.edu.

BACKGROUND: For the past 30 y, the incidence rate of malignant melanoma has
risen steadily. Ultraviolet radiation exposure has been identified as the most
prevalent modifiable risk factor for melanoma. Here, next-generation sequencing
was used to analyze the relationship between multiple sun exposure factors and
select cancer-related genes to determine the relationship of sun exposure on the
molecular profiles of melanomas.
METHODS: The collection and analysis of study samples were approved by the
institutional review board. The patient cohort consisted of 173 patients whose
melanoma tissue samples underwent next-generation sequencing analysis for
somatic mutations of 50 cancer-related genes. Univariate and multivariate
analyses were conducted.
RESULTS: Patients with a history of blistering sunburn had an absolute mutation
incidence of 1.67 mutations per patient, compared with patients without a
history of blistering sunburn, who had an absolute mutation incidence of 1.16
mutations per patient (P = 0.028). A BRAF mutation was found in more tumors of
patients who reported visiting a tanning salon (57.14%), compared with those who
had not (18.75%; P = 0.0463). Patients with a previous history of skin cancer
were more likely to have a CDKN2A mutation (20.83%), compared with those without
a previous history of skin cancer (7.76%; P = 0.0292).
CONCLUSIONS: The trends seen in the molecular profiles of melanomas with respect
to various sun exposure factors suggest that sun exposure impacts genetic
makeup. Considering the increase in absolute mutation incidence in patients with
a history of blistering sunburn suggests that additional genes may contribute to
the pathology of malignancy. Future studies will use the unique molecular
profiles of melanomas to personalize patient treatments.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jss.2020.04.021
PMID: 32445930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
