---
reference_id: "PMID:28801039"
title: "Kohler's disease presenting as acute foot injury."
authors:
- Alhamdani M
- Kelly C
journal: Am J Emerg Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajem.2017.08.004
keywords:
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Foot Injuries/diagnosis
- Humans
- Male
- Osteochondrosis/diagnostic imaging
- Osteonecrosis/diagnostic imaging
- Tarsal Bones/diagnostic imaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kohler's disease presenting as acute foot injury.
**Authors:** Alhamdani M, Kelly C
**Journal:** Am J Emerg Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajem.2017.08.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajem.2017.08.004)

## Content

1. Am J Emerg Med. 2017 Nov;35(11):1787.e5-1787.e6. doi: 
10.1016/j.ajem.2017.08.004. Epub 2017 Aug 2.

Kohler's disease presenting as acute foot injury.

Alhamdani M(1), Kelly C(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, NewYork-Presbyterian Brooklyn Methodist 
Hospital, 506 6th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11215, United States. Electronic address: 
Dr.mazin_alhamdani@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, NewYork-Presbyterian Brooklyn Methodist 
Hospital, 506 6th Street, Brooklyn, NY 11215, United States.

Kohler's disease is rare cause of foot pain and limping in the pediatric 
population. The exact etiology of Kohler's disease is unknown. It usually 
presents as sudden and unexplained foot pain and limping. We report a case of a 
5-year-old male who presented to the Pediatric Emergency Department with foot 
pain and inability to bear weight for two days after overactivity and acute foot 
injury. The patient was eventually diagnosed with Kohler's disease (avascular 
necrosis of the navicular bone). Although Kohler's disease is not very common, 
it should be considered in the differential diagnosis of foot pain in the 
pediatric population, as it may prevent unnecessary tests and treatments.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajem.2017.08.004
PMID: 28801039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]