---
reference_id: "PMID:9497857"
title: "Gaucher's disease: clinical features and natural history."
authors:
- Cox TM
- Schofield JP
journal: Baillieres Clin Haematol
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1016/s0950-3536(97)80033-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gaucher's disease: clinical features and natural history.
**Authors:** Cox TM, Schofield JP
**Journal:** Baillieres Clin Haematol (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0950-3536(97)80033-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0950-3536(97)80033-9)

## Content

1. Baillieres Clin Haematol. 1997 Dec;10(4):657-89. doi: 
10.1016/s0950-3536(97)80033-9.

Gaucher's disease: clinical features and natural history.

Cox TM(1), Schofield JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, UK.

Gaucher's disease is an inherited disorder characterized by pathological storage 
of glycolipid in mononuclear phagocytes: it is a multi-system disease associated 
with striking variation in its clinical manifestations, severity and course. 
Although molecular analysis of the glucocerebrosidase gene in patients with 
Gaucher's disease has permitted broad correlations between genotype and 
phenotype to be made, with few exceptions genetic variation at this locus does 
not allow confident prediction of clinical phenotype or prognosis. Partial 
deficiency of glucocerebrosidase is associated principally with parenchymal 
disease of the liver, spleen, bone marrow and, in severe cases, the lung, in 
non-neuronopathic, Type 1, Gaucher's disease: here storage material in 
macrophages originates from turnover of exogenous glycolipids. Severe deficiency 
of glucocerebrosidase caused by disabling mutations is additionally associated 
with neurological manifestations that in part reflect a failure to degrade 
endogenous neuronal glycosphingolipids, the so-called neuronopathic, Type 2 and 
Type 3 disease categories. Here we describe the clinical features, complications 
and natural history principally of Type 1 Gaucher's disease: emphasis is placed 
on emerging pulmonary, osseous and other manifestations of obscure pathogenesis 
that respond poorly to enzyme-replacement therapy.

DOI: 10.1016/s0950-3536(97)80033-9
PMID: 9497857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]