---
reference_id: "PMID:20085714"
title: Autosomal-dominant striatal degeneration is caused by a mutation in the phosphodiesterase 8B gene.
authors:
- Appenzeller S
- Schirmacher A
- Halfter H
- Bäumer S
- Pendziwiat M
- Timmerman V
- De Jonghe P
- Fekete K
- Stögbauer F
- Lüdemann P
- Hund M
- Quabius ES
- Ringelstein EB
- Kuhlenbäumer G
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.12.003
keywords:
- "3',5'-Cyclic-AMP Phosphodiesterases/genetics"
- Brain/metabolism
- Corpus Striatum/metabolism
- Dopamine/metabolism
- Female
- Frameshift Mutation
- Gene Expression Regulation
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Genetic Linkage
- Humans
- Lod Score
- Male
- Mutation
- Neurodegenerative Diseases/metabolism
- Parkinson Disease/genetics
- Second Messenger Systems
- Signal Transduction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autosomal-dominant striatal degeneration is caused by a mutation in the phosphodiesterase 8B gene.
**Authors:** Appenzeller S, Schirmacher A, Halfter H, Bäumer S, Pendziwiat M, Timmerman V, De Jonghe P, Fekete K, Stögbauer F, Lüdemann P, Hund M, Quabius ES, Ringelstein EB, Kuhlenbäumer G
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.12.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.12.003)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Jan;86(1):83-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.12.003.

Autosomal-dominant striatal degeneration is caused by a mutation in the
phosphodiesterase 8B gene.

Appenzeller S(1), Schirmacher A, Halfter H, Bäumer S, Pendziwiat M, Timmerman V,
De Jonghe P, Fekete K, Stögbauer F, Lüdemann P, Hund M, Quabius ES, Ringelstein
EB, Kuhlenbäumer G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Institute of Experimental Medicine,
University of Kiel, Germany.

Autosomal-dominant striatal degeneration (ADSD) is an autosomal-dominant
movement disorder affecting the striatal part of the basal ganglia. ADSD is
characterized by bradykinesia, dysarthria, and muscle rigidity. These symptoms
resemble idiopathic Parkinson disease, but tremor is not present. Using genetic
linkage analysis, we have mapped the causative genetic defect to a 3.25 megabase
candidate region on chromosome 5q13.3-q14.1. A maximum LOD score of 4.1 (Theta =
0) was obtained at marker D5S1962. Here we show that ADSD is caused by a complex
frameshift mutation (c.94G>C+c.95delT) in the phosphodiesterase 8B (PDE8B) gene,
which results in a loss of enzymatic phosphodiesterase activity. We found that
PDE8B is highly expressed in the brain, especially in the putamen, which is
affected by ADSD. PDE8B degrades cyclic AMP, a second messenger implied in
dopamine signaling. Dopamine is one of the main neurotransmitters involved in
movement control and is deficient in Parkinson disease. We believe that the
functional analysis of PDE8B will help to further elucidate the pathomechanism
of ADSD as well as contribute to a better understanding of movement disorders.

2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2009.12.003
PMCID: PMC2801755
PMID: 20085714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
