---
reference_id: "PMID:33544627"
title: Early Environmental Upheaval and the Risk for Schizophrenia.
authors:
- Paquin V
- Lapierre M
- Veru F
- King S
journal: Annu Rev Clin Psychol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-081219-103805
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early Environmental Upheaval and the Risk for Schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Paquin V, Lapierre M, Veru F, King S
**Journal:** Annu Rev Clin Psychol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-081219-103805](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-081219-103805)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Clin Psychol. 2021 May 7;17:285-311. doi: 
10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-081219-103805. Epub 2021 Feb 5.

Early Environmental Upheaval and the Risk for Schizophrenia.

Paquin V(1)(2), Lapierre M(2)(3), Veru F(1)(2), King S(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, Montréal, Québec H3A 1A1, 
Canada; email: suzanne.king@mcgill.ca.
(2)Douglas Research Centre, Montréal, Québec H4H 1R3, Canada.
(3)Department of Psychology, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec H2V 2S9, 
Canada.

Why does prenatal exposure to wars, natural disasters, urbanicity, or winter 
increase the risk for schizophrenia? Research from the last two decades has 
provided rich insight about the underlying chains of causation at play during 
environmental upheaval, from conception to early infancy. In this review, we 
appraise the evidence linking schizophrenia spectrum disorder to prenatal 
maternal stress, obstetric complications, early infections, and maternal 
nutrition and other lifestyle factors. We discuss putative mechanisms, including 
the maternal stress system, perinatal hypoxia, and maternal-offspring immune 
activation. We propose that gene-environment interactions, timing during 
development, and sex differentiate the neuropsychiatric outcomes. Future 
research should pursue the translation of animal studies to humans and the 
longitudinal associations between early exposures, intermediate phenotypes, and 
psychiatric disorders. Finally, to paint a comprehensive model of risk and to 
harness targets for prevention, we argue that risk factors should be situated 
within the individual's personal ecosystem.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-081219-103805
PMID: 33544627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]