---
reference_id: "PMID:22637703"
title: Transcriptome analysis identifies TNF superfamily receptors as potential therapeutic targets in alcoholic hepatitis.
authors:
- Affò S
- Dominguez M
- Lozano JJ
- Sancho-Bru P
- Rodrigo-Torres D
- Morales-Ibanez O
- Moreno M
- Millán C
- Loaeza-del-Castillo A
- Altamirano J
- García-Pagán JC
- Arroyo V
- Ginès P
- Caballería J
- Schwabe RF
- Bataller R
journal: Gut
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-301146
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transcriptome analysis identifies TNF superfamily receptors as potential therapeutic targets in alcoholic hepatitis.
**Authors:** Affò S, Dominguez M, Lozano JJ, Sancho-Bru P, Rodrigo-Torres D, Morales-Ibanez O, Moreno M, Millán C, Loaeza-del-Castillo A, Altamirano J, García-Pagán JC, Arroyo V, Ginès P, Caballería J, Schwabe RF, Bataller R
**Journal:** Gut (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1136/gutjnl-2011-301146](https://doi.org/10.1136/gutjnl-2011-301146)

## Content

1. Gut. 2013 Mar;62(3):452-60. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-301146. Epub 2012 May 25.

Transcriptome analysis identifies TNF superfamily receptors as potential 
therapeutic targets in alcoholic hepatitis.

Affò S(1), Dominguez M, Lozano JJ, Sancho-Bru P, Rodrigo-Torres D, 
Morales-Ibanez O, Moreno M, Millán C, Loaeza-del-Castillo A, Altamirano J, 
García-Pagán JC, Arroyo V, Ginès P, Caballería J, Schwabe RF, Bataller R.

Author information:
(1)Liver Unit, Hospital Clínic, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi 
i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Centre Esther Koplowitz, CIBER de Enfermedades Hepáticas y 
Digestivas (CIBERehd), Barcelona, Spain.

Comment in
    Gut. 2013 Mar;62(3):335-6. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2012-302644.

OBJECTIVE: Alcoholic hepatitis (AH) is a severe clinical condition that needs 
novel therapies. The identification of targets for therapy is hampered by the 
lack of animal models of advanced AH. The authors performed a translational 
study through a transcriptome analysis in patients with AH to identify new 
molecular targets.
DESIGN: Hepatic gene expression profiling was assessed by DNA microarray in 
patients with AH (n=15) and normal livers (n=7). Functional analysis was 
assessed by gene set enrichment analysis. Quantitative PCR was performed in 
patients with AH (n=40), hepatitis C (n=18), non-alcoholic steatohepatitis 
(n=20) and in mouse models of acute and chronic liver injury. Protein expression 
was assessed by immunohistochemistry and western blotting.
RESULTS: Gene expression analysis showed 207 genes >5-fold differentially 
expressed in patients with AH and revealed seven pathways differentially 
regulated including 'cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction'. Several tumour 
necrosis factor (TNF) superfamily receptors, but not ligands, were overexpressed 
in AH. Importantly, Fn14 was the only TNF superfamily receptor exclusively 
upregulated in AH compared with other liver diseases and correlated with both 
90-day mortality and severity of portal hypertension. Fn14 protein expression 
was detected in areas of fibrogenesis and in a population of hepatocytes. Fn14 
expression was increased in experimental models of liver injury and was detected 
in progenitor cells.
CONCLUSION: Translational research revealed that TNF superfamily receptors are 
overexpressed in AH. Fn14, the receptor for TNF-like weak inducer of apoptosis, 
is selectively upregulated in patients with AH. TNF superfamily receptors could 
represent a potential target for therapy.

DOI: 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-301146
PMCID: PMC4064940
PMID: 22637703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests None.