---
reference_id: "PMID:38160837"
title: "ViCEKb: Vitiligo-linked Chemical Exposome Knowledgebase."
authors:
- Chivukula N
- Ramesh K
- Subbaroyan A
- Sahoo AK
- Dhanakoti GB
- Ravichandran J
- Samal A
journal: Sci Total Environ
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2023.169711
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- "Vitiligo/chemically induced, drug therapy, genetics"
- Exposome
- Skin
- Melanocytes
- Knowledge Bases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ViCEKb: Vitiligo-linked Chemical Exposome Knowledgebase.
**Authors:** Chivukula N, Ramesh K, Subbaroyan A, Sahoo AK, Dhanakoti GB, Ravichandran J, Samal A
**Journal:** Sci Total Environ (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.scitotenv.2023.169711](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2023.169711)

## Content

1. Sci Total Environ. 2024 Feb 25;913:169711. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2023.169711.  Epub 2023 Dec 29.

ViCEKb: Vitiligo-linked Chemical Exposome Knowledgebase.

Chivukula N(1), Ramesh K(2), Subbaroyan A(1), Sahoo AK(1), Dhanakoti GB(2), 
Ravichandran J(1), Samal A(3).

Author information:
(1)The Institute of Mathematical Sciences (IMSc), Chennai, India; Homi Bhabha 
National Institute (HBNI), Mumbai, India.
(2)The Institute of Mathematical Sciences (IMSc), Chennai, India.
(3)The Institute of Mathematical Sciences (IMSc), Chennai, India; Homi Bhabha 
National Institute (HBNI), Mumbai, India. Electronic address: 
asamal@imsc.res.in.

Vitiligo is a complex disease wherein the environmental factors, in conjunction 
with the underlying genetic predispositions, trigger the autoimmune destruction 
of melanocytes, ultimately leading to depigmented patches on the skin. While 
genetic factors have been extensively studied, the knowledge on environmental 
triggers remains sparse and less understood. To address this knowledge gap, we 
present the first comprehensive knowledgebase of vitiligo-triggering chemicals 
namely, Vitiligo-linked Chemical Exposome Knowledgebase (ViCEKb). ViCEKb 
involves an extensive and systematic manual effort in curation of published 
literature and subsequent compilation of 113 unique chemical triggers of 
vitiligo. ViCEKb standardizes various chemical information, and categorizes the 
chemicals based on their evidences and sources of exposure. Importantly, ViCEKb 
contains a wide range of metrics necessary for different toxicological 
evaluations. Notably, we observed that ViCEKb chemicals are present in a variety 
of consumer products. For instance, Propyl gallate is present as a fragrance 
substance in various household products, and Flutamide is used in medication to 
treat prostate cancer. These two chemicals have the highest level of evidence in 
ViCEKb, but are not regulated for their skin sensitizing effects. Furthermore, 
an extensive cheminformatics-based investigation revealed that ViCEKb chemical 
space is structurally diverse and comprises unique chemical scaffolds in 
comparison with skin specific regulatory lists. For example, Neomycin and 
2,3,5-Triglycidyl-4-aminophenol have unique chemical scaffolds and the highest 
level of evidence in ViCEKb, but are not regulated for their skin sensitizing 
effects. Finally, a transcriptomics-based analysis of ViCEKb chemical 
perturbations in skin cell samples highlighted the commonality in their linked 
biological processes. Overall, we present the first comprehensive effort in 
compilation and exploration of various chemical triggers of vitiligo. We believe 
such a resource will enable in deciphering the complex etiology of vitiligo and 
aid in the characterization of human chemical exposome. ViCEKb is freely 
available for academic research at: https://cb.imsc.res.in/vicekb.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2023.169711
PMID: 38160837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.