---
reference_id: "PMID:37861207"
title: "Human papillomavirus and p16(INK4a) in oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Lu Y
- Clifford GM
- Fairley CK
- Grulich AE
- Garland SM
- Xiao F
- Wang Y
- Zou H
journal: Int J Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/ijc.34763
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human papillomavirus and p16(INK4a) in oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Lu Y, Clifford GM, Fairley CK, Grulich AE, Garland SM, Xiao F, Wang Y, Zou H
**Journal:** Int J Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ijc.34763](https://doi.org/10.1002/ijc.34763)

## Content

1. Int J Cancer. 2024 Mar 1;154(5):830-841. doi: 10.1002/ijc.34763. Epub 2023 Oct
 20.

Human papillomavirus and p16(INK4a) in oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Lu Y(1)(2), Clifford GM(3), Fairley CK(4)(5), Grulich AE(6), Garland SM(7), Xiao 
F(1), Wang Y(1), Zou H(8)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health, the Key Laboratory of Environmental Pollution 
Monitoring and Disease Control, Ministry of Education, Guizhou Medical 
University, Guiyang, China.
(2)School of Public Health, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Early Detection, Prevention and Infections Branch, International Agency for 
Research on Cancer (IARC/WHO), Lyon, France.
(4)Melbourne Sexual Health Centre, The Alfred, Melbourne, Australia.
(5)Central Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine, Nursing and Health Sciences, 
Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.
(6)Kirby Institute, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.
(7)Royal Women's Hospital, University of Melbourne, Murdoch Children's Research 
Institute, Melbourne, Australia.
(8)School of Public Health, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
(9)Fujian Maternity and Child Health Hospital, College of Clinical Medicine for 
Obstetrics and Gynecology and Pediatrics, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, 
China.
(10)School of Public Health, Southwest Medical University, Luzhou, China.

We intended to update human papillomavirus (HPV) prevalence and p16INK4a 
positivity in oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomars (SCC), and calculate HPV 
attributable fraction (AF) for oropharyngeal SCC by geographic region. We 
searched Medline, Embase, and the Cochrane Library to identify published studies 
of HPV prevalence and p16INK4a positivity alone or together in oropharyngeal SCC 
before December 28, 2021. Studies that reported type-specific HPV DNA prevalence 
using broad-spectrum PCR-based testing methods were included. We estimated 
pooled HPV prevalence, type-specific HPV prevalence, and p16INK4a positivity. AF 
of HPV was calculated by geographic region. One hundred and thirty-four studies 
including 12 139 cases were included in our analysis. The pooled HPV prevalence 
estimate for oropharyngeal SCC was 48.1% (95% confidence interval [CI] 
43.2-53.0). HPV prevalence varied significantly by geographic region, and the 
highest HPV prevalence in oropharyngeal SCC was noted in North America (72.6%, 
95% CI 63.8-80.6). Among HPV positive cases, HPV 16 was the most common type 
with a prevalence of 40.2% (95% CI 35.7-44.7). The pooled p16INK4a positivity in 
HPV positive and HPV16 positive oropharyngeal SCC cases was 87.2% (95% CI 
81.6-91.2) and 91.7% (84.3-97.2). The highest AFs of HPV and HPV16 were noted in 
North America at 69.6% (95% CI 53.0-91.5) and 63.0% (48.0-82.7). [Correction 
added on 31 October 2023, after first online publication: the percentage symbol 
(%) was missing and has been added to 63.0% (48.0-82.7) in the Abstract and 
Conclusion.] A significant proportion of oropharyngeal SCC was attributable to 
HPV. HPV16 accounts for the majority of HPV positive oropharyngeal SCC cases. 
These findings highlight the importance of HPV vaccination in the prevention of 
a substantial proportion of oropharyngeal SCC cases.

© 2023 UICC.

DOI: 10.1002/ijc.34763
PMID: 37861207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]