---
reference_id: "PMID:35315985"
title: Proptosis is associated with thiol-disulfide in patients with Graves' ophthalmopathy.
authors:
- Acibucu F
- Öztürk DD
- Kizildag C
- Aslan MZ
- Gulumsek E
- Sumbul MS
- Neselioglu S
- Erel O
- Sen S
- Bankir M
- Sumbul HE
journal: Arch Endocrinol Metab
year: '2022'
doi: 10.20945/2359-3997000000448
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Proptosis is associated with thiol-disulfide in patients with Graves' ophthalmopathy.
**Authors:** Acibucu F, Öztürk DD, Kizildag C, Aslan MZ, Gulumsek E, Sumbul MS, Neselioglu S, Erel O, Sen S, Bankir M, Sumbul HE
**Journal:** Arch Endocrinol Metab (2022)
**DOI:** [10.20945/2359-3997000000448](https://doi.org/10.20945/2359-3997000000448)

## Content

1. Arch Endocrinol Metab. 2022 Apr 28;66(2):191-197. doi: 
10.20945/2359-3997000000448. Epub 2022 Mar 22.

Proptosis is associated with thiol-disulfide in patients with Graves' 
ophthalmopathy.

Acibucu F(1), Öztürk DD(2), Kizildag C(2), Aslan MZ(2), Gulumsek E(3), Sumbul 
MS(4), Neselioglu S(5), Erel O(5), Sen S(2), Bankir M(2), Sumbul HE(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Endocrinology Division, University of Health 
Sciences - Adana Health Practice and Research Center, Adana, Turkey, 
facibucu@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Health Sciences - Adana Health 
Practice and Research Center, Adana, Turkey.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, University of Health Sciences - Adana Health 
Practice and Research Center, Adana, Turkey.
(4)Department of Family Medicine, Adana Provincial Health Directorate, Adana, 
Turkey.
(5)Ankara Yildirim Beyazit University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical 
Biochemistry, Ankara, Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: Graves' ophthalmopathy (GO) is a vision-threatening finding observed 
in approximately half of Graves' disease patients. The pathophysiology of GO is 
unclear, and one of the suspected factors is oxidative stress. In our study, we 
compared the relationship between proptosis and SH-SS in patients diagnosed with 
GO.
METHODS: In this prospective study, 40 recently diagnosed Graves' disease 
patients with proptosis, 40 recently diagnosed Graves' disease patients without 
GO and 30 healthy individuals with similar demographic characteristics were 
included. Serum thiol-disulfide (SH-SS) measurements were performed. Eye 
examinations were performed by a single ophthalmologist to check for the 
presence of GO, and proptosis values were recorded with a Hertel 
exophthalmometer.
RESULTS: Total SH values were lower in the group with proptosis than in the 
other groups (p < 0.05). Total and native SH values were lower in patients 
without proptosis than in the control group (p < 0.05). Total SH, native SH and 
SS levels were independently associated with proptosis (p < 0.05). According to 
this analysis, it was found that increasing SS and decreasing total and native 
SH levels increased the probability of proptosis by 24.4%, 32.7% and 32.4%, 
respectively.
CONCLUSION: A decrease in SH, which is a natural antioxidant that protects the 
body against oxidative stress, and an increase in SS are important signs of 
oxidative damage. Proptosis and SH-SS are closely related in GO. This may help 
us detect GO and proptosis in Graves' patients. It can also assist in developing 
new options for preventing and treating GO.

DOI: 10.20945/2359-3997000000448
PMCID: PMC9832892
PMID: 35315985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: no potential conflict of interest 
relevant to this article was reported. The authors alone are responsible for the 
content and the writing of the article.