---
reference_id: "PMID:38862897"
title: "Targeted analysis of Ubiquitin-Specific Peptidase (USP8) in a population of Iranian people with Cushing's disease and a systematic review of the literature."
authors:
- Hashemi-Madani N
- Cheraghi S
- Emami Z
- Mehrjardi AZ
- Kaynama MR
- Khamseh ME
journal: BMC Endocr Disord
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12902-024-01619-z
keywords:
- Humans
- Ubiquitin Thiolesterase/genetics
- Iran/epidemiology
- Endosomal Sorting Complexes Required for Transport/genetics
- "Pituitary ACTH Hypersecretion/genetics, drug therapy"
- Adult
- Female
- Male
- Endopeptidases/genetics
- Mutation
- Middle Aged
- "ACTH-Secreting Pituitary Adenoma/genetics, pathology, drug therapy"
- Middle Eastern People
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeted analysis of Ubiquitin-Specific Peptidase (USP8) in a population of Iranian people with Cushing's disease and a systematic review of the literature.
**Authors:** Hashemi-Madani N, Cheraghi S, Emami Z, Mehrjardi AZ, Kaynama MR, Khamseh ME
**Journal:** BMC Endocr Disord (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12902-024-01619-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12902-024-01619-z)

## Content

1. BMC Endocr Disord. 2024 Jun 11;24(1):86. doi: 10.1186/s12902-024-01619-z.

Targeted analysis of Ubiquitin-Specific Peptidase (USP8) in a population of
Iranian people with Cushing's disease and a systematic review of the literature.

Hashemi-Madani N(#)(1), Cheraghi S(#)(1), Emami Z(1), Mehrjardi AZ(2), Kaynama
MR(3), Khamseh ME(4).

Author information:
(1)Endocrine Research Center, Institute of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Iran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, No. 10, Firoozeh St., Vali-asr
Ave., Vali-asr Sq, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Pathology, Firoozgar hospital, Iran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Arad Hospital, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Endocrine Research Center, Institute of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Iran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, No. 10, Firoozeh St., Vali-asr
Ave., Vali-asr Sq, Tehran, Iran. khamseh.m@iums.ac.ir.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVE: Activating mutation in Ubiquitin-specific peptidase (USP8) is
identified to enhance cell proliferation and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)
secretion from corticotroph pituitary adenoma. We investigated the USP8 variant
status in a population of Iranian people with functional corticotroph pituitary
adenoma (FCPA). Moreover, a systematic review was conducted to thoroughly
explore the role of USP8 variants and the related pathways in corticotroph
adenomas, genotype-phenotype correlation in USP8-mutated individuals with FCPA,
and the potential role of USP8 and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) as
targeted therapies in PFCAs.
METHODS: Genetic analysis of 20 tissue samples from 19 patients with PFCAs was
performed using Sanger sequencing. Moreover, a systematic literature review was
performed using the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and
Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines. PubMed, Scopus, web of Sciences, and Cochrane
databases were searched. The last search was performed on 20 September 2023 for
all databases.
RESULTS: In our series, we found two somatic mutations including a 7-bp deletion
variant: c.2151_2157delCTCCTCC, p. Ser718GlnfsTer3, and a missense variant:
c.2159 C > G, p. Pro720Arg (rs672601311) in exon 14. The Systematic review
indicated USP8 variant in 35% of corticotroph adenomas, with the highest
frequency (25%) in 720 code regions, p. Pro720Arg. Data regarding the impact of
USP8 mutational status on clinical characteristics and outcomes in FCPAs are
inconsistent. Moreover, Pasireotide as well as inhibitors of EGFR such as
Gefitinib and Lapatinib, as well as USP8 inhibitors including
-ehtyloxyimino9H-indeno (1, 2-b) pyrazine-2, 3-dicarbonitrile, DUBs-IN-2, and
RA-9 indicated promising results in treatment of corticotroph adenomas.
CONCLUSION: Although the USP8-EGFR system has been identified as the main
trigger and target of corticotroph tumorigenesis, more precise multicenter
studies are required to yield more consistent information regarding the
phenotype-genotype correlation and to develop effective targeted therapies.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12902-024-01619-z
PMCID: PMC11165846
PMID: 38862897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
