---
reference_id: "PMID:22938934"
title: Imaging of thyrotoxicosis.
authors:
- Sipos JA
- Kahaly GJ
journal: Am J Med
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2012.05.012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Imaging of thyrotoxicosis.
**Authors:** Sipos JA, Kahaly GJ
**Journal:** Am J Med (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.amjmed.2012.05.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amjmed.2012.05.012)

## Content

1. Am J Med. 2012 Sep;125(9):S1-2. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2012.05.012.

Imaging of thyrotoxicosis.

Sipos JA(1), Kahaly GJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, The Ohio State University, Columbus, USA. 
Jennifer.Sipos@osumc.edu

The diagnostic algorithm for patients with Graves' disease frequently involves 
the use of thyroid autoantibody testing and radioisotope scanning (full text 
available online: http://education.amjmed.com/pp1/248). However, ultrasound has 
myriad uses in the evaluation of patients with hyperthyroidism. The purpose of 
this paper is to review the medical literature outlining the important role that 
ultrasonography (US) can play in the diagnosis and management of patients with 
hyperthyroidism. We will make a case for the use of ultrasonography in the 
initial evaluation of all patients with thyrotoxicosis. This review will 
delineate the advantages of ultrasonography compared to nuclear medicine imaging 
in determining the etiology of the hyperthyroidism. The role of sonography in 
predicting remission and relapse of Graves' disease will also be examined. 
Finally, this paper will detail the importance of ultrasonography in the workup 
of hyperthyroidism during pregnancy. We will also outline its utility for 
predicting fetal thyroid dysfunction in maternal Graves' disease without the 
need for cordocentesis and its attendant complications.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2012.05.012
PMID: 22938934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]