---
reference_id: "PMID:25411971"
title: Household Transmission of Vibrio cholerae in Bangladesh.
authors:
- Sugimoto JD
- Koepke AA
- Kenah EE
- Halloran ME
- Chowdhury F
- Khan AI
- LaRocque RC
- Yang Y
- Ryan ET
- Qadri F
- Calderwood SB
- Harris JB
- Longini IM Jr
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003314
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Household Transmission of Vibrio cholerae in Bangladesh.
**Authors:** Sugimoto JD, Koepke AA, Kenah EE, Halloran ME, Chowdhury F, Khan AI, LaRocque RC, Yang Y, Ryan ET, Qadri F, Calderwood SB, Harris JB, Longini IM Jr
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0003314](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0003314)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2014 Nov 20;8(11):e3314. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0003314.  eCollection 2014 Nov.

Household Transmission of Vibrio cholerae in Bangladesh.

Sugimoto JD(1), Koepke AA(2), Kenah EE(3), Halloran ME(4), Chowdhury F(5), Khan 
AI(5), LaRocque RC(6), Yang Y(3), Ryan ET(7), Qadri F(5), Calderwood SB(8), 
Harris JB(9), Longini IM Jr(3).

Author information:
(1)Center for Statistics and Quantitative Infectious Diseases, Department of 
Biostatistics, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United States of 
America; Department of Epidemiology, University of Florida, Gainesville, 
Florida, United States of America; Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of 
Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United States of America; Center for Statistics 
and Quantitative Infectious Diseases, Vaccine and Infectious Disease Division, 
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington, United States of 
America.
(2)Center for Statistics and Quantitative Infectious Diseases, Department of 
Biostatistics, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United States of 
America; Center for Statistics and Quantitative Infectious Diseases, Vaccine and 
Infectious Disease Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, 
Washington, United States of America; Department of Statistics, University of 
Washington, Seattle, Washington, United States of America.
(3)Center for Statistics and Quantitative Infectious Diseases, Department of 
Biostatistics, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United States of 
America; Emerging Pathogens Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville, 
Florida, United States of America; Department of Biostatistics, University of 
Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United States of America.
(4)Center for Statistics and Quantitative Infectious Diseases, Department of 
Biostatistics, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United States of 
America; Center for Statistics and Quantitative Infectious Diseases, Vaccine and 
Infectious Disease Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, 
Washington, United States of America; Department of Biostatistics, University of 
Washington, Seattle, Washington, United States of America.
(5)Centre for Vaccine Sciences (CVS), International Centre for Diarrhoeal 
Disease Research, Bangladesh, Mohakhali Dhaka, Bangladesh.
(6)Division of Infectious Diseases, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts, United States of America; Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(7)Division of Infectious Diseases, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts, United States of America; Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; Department of 
Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, 
Massachusetts, United States of America.
(8)Division of Infectious Diseases, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts, United States of America; Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; Department of 
Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, 
United States of America.
(9)Division of Infectious Diseases, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, 
Massachusetts, United States of America; Department of Pediatrics, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Vibrio cholerae infections cluster in households. This study's 
objective was to quantify the relative contribution of direct, within-household 
exposure (for example, via contamination of household food, water, or surfaces) 
to endemic cholera transmission. Quantifying the relative contribution of direct 
exposure is important for planning effective prevention and control measures.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Symptom histories and multiple blood and fecal 
specimens were prospectively collected from household members of 
hospital-ascertained cholera cases in Bangladesh from 2001-2006. We estimated 
the probabilities of cholera transmission through 1) direct exposure within the 
household and 2) contact with community-based sources of infection. The natural 
history of cholera infection and covariate effects on transmission were 
considered. Significant direct transmission (p-value<0.0001) occurred among 1414 
members of 364 households. Fecal shedding of O1 El Tor Ogawa was associated with 
a 4.9% (95% confidence interval: 0.9%-22.8%) risk of infection among household 
contacts through direct exposure during an 11-day infectious period (mean 
length). The estimated 11-day risk of O1 El Tor Ogawa infection through exposure 
to community-based sources was 2.5% (0.8%-8.0%). The corresponding estimated 
risks for O1 El Tor Inaba and O139 infection were 3.7% (0.7%-16.6%) and 8.2% 
(2.1%-27.1%) through direct exposure, and 3.4% (1.7%-6.7%) and 2.0% (0.5%-7.3%) 
through community-based exposure. Children under 5 years-old were at elevated 
risk of infection. Limitations of the study may have led to an underestimation 
of the true risk of cholera infection. For instance, available covariate data 
may have incompletely characterized levels of pre-existing immunity to cholera 
infection. Transmission via direct exposure occurring outside of the household 
was not considered.
CONCLUSIONS: Direct exposure contributes substantially to endemic transmission 
of symptomatic cholera in an urban setting. We provide the first estimate of the 
transmissibility of endemic cholera within prospectively-followed members of 
households. The role of direct transmission must be considered when planning 
cholera control activities.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0003314
PMCID: PMC4238997
PMID: 25411971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.