---
reference_id: "PMID:39108836"
title: Epigenetics in rare neurological diseases.
authors:
- Roberts CT
- Arezoumand KS
- Kadar Shahib A
- Davie JR
- Rastegar M
journal: Front Cell Dev Biol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fcell.2024.1413248
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epigenetics in rare neurological diseases.
**Authors:** Roberts CT, Arezoumand KS, Kadar Shahib A, Davie JR, Rastegar M
**Journal:** Front Cell Dev Biol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcell.2024.1413248](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcell.2024.1413248)

## Content

1. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2024 Jul 23;12:1413248. doi: 10.3389/fcell.2024.1413248. 
eCollection 2024.

Epigenetics in rare neurological diseases.

Roberts CT(1), Arezoumand KS(1), Kadar Shahib A(1), Davie JR(1), Rastegar M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, Max Rady College of 
Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, 
Canada.

Rare neurological diseases include a vast group of heterogenous syndromes with 
primary impairment(s) in the peripheral and/or central nervous systems. Such 
rare disorders may have overlapping phenotypes, despite their distinct genetic 
etiology. One unique aspect of rare neurological diseases is their potential 
common association with altered epigenetic mechanisms. Epigenetic mechanisms 
include regulatory processes that control gene expression and cellular phenotype 
without changing the composition of the corresponding DNA sequences. Epigenetic 
factors include three types of proteins, the "readers, writers, and erasers" of 
DNA and DNA-bound proteins. Thus, epigenetic impairments of many neurological 
diseases may contribute to their pathology and manifested phenotypes. Here, we 
aim to provide a comprehensive review on the general etiology of selected rare 
neurological diseases, that include Rett Syndrome, Prader-Willi Syndrome, 
Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome, Huntington's disease, and Angelman syndrome, with 
respect to their associated aberrant epigenetic mechanisms.

Copyright © 2024 Roberts, Arezoumand, Kadar Shahib, Davie and Rastegar.

DOI: 10.3389/fcell.2024.1413248
PMCID: PMC11300358
PMID: 39108836

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that 
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. 
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.