---
reference_id: "PMID:17613355"
title: Liver biopsy assessment in chronic hepatitis.
authors:
- Lefkowitch JH
journal: Arch Med Res
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2006.08.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Liver biopsy assessment in chronic hepatitis.
**Authors:** Lefkowitch JH
**Journal:** Arch Med Res (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.arcmed.2006.08.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arcmed.2006.08.005)

## Content

1. Arch Med Res. 2007 Aug;38(6):634-43. doi: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2006.08.005.

Liver biopsy assessment in chronic hepatitis.

Lefkowitch JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, New York, USA. JHL3@columbia.edu

Liver biopsy has been a major diagnostic tool in the evaluation of individuals 
with chronic hepatitis for many decades and remains the most direct way of 
visualizing hepatic necroinflammation and fibrosis. In chronic viral hepatitis B 
and C, immune attack on hepatocytes bearing viral antigens results in the entry 
of lymphocytes and other effector cells through the portal tracts from which 
other lesions may evolve, including interface and lobular hepatitis as well as 
fibrosis or cirrhosis. Classification systems have been developed in order to 
provide semiquantitative grading of necroinflammation and staging of fibrosis 
and include the Scheuer, Batts and Ludwig, Ishak, and METAVIR systems. This 
review provides an historical perspective on histopathological methods of 
analyzing chronic hepatitis, describes the essential criteria of each of the 
major scoring systems and discusses problems related to sampling error, observer 
variation, and specimen size.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2006.08.005
PMID: 17613355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]