---
reference_id: "PMID:35148738"
title: "Abnormal eruption of teeth in relation to FGFR1 heterozygote mutation: a rare case of osteoglophonic dysplasia with 4-year follow-up."
authors:
- Zou Y
- Lin H
- Chen W
- Chang L
- Cai S
- Lu YG
- Xu L
journal: BMC Oral Health
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s12903-022-02069-6
keywords:
- Child
- Follow-Up Studies
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Osteochondrodysplasias
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 1/genetics"
- Tooth Eruption/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abnormal eruption of teeth in relation to FGFR1 heterozygote mutation: a rare case of osteoglophonic dysplasia with 4-year follow-up.
**Authors:** Zou Y, Lin H, Chen W, Chang L, Cai S, Lu YG, Xu L
**Journal:** BMC Oral Health (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12903-022-02069-6](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12903-022-02069-6)

## Content

1. BMC Oral Health. 2022 Feb 11;22(1):36. doi: 10.1186/s12903-022-02069-6.

Abnormal eruption of teeth in relation to FGFR1 heterozygote mutation: a rare 
case of osteoglophonic dysplasia with 4-year follow-up.

Zou Y(#)(1)(2), Lin H(#)(1)(2), Chen W(1)(2), Chang L(1)(2), Cai S(1)(2), Lu 
YG(3)(4), Xu L(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Fujian Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases and Fujian Provincial Engineering 
Research, Center of Oral Biomaterial and Stomatological Key Lab of Fujian 
College and University, School and Hospital of Stomatology, Fujian Medical 
University, Fuzhou, China.
(2)Institute of Stomatology and Research Center of Dental Esthetics and 
Biomechanics and Department of Orthodontics, School and Hospital of Stomatology, 
Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China.
(3)Fujian Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases and Fujian Provincial Engineering 
Research, Center of Oral Biomaterial and Stomatological Key Lab of Fujian 
College and University, School and Hospital of Stomatology, Fujian Medical 
University, Fuzhou, China. fjlyg63@fjmu.edu.cn.
(4)Department of Preventive Dentistry, Fujian Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, 
School of Stomatology, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, 350001, China. 
fjlyg63@fjmu.edu.cn.
(5)Fujian Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases and Fujian Provincial Engineering 
Research, Center of Oral Biomaterial and Stomatological Key Lab of Fujian 
College and University, School and Hospital of Stomatology, Fujian Medical 
University, Fuzhou, China. xlyyydentist@fjmu.edu.cn.
(6)Institute of Stomatology and Research Center of Dental Esthetics and 
Biomechanics and Department of Orthodontics, School and Hospital of Stomatology, 
Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China. xlyyydentist@fjmu.edu.cn.
(7)Department of Orthodontics, Fujian Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, School of 
Stomatology, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, 350001, China. 
xlyyydentist@fjmu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: We report a case and its 4-year follow-up of Osteoglophonic 
dysplasia (OD), a rare disease that disturbs both skeletal and dental 
development, which is usually caused by heterozygous FGFR1 mutations.
CASE PRESENTATION: This article presents a case where a 6-year-old male patient 
suffered dysregulation of tooth eruption and was diagnosed with osteogenic 
dysplasia from a fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) heterozygote 
mutation. However, the number of teeth is within the normal range, and their 
roots are well developed. Several interventions were implemented with varying 
degrees of results. The details of the 4-year follow-up showed that the signs of 
OD were more pronounced, including dwarfism, frontal bossing, delayed skeletal 
maturation, anteverted nares, micrognathia, and prominent ears, but the 
patient's impacted teeth and edentulous jaws remained unchanged.
CONCLUSIONS: FGFR1 heterozygote mutation and OD present significant difficulty 
for teeth eruption and subsequent intervention. Further measures ought to be 
taken in recognizing various symptoms presented by the patient. This case 
supports the significance of careful inquiry, comprehensive physical examination 
and correct diagnosis as indispensable steps for clinical practice in patients 
with unerupted teeth. Additionally, the detailed case and its 4-year follow-up 
length may provide new insights into osteogenic dysplasia and patients with 
impacted teeth while encouraging further exploration in treatment methods.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12903-022-02069-6
PMCID: PMC8832749
PMID: 35148738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.