---
reference_id: "PMID:38782614"
title: "Evaluation of final-year nursing students' attitudes towards preventing medical device-related pressure ulcers using a ABC model of affect, behavior and cognitive dimensions."
authors:
- Gül G
- Özyürek P
journal: J Tissue Viability
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.jtv.2024.05.007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Evaluation of final-year nursing students' attitudes towards preventing medical device-related pressure ulcers using a ABC model of affect, behavior and cognitive dimensions.
**Authors:** Gül G, Özyürek P
**Journal:** J Tissue Viability (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jtv.2024.05.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtv.2024.05.007)

## Content

1. J Tissue Viability. 2024 Aug;33(3):472-480. doi: 10.1016/j.jtv.2024.05.007.
Epub  2024 May 18.

Evaluation of final-year nursing students' attitudes towards preventing medical 
device-related pressure ulcers using a ABC model of affect, behavior and 
cognitive dimensions.

Gül G(1), Özyürek P(2).

Author information:
(1)Graduate Education Institute, Afyonkarahisar Health Sciences University, 
03200, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey.
(2)Faculty of Health Science, Surgical Nursing Department, Afyonkarahisar Health 
Sciences University, 03200, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey. Electronic address: 
pakize.ozyurek@afsu.edu.tr.

INTRODUCTION: Half of the hospital-acquired pressure ulcers are associated with 
the use of medical devices. Nursing students provide care services to patients 
in clinical settings and intensive care units who have or are at risk for 
medical device-related pressure ulcers (MDRPUs). In the prevention and care of 
MDRPUs, the attitudes of nursing students towards preventing of pressure ulcers 
are as crucial as their knowledge level and clinical skills.
AIM: The aim of this descriptive study is to assess the attitudes of final-year 
nursing undergraduate students towards preventing MDRPUs across cognitive, 
affective, and behavioral dimensions of ABC model.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Data of the study was handed between April 1 and December 
31, 2021, with 147 final-year nursing students. Data were collected using the 
Student Information Form and the Attitude Towards Preventing Medical 
Device-Related Pressure Ulcers Questionnaire (ATP-MDRPUsQ).
RESULTS: The mean attitude score towards preventing MDRPUs was 3.98 ± 0.45 on a 
5-point Likert scale. The mean scores for the cognitive, affective, and 
behavioral sub-dimensions were 3.88 ± 0.57, 4.15 ± 0.51, and 4.00 ± 0.672, 
respectively. A moderate positive relationship was found between the cognitive 
sub-dimension and both the affective and behavioral sub-dimensions (r = 0.451; 
r = 0.302; p < 0.01, respectively). Based on cluster analysis, the mean attitude 
scores of students towards MDRPU prevention were grouped into two clusters. The 
students in Cluster-2 and female students had higher mean attitude scores 
(p < 0.01). The item with the lowest mean score in the questionnaire pertained 
to the item, "I believe that I need training on the etiology and prevention of 
medical device-related pressure ulcers."
CONCLUSION: The general attitudes of final-year nursing students towards 
prevention MDRPU were satisfactory. However, their cognitive attitudes were less 
positive compared to their affective and behavioral attitudes. It is recommended 
to incorporate theoretical and practical courses focusing on the prevention of 
these injuries into nursing curricula to enhance students' knowledge and 
attitudes.

Copyright © 2024 Tissue Viability Society / Society of Tissue Viability. 
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jtv.2024.05.007
PMID: 38782614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no conflict of interest.