---
reference_id: "PMID:30205412"
title: "Epidemiological and Clinical Patterns of Kaposi Sarcoma: A 16-Year Retrospective Cross-Sectional Study from Yaoundé, Cameroon."
authors:
- Tounouga DN
- Kouotou EA
- Nansseu JR
- Zoung-Kanyi Bissek AC
journal: Dermatology
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1159/000492175
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- CD4 Lymphocyte Count
- Cameroon/epidemiology
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Female
- "HIV Infections/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy, immunology"
- Humans
- Incidence
- Lower Extremity
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mucous Membrane
- Retrospective Studies
- "Sarcoma, Kaposi/epidemiology, immunology, virology"
- "Skin Neoplasms/epidemiology, immunology, virology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiological and Clinical Patterns of Kaposi Sarcoma: A 16-Year Retrospective Cross-Sectional Study from Yaoundé, Cameroon.
**Authors:** Tounouga DN, Kouotou EA, Nansseu JR, Zoung-Kanyi Bissek AC
**Journal:** Dermatology (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000492175](https://doi.org/10.1159/000492175)

## Content

1. Dermatology. 2018;234(5-6):198-204. doi: 10.1159/000492175. Epub 2018 Sep 11.

Epidemiological and Clinical Patterns of Kaposi Sarcoma: A 16-Year Retrospective
Cross-Sectional Study from Yaoundé, Cameroon.

Tounouga DN(1), Kouotou EA(2)(3)(4), Nansseu JR(5)(6), Zoung-Kanyi Bissek AC(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Yaoundé I,
Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine and Specialties, Faculty of Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences, University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(3)Yaoundé University Teaching Hospital, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(4)Biyem-Assi District Hospital, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
(5)Department of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences,
University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, Cameroonjobertrichie_nansseu@yahoo.fr.
(6)Department for the Control of Disease, Epidemics and Pandemics, Ministry of
Public Health, Yaoundé, Cameroonjobertrichie_nansseu@yahoo.fr.

BACKGROUND: The burden of Kaposi sarcoma (KS) is increasing fast among
HIV-infected populations, but the disease remains desperately underexplored in
Cameroon, where the burden of HIV is high.
METHODS: This is a retrospective cross-sectional study carried out over a period
of 16 years (January 2001 to December 2016) at the HIV day care unit of the
Central Hospital of Yaoundé, Cameroon. The diagnosis was based on clinical
aspects and histological confirmation, and we used a preconstructed
questionnaire for data collection through patients' electronic and physical
files.
RESULTS: Among 14,220 files reviewed, 316 cases of KS were identified, yielding
a cumulative incidence of 2.2%. In the end, 266 patients (55% male) were
included in this study. The patients' age ranged from 17 to 72 years, with a
mean of 37.8 ± 9.5 years. KS was the presenting manifestation of HIV in 89.8% of
the cases. Cutaneous lesions occurred more often (81.6%), mainly located on the
lower limbs (47.7%); mucous lesions were found in 15.8% of the patients, while 8
patients (3.0%) had associated visceral lesions. The lesions predominantly were
lymphedemas (28.6%) and papulonodules (21.1%). At the diagnosis of KS, the
median CD4 count was 175 cells/mm3 (interquartile range 80.5-288.5), and 150
patients (56.6%) had CD4 counts < 200 cells/mm3.
CONCLUSIONS: KS is frequent among our HIV-infected patients; it seems to occur
most often at a younger adult age and represents one of the presenting
manifestations of HIV/AIDS in our context. It seems to equally affect men and
women, occurring more often when CD4 counts are < 200 cells/mm3.

© 2018 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000492175
PMID: 30205412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
