---
reference_id: "PMID:36476434"
title: "Therapies for Type 1 Diabetes: Is a Cure Possible?"
authors:
- Chuzho N
- Mishra N
- Tandon N
- Kumar N
journal: Curr Diabetes Rev
year: '2023'
doi: 10.2174/1573399819666221202161259
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapies for Type 1 Diabetes: Is a Cure Possible?
**Authors:** Chuzho N, Mishra N, Tandon N, Kumar N
**Journal:** Curr Diabetes Rev (2023)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1573399819666221202161259](https://doi.org/10.2174/1573399819666221202161259)

## Content

1. Curr Diabetes Rev. 2023;19(7):e021222211565. doi: 
10.2174/1573399819666221202161259.

Therapies for Type 1 Diabetes: Is a Cure Possible?

Chuzho N(1)(2), Mishra N(2), Tandon N(3), Kumar N(1).

Author information:
(1)ICMR-National Institute of Pathology, Safdarjung Hospital Campus, New Delhi, 
India.
(2)Symbiosis School of Biological Sciences, Symbiosis International (Deemed 
University), Pune, India.
(3)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences, New Delhi, India.

The current standard method for type 1 diabetes (T1D) management majorly focuses 
on controlling blood glucose levels with exogeneous insulin administration. 
Recent developments have focused on finding ways to predict and prevent the 
development of T1D, as well as finding a curative therapy for T1D. Such 
developments include β-cell replacement therapy by islet transplantation, 
non-insulin adjunct therapy, gene and stem cell-based therapies, immunotherapy, 
and automated treatment with an artificial pancreas. In recent years, 
non-traditional alternative therapy has also become a popular treatment option 
for T1D. This review discusses the various therapeutic options for T1D currently 
under various stages of development, the challenges associated with the present 
strategies, and their potential to eventually change the way T1D is treated.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1573399819666221202161259
PMID: 36476434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]