---
reference_id: "PMID:27803079"
title: Effect of Botulinum Toxin and Surgery among Spasmodic Dysphonia Patients.
authors:
- van Esch BF
- Wegner I
- Stegeman I
- Grolman W
journal: Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1177/0194599816675320
keywords:
- "Botulinum Toxins, Type A/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- "Dysphonia/drug therapy, physiopathology, surgery"
- Humans
- "Injections, Intramuscular"
- "Laryngeal Muscles/drug effects, innervation, surgery"
- "Laryngismus/drug therapy, surgery"
- "Neuromuscular Agents/administration & dosage, therapeutic use"
- Quality of Life
- Voice Quality
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of Botulinum Toxin and Surgery among Spasmodic Dysphonia Patients.
**Authors:** van Esch BF, Wegner I, Stegeman I, Grolman W
**Journal:** Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0194599816675320](https://doi.org/10.1177/0194599816675320)

## Content

1. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2017 Feb;156(2):238-254. doi: 
10.1177/0194599816675320. Epub 2016 Nov 1.

Effect of Botulinum Toxin and Surgery among Spasmodic Dysphonia Patients.

van Esch BF(1), Wegner I(1)(2), Stegeman I(1)(2), Grolman W(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University Medical 
Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands.
(2)2 Brain Center Rudolf Magnus, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the 
Netherlands.

Objective The effect of botulinum toxin among patients with adductor spasmodic 
dysphonia (AdSD) is temporary. To optimize long-term treatment outcome, other 
therapy options should be evaluated. Alternative treatment options for AdSD 
comprise several surgical treatments, such as thyroarytenoid myotomy, 
thyroplasty, selective laryngeal adductor denervation-reinnervation, laryngeal 
nerve crush, and recurrent laryngeal nerve resection. Here, we present the first 
systematic review comparing the effect of botulinum toxin with surgical 
treatment among patients diagnosed with AdSD. Data Sources MEDLINE (PubMed), 
EMBASE, and the Cochrane Library. Methods Articles were reviewed by 2 
independent authors, and data were compiled in tables for analysis of the 
objective outcome (voice expert evaluation after voice recording), the 
subjective outcome (patient self-assessment scores), and voice-related quality 
of life (Voice Health Index scores). Results No clinical trials comparing both 
treatment modalities were identified. Single-armed studies evaluated either the 
effect of botulinum toxin or surgical treatment. Thirteen studies reported 
outcomes after botulinum toxin treatment (n = 419), and 9 studies reported 
outcomes after surgical treatment (n = 585 patients). A positive effect of 
bilateral botulinum toxin injections was found for the objective voice outcome, 
subjective voice outcome, and quality of life. The duration of the beneficial 
effect ranged from 15 to 18 weeks. Surgical treatment had an overall positive 
effect on objective voice improvement, subjective voice improvement, and quality 
of live. Conclusion No preference for one treatment could be demonstrated. 
Prospective clinical trials comparing treatment modalities are recommended to 
delineate the optimal outcomes by direct comparison.

DOI: 10.1177/0194599816675320
PMID: 27803079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]