---
reference_id: "PMID:21295409"
title: Comparative efficacy of four commercially available heartworm preventive products against the MP3 laboratory strain of Dirofilaria immitis.
authors:
- Blagburn BL
- Dillon AR
- Arther RG
- Butler JM
- Newton JC
journal: Vet Parasitol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2010.12.049
keywords:
- Animals
- Anthelmintics/therapeutic use
- Dirofilaria immitis/classification
- "Dirofilariasis/drug therapy, parasitology"
- "Dog Diseases/drug therapy, parasitology"
- Dogs
- Female
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comparative efficacy of four commercially available heartworm preventive products against the MP3 laboratory strain of Dirofilaria immitis.
**Authors:** Blagburn BL, Dillon AR, Arther RG, Butler JM, Newton JC
**Journal:** Vet Parasitol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.vetpar.2010.12.049](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vetpar.2010.12.049)

## Content

1. Vet Parasitol. 2011 Mar 10;176(2-3):189-94. doi: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2010.12.049.
 Epub 2011 Jan 11.

Comparative efficacy of four commercially available heartworm preventive
products against the MP3 laboratory strain of Dirofilaria immitis.

Blagburn BL(1), Dillon AR, Arther RG, Butler JM, Newton JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn
University, Auburn, AL, USA. blagbbl@vetmed.auburn.edu

A controlled laboratory study was conducted to evaluate the efficacy of four
commercial products administered as a single treatment for the prevention of
heartworm disease caused by Dirofilaria immitis in dogs. Forty-four commercially
sourced Beagle dogs, 6-7 months of age, were received at the test site (Auburn
University, Department of Pathobiology) on Study Day (SD) -72 to begin
acclimation. On SD -30, each dog was inoculated subcutaneously with 100
infective, third-stage D. immitis larvae (MP3 strain, TRS Laboratories, Inc.,
Athens, GA). On SD -1, 40 dogs weighing 18.2-25.3 lbs were ranked by decreasing
body weight and randomized to five groups of eight dogs each. On SD 0, the dogs
assigned to Group 1 were treated orally with ivermectin/pyrantel pamoate
chewable tablets, Group 2 dogs were treated orally with milbemycin oxime
flavored tablets, Group 3 dogs were treated with selamectin topical solution,
and Group 4 dogs were treated with imidacloprid/moxidectin topical solution.
Group 5 dogs remained nontreated. Dosages for dogs in Groups 1-4 were based on
the individual body weight of each dog and current labeled dose banding for each
commercial product. All dogs were fasted overnight prior to treatment. Food was
returned four hours after treatment. Animals were observed for abnormal clinical
signs involving eyes, feces, respiration, behavioral attitude,
locomotion/musculature, or skin conditions at prescribed intervals immediately
after treatment and at twice daily intervals thereafter. On SD 90, whole blood
was collected and tested for adult heartworm antigen. On SDs 119/120, the dogs
were euthanized and subjected to necropsy examination for recovery of adult D.
immitis and/or worm fragments. At necropsy, all 8 dogs in the nontreated group
were infected with adult D. immitis (34-70 worms/dog, geometric mean (GM)=51.6
worms/dog). One or more adult D. immitis and/or worm fragments were recovered
from 7 of 8 of the dogs each in Groups 1-3 (87.5% were heartworm positive). The
respective GM worm burdens/dog for Groups 1-3 was 2.3, 2.4, and 2.3 which
resulted in 95.6, 95.4 and 95.5% efficacy, respectively. No worms were recovered
from any of the 8 dogs in Group 4 resulting in 100% efficacy.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.vetpar.2010.12.049
PMID: 21295409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
