---
reference_id: "PMID:19966218"
title: Characterization and temporal development of cores in a mouse model of malignant hyperthermia.
authors:
- Boncompagni S
- Rossi AE
- Micaroni M
- Hamilton SL
- Dirksen RT
- Franzini-Armstrong C
- Protasi F
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0911496106
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Malignant Hyperthermia/physiopathology
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Mitochondria, Muscle/physiology"
- "Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel/genetics, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization and temporal development of cores in a mouse model of malignant hyperthermia.
**Authors:** Boncompagni S, Rossi AE, Micaroni M, Hamilton SL, Dirksen RT, Franzini-Armstrong C, Protasi F
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0911496106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0911496106)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Dec 22;106(51):21996-2001. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0911496106. Epub 2009 Dec 4.

Characterization and temporal development of cores in a mouse model of malignant 
hyperthermia.

Boncompagni S(1), Rossi AE, Micaroni M, Hamilton SL, Dirksen RT, 
Franzini-Armstrong C, Protasi F.

Author information:
(1)Centro Scienze dell'Invecchiamento, Department of Basic and Applied Medical 
Sciences, Interuniversity Institute of Myology, Università Gabriele d'Annunzio, 
I-66013 Chieti, Italy.

Malignant hyperthermia (MH) and central core disease are related skeletal muscle 
diseases often linked to mutations in the type 1 ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene, 
encoding for the Ca(2+) release channel of the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR). In 
humans, the Y522S RYR1 mutation is associated with malignant hyperthermia 
susceptibility (MHS) and the presence in skeletal muscle fibers of core regions 
that lack mitochondria. In heterozygous Y522S knock-in mice (RYR1(Y522S/WT)), 
the mutation causes SR Ca(2+) leak and MHS. Here, we identified 
mitochondrial-deficient core regions in skeletal muscle fibers from 
RYR1(Y522S/WT) knock-in mice and characterized the structural and temporal 
aspects involved in their formation. Mitochondrial swelling/disruption, the 
initial detectable structural change observed in young-adult RYR1(Y522S/WT) mice 
(2 months), does not occur randomly but rather is confined to discrete areas 
termed presumptive cores. This localized mitochondrial damage is followed by 
local disruption/loss of nearby SR and transverse tubules, resulting in early 
cores (2-4 months) and small contracture cores characterized by extreme 
sarcomere shortening and lack of mitochondria. At later stages (1 year), 
contracture cores are extended, frequent, and accompanied by areas in which 
contractile elements are also severely compromised (unstructured cores). Based 
on these observations, we propose a possible series of events leading to core 
formation in skeletal muscle fibers of RYR1(Y522S/WT) mice: Initial 
mitochondrial/SR disruption in confined areas causes significant loss of local 
Ca(2+) sequestration that eventually results in the formation of contractures 
and progressive degradation of the contractile elements.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0911496106
PMCID: PMC2799858
PMID: 19966218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.