---
reference_id: "PMID:29300972"
title: A recurrent de novo missense mutation in UBTF causes developmental neuroregression.
authors:
- Toro C
- Hori RT
- Malicdan MCV
- Tifft CJ
- Goldstein A
- Gahl WA
- Adams DR
- Fauni HB
- Wolfe LA
- Xiao J
- Khan MM
- Tian J
- Hope KA
- Reiter LT
- Tremblay MG
- Moss T
- Franks AL
- Balak C
- C4RCD Research Group
- LeDoux MS
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddx435
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A recurrent de novo missense mutation in UBTF causes developmental neuroregression.
**Authors:** Toro C, Hori RT, Malicdan MCV, Tifft CJ, Goldstein A, Gahl WA, Adams DR, Fauni HB, Wolfe LA, Xiao J, Khan MM, Tian J, Hope KA, Reiter LT, Tremblay MG, Moss T, Franks AL, Balak C, C4RCD Research Group, LeDoux MS
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddx435](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddx435)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2018 Feb 15;27(4):691-705. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddx435.

A recurrent de novo missense mutation in UBTF causes developmental 
neuroregression.

Toro C(1), Hori RT(2), Malicdan MCV(1), Tifft CJ(1), Goldstein A(3), Gahl WA(1), 
Adams DR(1), Fauni HB(1), Wolfe LA(1), Xiao J(4), Khan MM(4), Tian J(4), Hope 
KA(5), Reiter LT(4)(6), Tremblay MG(7)(8), Moss T(7)(8), Franks AL(3), Balak 
C(9); C4RCD Research Group; LeDoux MS(4).

Author information:
(1)Undiagnosed Diseases Program and Office of the Clinical Director, National 
Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 
USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Biochemistry, University of 
Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN, USA.
(3)Division of Child Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(4)Departments of Neurology and Anatomy & Neurobiology, University of Tennessee 
Health Science Center, Memphis, TN, USA.
(5)Integrated Program in Biological Sciences, University of Tennessee Health 
Science Center, Memphis, TN, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, 
Memphis, TN, USA.
(7)Laboratory of Growth and Development, St-Patrick Research Group in Basic 
Oncology, Cancer Division of the Quebec University Hospital Research Centre, 
Canada.
(8)Department of Molecular Biology, Medical Biochemistry and Pathology, Faculty 
of Medicine, Laval University, QC, Canada.
(9)Center for Rare Childhood Disorders (C4RCD), Translational Genomics Research 
Institute (TGen), Phoenix, AZ, USA.

Erratum in
    Hum Mol Genet. 2018 Apr 1;27(7):1310. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddy049.

UBTF (upstream binding transcription factor) exists as two isoforms; UBTF1 
regulates rRNA transcription by RNA polymerase 1, whereas UBTF2 regulates mRNA 
transcription by RNA polymerase 2. Herein, we describe 4 patients with very 
similar patterns of neuroregression due to recurrent de novo mutations in UBTF 
(GRCh37/hg19, NC_000017.10: g.42290219C > T, NM_014233.3: c.628G > A) resulting 
in the same amino acid change in both UBTF1 and UBTF2 (p.Glu210Lys [p.E210K]). 
Disease onset in our cohort was at 2.5 to 3 years and characterized by slow 
progression of global motor, cognitive and behavioral dysfunction. Notable early 
features included hypotonia with a floppy gait, high-pitched dysarthria and 
hyperactivity. Later features included aphasia, dystonia, and spasticity. Speech 
and ambulatory ability were lost by the early teens. Magnetic resonance imaging 
showed progressive generalized cerebral atrophy 
(supratentorial > infratentorial) with involvement of both gray and white 
matter. Patient fibroblasts showed normal levels of UBTF transcripts, increased 
expression of pre-rRNA and 18S rRNA, nucleolar abnormalities, markedly increased 
numbers of DNA breaks, defective cell-cycle progression, and apoptosis. 
Expression of mutant human UBTF1 in Drosophila neurons was lethal. Although no 
loss-of-function variants are reported in the Exome Aggregation Consortium 
(ExAC) database and Ubtf-/- is early embryonic lethal in mice, Ubtf+/- mice 
displayed only mild motor and behavioral dysfunction in adulthood. Our data 
underscore the importance of including UBTF E210K in the differential diagnosis 
of neuroregression and suggest that mainly gain-of-function mechanisms 
contribute to the pathogenesis of the UBTF E210K neuroregression syndrome.

© The Author(s) 2018. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddx435
PMCID: PMC5886272
PMID: 29300972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]