---
reference_id: "PMID:33618891"
title: The current international consensus criteria can lead to under and over-diagnosis of primary progressive aphasia variants.
authors:
- Teichmann M
journal: Rev Neurol (Paris)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.neurol.2020.12.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The current international consensus criteria can lead to under and over-diagnosis of primary progressive aphasia variants.
**Authors:** Teichmann M
**Journal:** Rev Neurol (Paris) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neurol.2020.12.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurol.2020.12.001)

## Content

1. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2021 Apr;177(4):370-375. doi:
10.1016/j.neurol.2020.12.001.  Epub 2021 Feb 19.

The current international consensus criteria can lead to under and 
over-diagnosis of primary progressive aphasia variants.

Teichmann M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Institute of Memory and Alzheimer's Disease, 
National reference centre for 'rare or early onset dementias', Pitié-Salpêtrière 
hospital, AP-HP, 47-83, boulevard de l'Hôpital, 75013 Paris, France. Electronic 
address: marc.teichmann@psl.aphp.fr.

In the field of primary progressive aphasia (PPA), the most recent international 
consensus criteria of 2011 for diagnosis and variant classification have been 
shown not to capture accurately the whole range of PPA patients. Up to 30-40% of 
PPA patients appear not to satisfy the criteria of the three 'classical' PPA 
variants (non-fluent/agrammatic, logopenic, semantic) and are labelled either 
'mixed PPA' or 'unclassifiable PPA'. Based on the PPA literature since 2011, 
this article discusses why patients might be under-diagnosed with respect to the 
three PPA variants, thus leading to the default concept of 'mixed/unclassifiable 
PPA' and, conversely, why the non-fluent/agrammatic variant appears to be 
over-diagnosed. It analyses and attempts to show how to resolve these issues, 
and it accordingly proposes clinical criteria, which are more inclusive to 
diminish the proportion of so-called mixed/unclassifiable PPA diagnoses and to 
reduce the proportion of questionable non-fluent/agrammatic diagnoses, which 
frequently correspond to progressive speech apraxia, rather than to aphasia.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurol.2020.12.001
PMID: 33618891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]