---
reference_id: "PMID:29618874"
title: "Bilateral Parotid Sialadenosis Associated with Long-Standing Bulimia: A Case Report and Literature Review."
authors:
- Garcia Garcia B
- Dean Ferrer A
- Diaz Jimenez N
- Alamillos Granados FJ
journal: J Maxillofac Oral Surg
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s12663-016-0913-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bilateral Parotid Sialadenosis Associated with Long-Standing Bulimia: A Case Report and Literature Review.
**Authors:** Garcia Garcia B, Dean Ferrer A, Diaz Jimenez N, Alamillos Granados FJ
**Journal:** J Maxillofac Oral Surg (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12663-016-0913-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12663-016-0913-7)

## Content

1. J Maxillofac Oral Surg. 2018 Jun;17(2):117-121. doi:
10.1007/s12663-016-0913-7.  Epub 2016 May 14.

Bilateral Parotid Sialadenosis Associated with Long-Standing Bulimia: A Case 
Report and Literature Review.

Garcia Garcia B(1)(2), Dean Ferrer A(1), Diaz Jimenez N(3), Alamillos Granados 
FJ(1).

Author information:
(1)1Department of Oral, Maxillofacial Surgery, Odonto-Stomatology, Faculty of 
Medicine, University Hospital Reina Sofia, Av. Menéndez Pidal S/N, Córdoba, 
Spain.
(2)Avda. Menéndez Pidal S/N, 14004 Córdoba, Spain.
(3)2Department of General Surgery, University Hospital Reina Sofia, Av. Menéndez 
Pidal S/N, Córdoba, Spain.

PURPOSE: Bulimia is a common cause of sialadenosis. This paper presents a case 
of bilateral parotid sialadenosis associated with long-standing bulimia, and 
reviews the relevant literature and current treatment options.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A 32-year-old woman had severe bilateral parotid 
sialomegaly for the last 6 years, which had occurred secondary to bulimia 
nervosa, which she had since 14 years. Treatment with pilocarpine was 
unsuccessful, so she underwent bilateral conservative parotidectomy. This 
procedure not only improved the aesthetic appearance of the patient but also 
improved her social and work life and overall quality of life.
CONCLUSIONS: Sialomegaly secondary to bulimia results in a major alteration of 
the aesthetics of a patient's face. Conservative measures are not enough in many 
cases, and parotidectomy may be the only viable option, as it can also 
significantly improve adherence to psychiatric treatment for bulimia, in 
addition to correcting the facial aesthetics.

DOI: 10.1007/s12663-016-0913-7
PMCID: PMC5878158
PMID: 29618874

Conflict of interest statement: Compliance with Ethical StandardsThe researchers 
declare no conflicts of interest.