---
reference_id: "PMID:24004678"
title: Revisiting spatial distribution and biochemical composition of calcium-containing crystals in human osteoarthritic articular cartilage.
authors:
- Nguyen C
- Bazin D
- Daudon M
- Chatron-Colliet A
- Hannouche D
- Bianchi A
- Côme D
- So A
- Busso N
- Busso N
- Lioté F
- Ea HK
journal: Arthritis Res Ther
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1186/ar4283
keywords:
- Aged
- "Alkaline Phosphatase/genetics, metabolism"
- "Arthroplasty, Replacement, Knee"
- "Calcium/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Calcium Phosphates/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Calcium Pyrophosphate/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Cartilage, Articular/metabolism, surgery, ultrastructure"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Chondrocalcinosis/diagnostic imaging, genetics, metabolism"
- "Chondrocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- Crystallization
- Female
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- "Knee Joint/diagnostic imaging, metabolism, surgery"
- Male
- "Microscopy, Electron, Scanning"
- "Osteoarthritis, Knee/genetics, metabolism, surgery"
- "Phosphate Transport Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Phosphoric Diester Hydrolases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Pyrophosphatases/genetics, metabolism"
- Radiography
- Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Spectroscopy, Fourier Transform Infrared"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Revisiting spatial distribution and biochemical composition of calcium-containing crystals in human osteoarthritic articular cartilage.
**Authors:** Nguyen C, Bazin D, Daudon M, Chatron-Colliet A, Hannouche D, Bianchi A, Côme D, So A, Busso N, Busso N, Lioté F, Ea HK
**Journal:** Arthritis Res Ther (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/ar4283](https://doi.org/10.1186/ar4283)

## Content

1. Arthritis Res Ther. 2013;15(5):R103. doi: 10.1186/ar4283.

Revisiting spatial distribution and biochemical composition of
calcium-containing crystals in human osteoarthritic articular cartilage.

Nguyen C, Bazin D, Daudon M, Chatron-Colliet A, Hannouche D, Bianchi A, Côme D,
So A, Busso N, Busso N, Lioté F, Ea HK.

INTRODUCTION: Calcium-containing (CaC) crystals, including basic calcium
phosphate (BCP) and calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate (CPP), are associated with
destructive forms of osteoarthritis (OA). We assessed their distribution and
biochemical and morphologic features in human knee OA cartilage.
METHODS: We prospectively included 20 patients who underwent total knee
replacement (TKR) for primary OA. CaC crystal characterization and
identification involved Fourier-transform infra-red spectrometry and scanning
electron microscopy of 8 to 10 cartilage zones of each knee, including medial
and lateral femoral condyles and tibial plateaux and the intercondyle zone.
Differential expression of genes involved in the mineralization process between
cartilage with and without calcification was assessed in samples from 8
different patients by RT-PCR. Immunohistochemistry and histology studies were
performed in 6 different patients.
RESULTS: Mean (SEM) age and body mass index of patients at the time of TKR was
74.6 (1.7) years and 28.1 (1.6) kg/m², respectively. Preoperative X-rays showed
joint calcifications (chondrocalcinosis) in 4 cases only. The medial
femoro-tibial compartment was the most severely affected in all cases, and mean
(SEM) Kellgren-Lawrence score was 3.8 (0.1). All 20 OA cartilages showed CaC
crystals. The mineral content represented 7.7% (8.1%) of the cartilage weight.
All patients showed BCP crystals, which were associated with CPP crystals for 8
joints. CaC crystals were present in all knee joint compartments and in a mean
of 4.6 (1.7) of the 8 studied areas. Crystal content was similar between
superficial and deep layers and between medial and femoral compartments. BCP
samples showed spherical structures, typical of biological apatite, and CPP
samples showed rod-shaped or cubic structures. The expression of several genes
involved in mineralization, including human homolog of progressive ankylosis,
plasma-cell-membrane glycoprotein 1 and tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase,
was upregulated in OA chondrocytes isolated from CaC crystal-containing
cartilages.
CONCLUSIONS: CaC crystal deposition is a widespread phenomenon in human OA
articular cartilage involving the entire knee cartilage including
macroscopically normal and less weight-bearing zones. Cartilage calcification is
associated with altered expression of genes involved in the mineralisation
process.

DOI: 10.1186/ar4283
PMCID: PMC3978672
PMID: 24004678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
