---
reference_id: "PMID:31112379"
title: Nintedanib for Systemic Sclerosis-Associated Interstitial Lung Disease.
authors:
- Distler O
- Highland KB
- Gahlemann M
- Azuma A
- Fischer A
- Mayes MD
- Raghu G
- Sauter W
- Girard M
- Alves M
- Clerisme-Beaty E
- Stowasser S
- Tetzlaff K
- Kuwana M
- Maher TM
- SENSCIS Trial Investigators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1903076
keywords:
- "Administration, Oral"
- Adult
- Diarrhea/chemically induced
- Disease Progression
- Double-Blind Method
- "Enzyme Inhibitors/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Female
- Humans
- "Indoles/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Lung Diseases, Interstitial/drug therapy, etiology, physiopathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Scleroderma, Systemic/complications, drug therapy"
- Vital Capacity
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nintedanib for Systemic Sclerosis-Associated Interstitial Lung Disease.
**Authors:** Distler O, Highland KB, Gahlemann M, Azuma A, Fischer A, Mayes MD, Raghu G, Sauter W, Girard M, Alves M, Clerisme-Beaty E, Stowasser S, Tetzlaff K, Kuwana M, Maher TM, SENSCIS Trial Investigators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1903076](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1903076)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2019 Jun 27;380(26):2518-2528. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1903076. Epub 
2019 May 20.

Nintedanib for Systemic Sclerosis-Associated Interstitial Lung Disease.

Distler O(1), Highland KB(1), Gahlemann M(1), Azuma A(1), Fischer A(1), Mayes 
MD(1), Raghu G(1), Sauter W(1), Girard M(1), Alves M(1), Clerisme-Beaty E(1), 
Stowasser S(1), Tetzlaff K(1), Kuwana M(1), Maher TM(1); SENSCIS Trial 
Investigators.

Collaborators: Bergna M, Casado G, Mannucci Walter P, Proudman S, Stevens W, 
Thakkar V, Troy L, Loeffler-Ragg J, Olschewski H, Bondue B, Houssiau F, Smith V, 
Wuyts W, Johnson S, Keystone E, Khalidi N, Levesque M, Maturana Rozas R, Silva 
Orellana A, Huang C, Li J, Jiang Z, Liu Y, Xiao W, Xu J, Zeng X, Zheng Y, Zou H, 
Becvar R, Madsen H, Søndergaard K, Kilpeläinen M, Myllärniemi M, Agard C, 
Allanore Y, Bourdin A, Cottin V, Crestani B, Diot E, Dominique S, Hachulla E, 
Jouneau S, Leroy S, Nunes H, Prevot G, Wallaert B, Wemeau L, Aringer M, Bewig B, 
Blaas S, Distler J, Ehrchen J, Ewert R, Gläser S, Henes J, Hunzelmann N, König 
R, Kötter I, Kreuter M, Prasse A, Schulze-Koops H, Sfikakis P, 
Vlachoyiannopoulos P, Losonczy G, Behera D, Gayathri Devi HJ, Kadel J, Kawedia 
M, Kumar D, Kumar U, Lokhande R, Malpani A, Mohan M, Nalawade A, Parakh U, 
Swarnakar R, Shobha V, Thangakunam B, Udwadia Z, Henry M, O'Reilly K, 
Balbir-Gurman A, Kramer M, Litinsky I, Rosner I, Cutolo M, Gabrielli A, 
Iaccarino L, Pesci A, Riccieri V, Vettori S, Funakubo Y, Inoue Y, Kawakami A, 
Kawaguchi Y, Kawamura T, Kondoh Y, Kuwana M, Nanki T, Nishioka Y, Nozawa K, 
Oguragawa T, Okamoto M, Sano H, Sasai R, Sasaki N, Suda T, Takahashi H, Takeuchi 
T, Tanaka S, Yamasaki Y, Ch'ng SS, Cheah C, Kan S, Raja Mohamed RB, Selman M, de 
Vries-Bouwstra JK, van den Toorn L, Vonken M, Voskuyl AE, Hoffmann-Vold AM, Seip 
M, Dankiewicz-Fares I, Olesiejuk R, Pulka G, Szepietowski J, Alves J, Bernardes 
M, Cordeiro A, Costa J, Neves S, Salvador MJ, Alegre Sancho J, Carreira Delgado 
P, Castellví Barranco I, Cifrián Martínez J, Guillén Del Castillo A, Ovalles JG, 
López-Longo FJ, Rivera Gallego A, Freire Dapena MC, Román Ivorra JA, Ekwall AH, 
Maurer B, Mihai CM, Müller R, Mahakkanukrauh A, Nantiruj K, Siripaitoon B, 
Denton CP, Herrick A, Madhok R, Maher TM, West A, Bascom R, Criner G, Csuka ME, 
Dematte D'Amico J, Ettinger N, Fischer A, Gerbino A, Gerke A, Glassberg M, 
Glazer C, Golden J, Gripaldo R, Gupta N, Hamblin M, Highland K, Ho L, Huggins 
JT, Hummers L, Jones L, Kahaleh M, Khanna D, Kim H, Lancaster LH, Luckhardt T, 
Mayes M, Mendoza Ballesteros F, Mooney J, Mohabir P, Morrissey B, Moua T, 
Padilla M, Patel N, Perez R, Roman J, Rossman M, Russell T, Saketkoo L, Shah A, 
Shlobin O, Scholand MB, Simmssetts R, Spiera R, Steen V, Veeraraghavan S, Weigt 
S.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Rheumatology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich 
(O.D.), and Boehringer Ingelheim (Schweiz), Basel (M. Gahlemann) - both in 
Switzerland; the Respiratory Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland (K.B.H.); 
the Departments of Pulmonary Medicine and Oncology (A.A.) and Allergy and 
Rheumatology (M.K.), Nippon Medical School Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo; 
University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora (A.F.); the Division of 
Rheumatology and Clinical Immunogenetics, University of Texas McGovern Medical 
School, Houston (M.D.M.); University of Washington, Seattle (G.R.); Boehringer 
Ingelheim Pharma, Biberach an der Riss (W.S.), Boehringer Ingelheim 
International, Ingelheim am Rhein (M.A., E.C.-B., S.S., K.T.), and the 
Department of Sports Medicine, University of Tübingen, Tübingen (K.T.) - all in 
Germany; Boehringer Ingelheim France, Reims, France (M. Girard); and the 
National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, and the National 
Institute for Health Research Clinical Research Facility, Royal Brompton 
Hospital, London (T.M.M.).

Comment in
    Rev Med Interne. 2019 Dec;40(12):775-777. doi: 10.1016/j.revmed.2019.08.009.
    N Engl J Med. 2019 Oct 17;381(16):1595. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1910735.
    N Engl J Med. 2019 Oct 17;381(16):1595-1596. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1910735.

BACKGROUND: Interstitial lung disease (ILD) is a common manifestation of 
systemic sclerosis and a leading cause of systemic sclerosis-related death. 
Nintedanib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, has been shown to have antifibrotic and 
antiinflammatory effects in preclinical models of systemic sclerosis and ILD.
METHODS: We conducted a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial to 
investigate the efficacy and safety of nintedanib in patients with ILD 
associated with systemic sclerosis. Patients who had systemic sclerosis with an 
onset of the first non-Raynaud's symptom within the past 7 years and a 
high-resolution computed tomographic scan that showed fibrosis affecting at 
least 10% of the lungs were randomly assigned, in a 1:1 ratio, to receive 150 mg 
of nintedanib, administered orally twice daily, or placebo. The primary end 
point was the annual rate of decline in forced vital capacity (FVC), assessed 
over a 52-week period. Key secondary end points were absolute changes from 
baseline in the modified Rodnan skin score and in the total score on the St. 
George's Respiratory Questionnaire (SGRQ) at week 52.
RESULTS: A total of 576 patients received at least one dose of nintedanib or 
placebo; 51.9% had diffuse cutaneous systemic sclerosis, and 48.4% were 
receiving mycophenolate at baseline. In the primary end-point analysis, the 
adjusted annual rate of change in FVC was -52.4 ml per year in the nintedanib 
group and -93.3 ml per year in the placebo group (difference, 41.0 ml per year; 
95% confidence interval [CI], 2.9 to 79.0; P = 0.04). Sensitivity analyses based 
on multiple imputation for missing data yielded P values for the primary end 
point ranging from 0.06 to 0.10. The change from baseline in the modified Rodnan 
skin score and the total score on the SGRQ at week 52 did not differ 
significantly between the trial groups, with differences of -0.21 (95% CI, -0.94 
to 0.53; P = 0.58) and 1.69 (95% CI, -0.73 to 4.12 [not adjusted for multiple 
comparisons]), respectively. Diarrhea, the most common adverse event, was 
reported in 75.7% of the patients in the nintedanib group and in 31.6% of those 
in the placebo group.
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with ILD associated with systemic sclerosis, the 
annual rate of decline in FVC was lower with nintedanib than with placebo; no 
clinical benefit of nintedanib was observed for other manifestations of systemic 
sclerosis. The adverse-event profile of nintedanib observed in this trial was 
similar to that observed in patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis; 
gastrointestinal adverse events, including diarrhea, were more common with 
nintedanib than with placebo. (Funded by Boehringer Ingelheim; SENSCIS 
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02597933.).

Copyright © 2019 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1903076
PMID: 31112379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]