---
reference_id: "PMID:25398053"
title: "Dominant De Novo Mutations in GJA1 Cause Erythrokeratodermia Variabilis et Progressiva, without Features of Oculodentodigital Dysplasia."
authors:
- Boyden LM
- Craiglow BG
- Zhou J
- Hu R
- Loring EC
- Morel KD
- Lauren CT
- Lifton RP
- Bilguvar K
- Paller AS
- Choate KA
journal: J Invest Dermatol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/jid.2014.485
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Cell Membrane/metabolism
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Connexin 43/genetics
- Connexins/genetics
- Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics
- Disease Progression
- Erythrokeratodermia Variabilis/genetics
- Exome
- Eye Abnormalities/genetics
- Female
- "Foot Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Golgi Apparatus/metabolism
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Male
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Mutagenesis, Site-Directed"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Skin Diseases/genetics
- Syndactyly/genetics
- Tooth Abnormalities/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dominant De Novo Mutations in GJA1 Cause Erythrokeratodermia Variabilis et Progressiva, without Features of Oculodentodigital Dysplasia.
**Authors:** Boyden LM, Craiglow BG, Zhou J, Hu R, Loring EC, Morel KD, Lauren CT, Lifton RP, Bilguvar K, Paller AS, Choate KA
**Journal:** J Invest Dermatol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/jid.2014.485](https://doi.org/10.1038/jid.2014.485)

## Content

1. J Invest Dermatol. 2015 Jun;135(6):1540-1547. doi: 10.1038/jid.2014.485. Epub 
2014 Nov 14.

Dominant De Novo Mutations in GJA1 Cause Erythrokeratodermia Variabilis et 
Progressiva, without Features of Oculodentodigital Dysplasia.

Boyden LM(1), Craiglow BG(2), Zhou J(2), Hu R(2), Loring EC(1), Morel KD(3), 
Lauren CT(3), Lifton RP(1), Bilguvar K(1), Paller AS(4), Choate KA(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut, USA.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut, USA.
(3)Departments of Dermatology and Pediatrics, Columbia University, New York, New 
York, USA.
(4)Department of Dermatology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(5)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, 
Connecticut, USA; Department of Dermatology, Yale University School of Medicine, 
New Haven, Connecticut, USA; Department of Pathology, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA. Electronic address: 
keith.choate@yale.edu.

Comment in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2015 Jun;135(6):1475-1478. doi: 10.1038/jid.2014.535.

Genetic investigation of inherited skin disorders has informed the understanding 
of skin self-renewal, differentiation, and barrier function. Erythrokeratodermia 
variabilis et progressiva (EKVP) is a rare, inherited skin disease that is 
characterized by transient figurate patches of erythema, localized or 
generalized scaling, and frequent palmoplantar keratoderma. By using exome 
sequencing, we show that de novo missense mutations in GJA1 (gap junction 
protein alpha 1) cause EKVP. The severe, progressive skin disease in EKVP 
subjects with GJA1 mutations is distinct from limited cutaneous findings rarely 
found in the systemic disorder oculodentodigital dysplasia, also caused by 
dominant GJA1 mutations. GJA1 encodes connexin 43 (Cx43), the most widely 
expressed gap junction protein. We show that the GJA1 mutations in EKVP subjects 
lead to disruption of Cx43 membrane localization and aggregation within the 
Golgi. These findings reveal a critical role for Cx43 in epidermal homeostasis, 
and they provide evidence of organ-specific pathobiology resulting from 
different mutations within GJA1.

DOI: 10.1038/jid.2014.485
PMCID: PMC4430428
PMID: 25398053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors state no 
conflict of interest.