---
reference_id: "PMID:35690467"
title: What parents need to know about Hirschsprung disease.
authors:
- Rosen N
- Holder M
journal: Semin Pediatr Surg
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.sempedsurg.2022.151159
content_type: abstract_only
---

# What parents need to know about Hirschsprung disease.
**Authors:** Rosen N, Holder M
**Journal:** Semin Pediatr Surg (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.sempedsurg.2022.151159](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sempedsurg.2022.151159)

## Content

1. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2022 Apr;31(2):151159. doi: 
10.1016/j.sempedsurg.2022.151159. Epub 2022 Apr 8.

What parents need to know about Hirschsprung disease.

Rosen N(1), Holder M(2).

Author information:
(1)Colorectal Center at Cincinnati Children's, Division of Pediatric General and 
Thoracic Surgery, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet 
Avenue, MLC 2023, Cincinnati, OH 45229, United States. Electronic address: 
nelson.rosen@cchmc.org.
(2)Colorectal Center at Cincinnati Children's, Division of Pediatric General and 
Thoracic Surgery, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet 
Avenue, MLC 2023, Cincinnati, OH 45229, United States.

Hirschsprung's disease (HD) is a complex colorectal disorder that can be 
challenging to understand and overwhelming to many parents. Counseling parents 
is critical for ensuring they understand their child's condition, how it must be 
treated, pitfalls that can occur during treatment, and how they will do in the 
long term. This article breaks down this process into a series of informally 
worded questions and reviews evidence-based discussion points around the most 
common concerns parents will have: survival, pathophysiology, surgical 
correction and complications, etiology and genetic basis, associated issues, 
outcomes, and familial nature. Where evidence is unclear, expert opinion is 
included. Discussion is geared towards the parents of a newly diagnosed and 
otherwise healthy neonate, with a brief section on complex situations including 
associated syndromes and late diagnosis. Embarking on the longitudinal care of a 
child with HD is a complex undertaking and requires significant parental 
education to establish a proper parent-surgeon relationship, an essential factor 
for optimizing outcome and family satisfaction.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sempedsurg.2022.151159
PMID: 35690467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]