---
reference_id: "PMID:23430394"
title: "Treatment of hemophilia B: focus on recombinant factor IX."
authors:
- Franchini M
- Frattini F
- Crestani S
- Sissa C
- Bonfanti C
journal: Biologics
year: '2013'
doi: 10.2147/BTT.S31582
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of hemophilia B: focus on recombinant factor IX.
**Authors:** Franchini M, Frattini F, Crestani S, Sissa C, Bonfanti C
**Journal:** Biologics (2013)
**DOI:** [10.2147/BTT.S31582](https://doi.org/10.2147/BTT.S31582)

## Content

1. Biologics. 2013;7:33-8. doi: 10.2147/BTT.S31582. Epub 2013 Feb 12.

Treatment of hemophilia B: focus on recombinant factor IX.

Franchini M(1), Frattini F, Crestani S, Sissa C, Bonfanti C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Transfusion Medicine and Hematology, Carlo Poma Hospital, 
Mantua, Italy.

Hemophilia B is a recessive X-linked bleeding disorder characterized by 
deficiency of the coagulation factor IX (FIX). In hemophilia B patients the 
severity of the bleeding phenotype is related to the degree of the FIX defect. 
Hemophilia B treatment has improved greatly in the last 20 years with the 
introduction first of plasma-derived and then of recombinant FIX concentrates. 
Replacement therapy may be administered through on-demand or prophylaxis 
regimens, but the latter treatment modality has been shown to be superior in 
prevention of hemophilic arthropathy and in improvement of patients' quality of 
life. The purpose of this narrative review is to summarize the current knowledge 
on treatment strategies for hemophilia B, focusing on recombinant FIX products 
either clinically used or in development. There is only one rFIX product that is 
licensed to treat hemophilia B patients; from the analysis of the literature 
data presented in this review, the authors conclude that this rFIX product has 
demonstrated an excellent safety profile and excellent clinical efficacy for 
halting and preventing bleeds in hemophilia B patients. While prophylaxis has 
emerged as the best therapeutic strategy for such patients because of its 
ability to prevent hemophilic arthropathy and to improve patients' quality of 
life, the pharmacokinetically tailored dosing of rFIX is another key point when 
planning hemophilia B treatment, as it allows optimization of the factor 
concentrate usage. Further clinical studies are needed to better assess the 
safety and efficacy (ie, the incidence of adverse reactions and inhibitor 
development) of newer rFIX products.

DOI: 10.2147/BTT.S31582
PMCID: PMC3575125
PMID: 23430394