---
reference_id: PMID:28957531
title: Fibroblasts and the extracellular matrix in right ventricular disease.
authors:
- Frangogiannis NG
journal: Cardiovasc Res
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvx146
keywords:
- Animals
- "Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Dysplasia/metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Extracellular Matrix/metabolism, pathology"
- Extracellular Matrix Proteins/metabolism
- "Fibroblasts/metabolism, pathology"
- Fibrosis
- "Heart Failure/etiology, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Hypertension, Pulmonary/complications, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Hypertrophy, Right Ventricular/etiology, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Myocardial Infarction/metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Myocardium/metabolism, pathology"
- "Ventricular Dysfunction, Right/etiology, metabolism, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Ventricular Function, Right"
- Ventricular Remodeling
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fibroblasts and the extracellular matrix in right ventricular disease.
**Authors:** Frangogiannis NG
**Journal:** Cardiovasc Res (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cvr/cvx146](https://doi.org/10.1093/cvr/cvx146)

## Content

1. Cardiovasc Res. 2017 Oct 1;113(12):1453-1464. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvx146.

Fibroblasts and the extracellular matrix in right ventricular disease.

Frangogiannis NG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (Cardiology), The Wilf Family Cardiovascular Research 
Institute, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, 
Forchheimer G46B Bronx, 10461 NY, USA.

Right ventricular failure predicts adverse outcome in patients with pulmonary 
hypertension (PH), and in subjects with left ventricular heart failure and is 
associated with interstitial fibrosis. This review manuscript discusses the 
cellular effectors and molecular mechanisms implicated in right ventricular 
fibrosis. The right ventricular interstitium contains vascular cells, 
fibroblasts, and immune cells, enmeshed in a collagen-based matrix. Right 
ventricular pressure overload in PH is associated with the expansion of the 
fibroblast population, myofibroblast activation, and secretion of extracellular 
matrix proteins. Mechanosensitive transduction of adrenergic signalling and 
stimulation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone cascade trigger the activation 
of right ventricular fibroblasts. Inflammatory cytokines and chemokines may 
contribute to expansion and activation of macrophages that may serve as a source 
of fibrogenic growth factors, such as transforming growth factor (TGF)-β. 
Endothelin-1, TGF-βs, and matricellular proteins co-operate to activate cardiac 
myofibroblasts, and promote synthesis of matrix proteins. In comparison with the 
left ventricle, the RV tolerates well volume overload and ischemia; whether the 
right ventricular interstitial cells and matrix are implicated in these 
favourable responses remains unknown. Expansion of fibroblasts and extracellular 
matrix protein deposition are prominent features of arrhythmogenic right 
ventricular cardiomyopathies and may be implicated in the pathogenesis of 
arrhythmic events. Prevailing conceptual paradigms on right ventricular 
remodelling are based on extrapolation of findings in models of left ventricular 
injury. Considering the unique embryologic, morphological, and physiologic 
properties of the RV and the clinical significance of right ventricular failure, 
there is a need further to dissect RV-specific mechanisms of fibrosis and 
interstitial remodelling.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. 
© The Author 2017. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/cvr/cvx146
PMCID: PMC5852546
PMID: 28957531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]