---
reference_id: "PMID:10945492"
title: The rate of the founder Jewish mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 in prostate cancer patients in Israel.
authors:
- Vazina A
- Baniel J
- Yaacobi Y
- Shtriker A
- Engelstein D
- Leibovitz I
- Zehavi M
- Sidi AA
- Ramon Y
- Tischler T
- Livne PM
- Friedman E
journal: Br J Cancer
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1054/bjoc.2000.1249
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Alleles
- BRCA2 Protein
- "Genes, BRCA1/genetics"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/genetics
- Germ-Line Mutation
- Humans
- Israel
- Jews/genetics
- Loss of Heterozygosity
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neoplasm Proteins/genetics
- Prostatic Neoplasms/genetics
- Transcription Factors/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The rate of the founder Jewish mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 in prostate cancer patients in Israel.
**Authors:** Vazina A, Baniel J, Yaacobi Y, Shtriker A, Engelstein D, Leibovitz I, Zehavi M, Sidi AA, Ramon Y, Tischler T, Livne PM, Friedman E
**Journal:** Br J Cancer (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1054/bjoc.2000.1249](https://doi.org/10.1054/bjoc.2000.1249)

## Content

1. Br J Cancer. 2000 Aug;83(4):463-6. doi: 10.1054/bjoc.2000.1249.

The rate of the founder Jewish mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 in prostate cancer
patients in Israel.

Vazina A(1), Baniel J, Yaacobi Y, Shtriker A, Engelstein D, Leibovitz I, Zehavi
M, Sidi AA, Ramon Y, Tischler T, Livne PM, Friedman E.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Urology Rabin Medical Center, Petach Tikvah, Israel.

Inherited predisposition occurs in 5-10% of all prostate cancer (CaP) patients,
but the genes involved in conferring genetic susceptibility remain largely
unknown. Several lines of evidence indicate that germline mutations in BRCA1 and
BRCA2 might be associated with an increased risk for CaP. Three mutations in
these two genes (185delAG and 5382InsC (BRCA1) and 6174delT (BRCA2) occur in
about 2.5% of the general Ashkenazi population, and the 185delAG BRCA1 mutation,
in up to 1% of non-Ashkenazi Jews. In order to assess the contribution of these
germline mutations to prostate cancer in Jewish Israeli patients, we tested 174
unselected prostate cancer patients (95 of Ashkenazi origin) for these mutations
by PCR amplification and modified restriction enzyme digests. Patient's age
range was 45-81 years (median 66), and in 24 (14.4%) the disease was diagnosed
prior to 55 years of age. Nineteen (11%) and 12 (6.9%) patients had a first or
second degree relative with CaP or breast cancer, respectively. Overall, five
mutation carriers were detected: 2/152 (1.3%) 185delAG, 2/104 (2%) 5382InsC, and
1/158 (0.6%) 6174delT. In all carriers, the disease was diagnosed after the age
of 55, and only one of them had a family history of breast and CaP. In addition,
no allelic losses at the BRCA1 locus were demonstrated in 17 patients with a
family history of CaP, using seven microsatellite markers. We conclude that the
rate of the predominant Jewish BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in CaP patients does
not significantly differ from that of the general population, and that
mutational inactivation of the BRCA1 is rare in familial CaP. Thus, germline
BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations probably contribute little to CaP occurrence, to
inherited predisposition, and to early onset disease in Jewish individuals.

DOI: 10.1054/bjoc.2000.1249
PMCID: PMC2374645
PMID: 10945492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
