---
reference_id: "PMID:40008208"
title: An overview of hereditary spherocytosis and the curative effects of splenectomy.
authors:
- Turpaev K
- Bovt E
- Shakhidzhanov S
- Sinauridze E
- Smetanina N
- Koleva L
- Kushnir N
- Suvorova A
- Ataullakhanov F
journal: Front Physiol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3389/fphys.2025.1497588
content_type: abstract_only
---

# An overview of hereditary spherocytosis and the curative effects of splenectomy.
**Authors:** Turpaev K, Bovt E, Shakhidzhanov S, Sinauridze E, Smetanina N, Koleva L, Kushnir N, Suvorova A, Ataullakhanov F
**Journal:** Front Physiol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fphys.2025.1497588](https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2025.1497588)

## Content

1. Front Physiol. 2025 Feb 11;16:1497588. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2025.1497588. 
eCollection 2025.

An overview of hereditary spherocytosis and the curative effects of splenectomy.

Turpaev K(1), Bovt E(1)(2), Shakhidzhanov S(1)(2), Sinauridze E(1)(2), Smetanina 
N(2), Koleva L(1)(2), Kushnir N(1)(2), Suvorova A(2), Ataullakhanov F(1)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Theoretical Problems of Physicochemical Pharmacology, Russian 
Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russia.
(2)Dmitry Rogachev National Medical Research Center of Pediatric Hematology, 
Oncology and Immunology, Moscow, Russia.
(3)Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, National Research University, 
Dolgoprudny, Russia.
(4)Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
United States.

Hereditary spherocytosis is a common hemolytic anemia with different severity. 
The causes of hereditary spherocytosis are mutations in genes that encode red 
blood cell (RBC) membrane and cytoskeletal proteins, including ankyrin-1, Band 3 
(or AE1), α spectrin, β spectrin, and protein 4.2. Molecular defects in these 
proteins decrease membrane integrity, leading to vesiculation, decreased 
membrane surface area, and reduced deformability of the cells. Eventually, this 
leads to the trapping the abnormal RBCs (spherocytes) in the spleen. In most 
severe cases, splenectomy may be necessary to prevent general RBC collapse 
during the passage of RBCs through the narrow slits of venous sinuses in the 
spleen. The clinical benefit of splenectomy results from elimination the primary 
site of RBC damage and destruction. Splenectomy is a curative approach but can 
cause complications and should be undertaken after examination by various 
laboratory approaches. Splenectomy does not correct most genetically determined 
membrane abnormalities in erythrocytes in patients with hereditary 
spherocytosis. The transformation of biconcave erythrocytes into spherocytes 
continues, although to a lesser degree than before surgery. Nevertheless, 
splenectomy increases the lifespan of red cells, significantly reducing the 
severity of anemia and improving many physiological signs of HS.

Copyright © 2025 Turpaev, Bovt, Shakhidzhanov, Sinauridze, Smetanina, Koleva, 
Kushnir, Suvorova and Ataullakhanov.

DOI: 10.3389/fphys.2025.1497588
PMCID: PMC11850534
PMID: 40008208

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.