---
reference_id: "PMID:24472885"
title: "Nonlethal multiple pterygium syndrome: Escobar syndrome."
authors:
- Bissinger RL
- Koch FR
journal: Adv Neonatal Care
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1097/ANC.0000000000000039
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Arthrogryposis/diagnosis, genetics"
- Female
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Malignant Hyperthermia/diagnosis, genetics"
- "Receptors, Nicotinic/genetics"
- "Skin Abnormalities/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nonlethal multiple pterygium syndrome: Escobar syndrome.
**Authors:** Bissinger RL, Koch FR
**Journal:** Adv Neonatal Care (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1097/ANC.0000000000000039](https://doi.org/10.1097/ANC.0000000000000039)

## Content

1. Adv Neonatal Care. 2014 Feb;14(1):24-9. doi: 10.1097/ANC.0000000000000039.

Nonlethal multiple pterygium syndrome: Escobar syndrome.

Bissinger RL(1), Koch FR.

Author information:
(1)College of Nursing (Dr Bissinger) and Division of Neonatology, Department of 
Pediatrics (Dr Koch), Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston.

Nonlethal Escobar is a rare disorder that is a variant of multiple pterygium 
syndromes. It is a form of arthrogryposis multiplex congenita characterized by 
excessive webbing (pterygia), congenital contractures (arthrogryposis), and 
scoliosis. It is usually diagnosed in utero on fetal ultrasound and then 
confirmed in the neonatal period. A case of nonlethal neonatal Escobar is 
reported in a 35-week-and-6-day old infant who presented in utero with decreased 
fetal movement, oligohydramnios, and arthrogryposis. The etiologies from 
maternal causes were excluded prior to birth. Subsequent workup after birth led 
to a highly suspected diagnosis of nonlethal Escobar by the geneticist. The 
diagnosis was confirmed by a positive CHRNG gene sequence analysis after 
discharge. The infant demonstrated contractures and bilateral hip subluxation 
but was feeding well and was discharged home with outpatient follow-up. 
Treatment after discharge has been extensive secondary to difficulties 
associated with this disease. The clinical presentation of nonlethal Escobar, as 
well as diagnosis and treatment strategies, is provided with caregiving 
strategies.

DOI: 10.1097/ANC.0000000000000039
PMID: 24472885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]