---
reference_id: "PMID:23250880"
title: Oxidative stress modulates mitochondrial failure and cyclophilin D function in X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy.
authors:
- López-Erauskin J
- Galino J
- Bianchi P
- Fourcade S
- Andreu AL
- Ferrer I
- Muñoz-Pinedo C
- Pujol A
journal: Brain
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/brain/aws292
keywords:
- ATP Binding Cassette Transporter 1
- ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/deficiency
- "Acetylcysteine/administration & dosage"
- Adenosine Triphosphate/metabolism
- "Adrenoleukodystrophy/diet therapy, pathology"
- Age Factors
- Analysis of Variance
- Animals
- "Brain/drug effects, metabolism"
- "Buthionine Sulfoximine/administration & dosage"
- Cell Death
- Chromatin/pathology
- Peptidyl-Prolyl Isomerase F
- Cyclophilins/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Enzyme Inhibitors/pharmacology
- "Fibroblasts/drug effects, metabolism, ultrastructure"
- Flow Cytometry
- Galactose/toxicity
- Gene Expression Regulation/drug effects
- Glucose/pharmacology
- Glutathione/metabolism
- Humans
- "Membrane Potential, Mitochondrial/physiology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Microscopy, Electron, Transmission"
- "Neuroprotective Agents/administration & dosage"
- Oligopeptides/pharmacology
- "Oxidative Stress/drug effects, physiology"
- Permeability/drug effects
- Reactive Oxygen Species/metabolism
- "Thioctic Acid/administration & dosage"
- Time Factors
- Tubulin/metabolism
- "Vitamin E/administration & dosage"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oxidative stress modulates mitochondrial failure and cyclophilin D function in X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy.
**Authors:** López-Erauskin J, Galino J, Bianchi P, Fourcade S, Andreu AL, Ferrer I, Muñoz-Pinedo C, Pujol A
**Journal:** Brain (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/aws292](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/aws292)

## Content

1. Brain. 2012 Dec;135(Pt 12):3584-98. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws292.

Oxidative stress modulates mitochondrial failure and cyclophilin D function in
X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy.

López-Erauskin J(1), Galino J, Bianchi P, Fourcade S, Andreu AL, Ferrer I,
Muñoz-Pinedo C, Pujol A.

Author information:
(1)Neurometabolic Diseases Laboratory, Institute of Neuropathology, IDIBELL,
08908 L' Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.

A common process associated with oxidative stress and severe mitochondrial
impairment is the opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore, as
described in many neurodegenerative diseases. Thus, inhibition of mitochondrial
permeability transition pore opening represents a potential target for
inhibiting mitochondrial-driven cell death. Among the mitochondrial permeability
transition pore components, cyclophilin D is the most studied and has been found
increased under pathological conditions. Here, we have used in vitro and in vivo
models of X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy to investigate the relationship between
the mitochondrial permeability transition pore opening and redox homeostasis.
X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy is a neurodegenerative condition caused by loss of
function of the peroxisomal ABCD1 transporter, in which oxidative stress plays a
pivotal role. In this study, we provide evidence of impaired mitochondrial
metabolism in a peroxisomal disease, as fibroblasts in patients with X-linked
adrenoleukodystrophy cannot survive when forced to rely on mitochondrial energy
production, i.e. on incubation in galactose. Oxidative stress induced under
galactose conditions leads to mitochondrial damage in the form of mitochondrial
inner membrane potential dissipation, ATP drop and necrotic cell death, together
with increased levels of oxidative modifications in cyclophilin D protein.
Moreover, we show increased expression levels of cyclophilin D in the affected
zones of brains in patients with adrenomyeloneuropathy, in spinal cord of a
mouse model of X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (Abcd1-null mice) and in
fibroblasts from patients with X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy. Notably, treatment
with antioxidants rescues mitochondrial damage markers in fibroblasts from
patients with X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy, including cyclophilin D oxidative
modifications, and reverses cyclophilin D induction in vitro and in vivo. These
findings provide mechanistic insight into the beneficial effects of antioxidants
in neurodegenerative and non-neurodegenerative cyclophilin D-dependent
disorders.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/aws292
PMCID: PMC3525057
PMID: 23250880 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
