---
reference_id: "PMID:39000221"
title: "Cardiac Development and Factors Influencing the Development of Congenital Heart Defects (CHDs): Part I."
authors:
- Zubrzycki M
- Schramm R
- Costard-Jäckle A
- Grohmann J
- Gummert JF
- Zubrzycka M
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25137117
keywords:
- Humans
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/pathology, etiology"
- Animals
- "Heart/embryology, growth & development"
- Neural Crest
- Morphogenesis
- Organogenesis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac Development and Factors Influencing the Development of Congenital Heart Defects (CHDs): Part I.
**Authors:** Zubrzycki M, Schramm R, Costard-Jäckle A, Grohmann J, Gummert JF, Zubrzycka M
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25137117](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25137117)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Jun 28;25(13):7117. doi: 10.3390/ijms25137117.

Cardiac Development and Factors Influencing the Development of Congenital Heart 
Defects (CHDs): Part I.

Zubrzycki M(1), Schramm R(2), Costard-Jäckle A(2), Grohmann J(3), Gummert JF(2), 
Zubrzycka M(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery for Congenital Heart Defects, Heart and Diabetes Center 
NRW, University Hospital, Ruhr-University Bochum, Georgstr. 11, 32545 Bad 
Oeynhausen, Germany.
(2)Clinic for Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Heart and Diabetes Center 
NRW, University Hospital, Ruhr-University Bochum, Georgstr. 11, 32545 Bad 
Oeynhausen, Germany.
(3)Department of Congenital Heart Disease/Pediatric Cardiology, Heart and 
Diabetes Center NRW, University Hospital, Ruhr-University Bochum, Georgstr. 11, 
32545 Bad Oeynhausen, Germany.
(4)Department of Clinical Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Medical University of 
Lodz, Mazowiecka 6/8, 92-215 Lodz, Poland.

The traditional description of cardiac development involves progression from a 
cardiac crescent to a linear heart tube, which in the phase of transformation 
into a mature heart forms a cardiac loop and is divided with the septa into 
individual cavities. Cardiac morphogenesis involves numerous types of cells 
originating outside the initial cardiac crescent, including neural crest cells, 
cells of the second heart field origin, and epicardial progenitor cells. The 
development of the fetal heart and circulatory system is subject to regulatation 
by both genetic and environmental processes. The etiology for cases with 
congenital heart defects (CHDs) is largely unknown, but several genetic 
anomalies, some maternal illnesses, and prenatal exposures to specific 
therapeutic and non-therapeutic drugs are generally accepted as risk factors. 
New techniques for studying heart development have revealed many aspects of 
cardiac morphogenesis that are important in the development of CHDs, in 
particular transposition of the great arteries.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25137117
PMCID: PMC11241401
PMID: 39000221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.