---
reference_id: "PMID:37309295"
title: "Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase substrate promiscuity: Challenges and opportunities for development of substrate reduction therapy in disorders of valine and isoleucine metabolism."
authors:
- Houten SM
- Dodatko T
- Dwyer W
- Violante S
- Chen H
- Stauffer B
- DeVita RJ
- Vaz FM
- Cross JR
- Yu C
- Leandro J
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12642
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase substrate promiscuity: Challenges and opportunities for development of substrate reduction therapy in disorders of valine and isoleucine metabolism.
**Authors:** Houten SM, Dodatko T, Dwyer W, Violante S, Chen H, Stauffer B, DeVita RJ, Vaz FM, Cross JR, Yu C, Leandro J
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12642](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12642)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2023 Sep;46(5):931-942. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12642. Epub
2023  Jun 19.

Acyl-CoA dehydrogenase substrate promiscuity: Challenges and opportunities for 
development of substrate reduction therapy in disorders of valine and isoleucine 
metabolism.

Houten SM(1), Dodatko T(1), Dwyer W(1), Violante S(2), Chen H(1), Stauffer 
B(1)(3), DeVita RJ(4)(5), Vaz FM(6)(7)(8), Cross JR(2), Yu C(1)(3), Leandro 
J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(2)The Donald B. and Catherine C. Marron Cancer Metabolism Center, Memorial 
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Molecular and Cell Based Medicine, Icahn School of 
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(4)Department of Pharmacological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount 
Sinai, New York, New York, USA.
(5)Drug Discovery Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, 
New York, USA.
(6)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Pediatrics, Laboratory Genetic Metabolic 
Diseases, Amsterdam UMC Location University of Amsterdam, Emma Children's 
Hospital, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)Amsterdam Gastroenterology Endocrinology Metabolism, Inborn Errors of 
Metabolism, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(8)Core Facility Metabolomics, Amsterdam UMC Location University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Toxicity of accumulating substrates is a significant problem in several 
disorders of valine and isoleucine degradation notably short-chain enoyl-CoA 
hydratase (ECHS1 or crotonase) deficiency, 3-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA hydrolase 
(HIBCH) deficiency, propionic acidemia (PA), and methylmalonic aciduria (MMA). 
Isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase (ACAD8) and short/branched-chain acyl-CoA 
dehydrogenase (SBCAD, ACADSB) function in the valine and isoleucine degradation 
pathways, respectively. Deficiencies of these acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (ACAD) 
enzymes are considered biochemical abnormalities with limited or no clinical 
consequences. We investigated whether substrate reduction therapy through 
inhibition of ACAD8 and SBCAD can limit the accumulation of toxic metabolic 
intermediates in disorders of valine and isoleucine metabolism. Using analysis 
of acylcarnitine isomers, we show that 2-methylenecyclopropaneacetic acid (MCPA) 
inhibited SBCAD, isovaleryl-CoA dehydrogenase, short-chain acyl-CoA 
dehydrogenase and medium-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase, but not ACAD8. MCPA 
treatment of wild-type and PA HEK-293 cells caused a pronounced decrease in 
C3-carnitine. Furthermore, deletion of ACADSB in HEK-293 cells led to an equally 
strong decrease in C3-carnitine when compared to wild-type cells. Deletion of 
ECHS1 in HEK-293 cells caused a defect in lipoylation of the E2 component of the 
pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, which was not rescued by ACAD8 deletion. MCPA 
was able to rescue lipoylation in ECHS1 KO cells, but only in cells with prior 
ACAD8 deletion. SBCAD was not the sole ACAD responsible for this compensation, 
which indicates substantial promiscuity of ACADs in HEK-293 cells for the 
isobutyryl-CoA substrate. Substrate promiscuity appeared less prominent for 
2-methylbutyryl-CoA at least in HEK-293 cells. We suggest that pharmacological 
inhibition of SBCAD to treat PA should be investigated further.

© 2023 SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12642
PMCID: PMC10526699
PMID: 37309295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement The authors 
declare no competing interests.