---
reference_id: "PMID:10843163"
title: Pamidronate treatment of severe osteogenesis imperfecta in children under 3 years of age.
authors:
- Plotkin H
- Rauch F
- Bishop NJ
- Montpetit K
- Ruck-Gibis J
- Travers R
- Glorieux FH
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1210/jcem.85.5.6584
keywords:
- Bone Density/drug effects
- Diphosphonates/therapeutic use
- Female
- "Fractures, Bone/prevention & control"
- Humans
- Infant
- Lumbar Vertebrae/diagnostic imaging
- Male
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Pamidronate
- Radiography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pamidronate treatment of severe osteogenesis imperfecta in children under 3 years of age.
**Authors:** Plotkin H, Rauch F, Bishop NJ, Montpetit K, Ruck-Gibis J, Travers R, Glorieux FH
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jcem.85.5.6584](https://doi.org/10.1210/jcem.85.5.6584)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 May;85(5):1846-50. doi: 10.1210/jcem.85.5.6584.

Pamidronate treatment of severe osteogenesis imperfecta in children under 3 
years of age.

Plotkin H(1), Rauch F, Bishop NJ, Montpetit K, Ruck-Gibis J, Travers R, Glorieux 
FH.

Author information:
(1)Shriners Hospital for Children, and Department of Surgery, McGill University, 
Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Severe osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a hereditary disorder characterized by 
increased bone fragility and progressive bone deformity. Cyclical pamidronate 
infusions improve clinical outcome in children older than 3 yr of age with 
severe OI. Because earlier treatment may have potential to prevent deformities 
and improve functional prognosis in young children, we studied nine severely 
affected OI patients under 2 yr of age (2.3-20.7 months at entry) for a period 
of 12 months. Pamidronate was administered i.v. in cycles of 3 consecutive days. 
Patients received four to eight cycles during the treatment period, with 
cumulative doses averaging 12.4 mg/kg. Clinical changes were evaluated regularly 
during treatment, and radiological changes were assessed after 6-12 months of 
treatment. The control group consisted of six age-matched, severely affected OI 
patients, who had not received pamidronate treatment. During treatment bone 
mineral density (BMD) increased between 86-227%. The deviation from normal, as 
indicated by the z-score, diminished from -6.5 +/- 2.1 to -3.0 +/- 2.1 (P < 
0.001). In the control group the BMD z-score worsened significantly. Vertebral 
coronal area increased in all treated patients (11.4 +/- 3.4 to 14.9 +/- 1.8 
cm2; P < 0.001), but decreased in the untreated group (P < 0.05). In the treated 
patients, fracture rate was lower than in control patients (2.6 +/- 2.5 vs. 6.3 
+/- 1.6 fractures/year; P < 0.01). No adverse side-effects were noted, apart 
from the well known acute phase reaction during the first infusion cycle. 
Pamidronate treatment in severely affected OI patients under 3 yr of age is 
safe, increases BMD, and decreases fracture rate.

DOI: 10.1210/jcem.85.5.6584
PMID: 10843163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]