---
reference_id: "PMID:40499538"
title: Bi-allelic mutations in FASTKD5 are associated with cytochrome c oxidase deficiency and early- to late-onset Leigh syndrome.
authors:
- Antonicka H
- Weraarpachai W
- Szigety KM
- Kopajtich R
- Gibson JB
- Van Hove JLK
- Friederich MW
- Lopriore P
- Neuhofer C
- Van Hove RA
- Cole MA
- Reisdorph R
- Peterson JT
- Dempsey KJ
- Ganetzky RD
- Mancuso M
- Prokisch H
- Shoubridge EA
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2025.05.007
keywords:
- Humans
- Leigh Disease/genetics
- Cytochrome-c Oxidase Deficiency/genetics
- Male
- Female
- Alleles
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- "Electron Transport Complex IV/genetics, metabolism"
- Age of Onset
- Adult
- Mitochondria
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bi-allelic mutations in FASTKD5 are associated with cytochrome c oxidase deficiency and early- to late-onset Leigh syndrome.
**Authors:** Antonicka H, Weraarpachai W, Szigety KM, Kopajtich R, Gibson JB, Van Hove JLK, Friederich MW, Lopriore P, Neuhofer C, Van Hove RA, Cole MA, Reisdorph R, Peterson JT, Dempsey KJ, Ganetzky RD, Mancuso M, Prokisch H, Shoubridge EA
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2025.05.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2025.05.007)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2025 Jul 3;112(7):1699-1710. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2025.05.007. 
Epub 2025 Jun 10.

Bi-allelic mutations in FASTKD5 are associated with cytochrome c oxidase 
deficiency and early- to late-onset Leigh syndrome.

Antonicka H(1), Weraarpachai W(2), Szigety KM(3), Kopajtich R(4), Gibson JB(5), 
Van Hove JLK(6), Friederich MW(6), Lopriore P(7), Neuhofer C(8), Van Hove RA(9), 
Cole MA(10), Reisdorph R(10), Peterson JT(11), Dempsey KJ(12), Ganetzky RD(13), 
Mancuso M(7), Prokisch H(14), Shoubridge EA(15).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 2B4, 
Canada; The Neuro, Montreal Neurological Institute, Montreal, QC H3A 2B4, 
Canada.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Chiang Mai University, 
Chiang Mai 50200, Thailand.
(3)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(4)Institute of Neurogenomics, Computational Health Center, Helmholtz Zentrum 
Munich, Neuherberg, Germany; School of Medicine, Institute of Human Genetics, 
School of Medicine, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
(5)Section of Metabolic Genetics, Dell Children's Medical Center of Central 
Texas, Austin, TX, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Dell Medical School at 
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA.
(6)Section of Clinical Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Colorado, Aurora, CO 80045, USA; Mitochondrial Laboratory, 
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital Colorado, 
Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(7)Neurological Institute, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, 
University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(8)Institute of Neurogenomics, Computational Health Center, Helmholtz Zentrum 
Munich, Neuherberg, Germany; School of Medicine, Institute of Human Genetics, 
School of Medicine, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany; Institute 
of Clinical Human Genetics, University Hospital Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany.
(9)Section of Clinical Genetics and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, 
University of Colorado, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(10)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Skaggs School of Pharmacy and 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, 
CO 80045, USA.
(11)Mitochondrial Medicine Frontier Program, Division of Human Genetics, 
Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA.
(12)Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Atrium Health Levine 
Children's Hospital, Charlotte, NC, USA.
(13)Division of Human Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(14)Institute of Neurogenomics, Computational Health Center, Helmholtz Zentrum 
Munich, Neuherberg, Germany; School of Medicine, Institute of Human Genetics, 
School of Medicine, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany; German 
Center for Child and Adolescent Health (DZKJ), Partner Site Munich, Munich, 
Germany.
(15)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 2B4, 
Canada; The Neuro, Montreal Neurological Institute, Montreal, QC H3A 2B4, 
Canada. Electronic address: eric.shoubridge@mcgill.ca.

Using exome sequencing, we identified compound heterozygous variants of unknown 
significance in FASTKD5, a gene that codes for a mitochondrial protein essential 
for processing mRNAs at non-canonical cleavage sites in the primary 
mitochondrial transcript, in three subjects with Leigh syndrome, a progressive 
neurodegenerative disease characterized by lesions in the brainstem and basal 
ganglia. Among the three subjects, we identified three missense variants and two 
frameshift variants leading to a premature stop codon. Analysis of fibroblasts 
from two subjects showed reduced steady-state levels of FASTKD5 protein by 
immunoblot, reduced translation of the cytochrome c oxidase subunit 1, impaired 
assembly of complex IV, and a consequent decrease in cytochrome c oxidase 
enzymatic activity. The extent of these deficiencies appeared to correlate with 
the severity of the clinical phenotype. Expression of a wild-type FASTKD5 cDNA, 
but not cDNAs expressing the missense mutations, rescued all the molecular 
defects in the subjects' fibroblasts, demonstrating that the alleles are 
pathogenic. Two of the three identified missense mutations resulted in near 
complete loss of function, while one was hypomorphic, resulting from impaired 
protein stability. These cases of mitochondrial disease associated with 
bi-allelic variants in FASTKD5 add to a growing list of primary genetic 
mutations causing Leigh syndrome associated with complex IV deficiency.

Copyright © 2025 American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2025.05.007
PMCID: PMC12256832
PMID: 40499538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.