---
reference_id: "PMID:37172566"
title: Structure of the endosomal Commander complex linked to Ritscher-Schinzel syndrome.
authors:
- Healy MD
- McNally KE
- Butkovič R
- Chilton M
- Kato K
- Sacharz J
- McConville C
- Moody ERR
- Shaw S
- Planelles-Herrero VJ
- Yadav SKN
- Ross J
- Borucu U
- Palmer CS
- Chen KE
- Croll TI
- Hall RJ
- Caruana NJ
- Ghai R
- Nguyen THD
- Heesom KJ
- Saitoh S
- Berger I
- Schaffitzel C
- Williams TA
- Stroud DA
- Derivery E
- Collins BM
- Cullen PJ
journal: Cell
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2023.04.003
keywords:
- "Heart Septal Defects, Atrial"
- "Abnormalities, Multiple"
- Craniofacial Abnormalities
- Proteins/metabolism
- Multiprotein Complexes/metabolism
- Humans
- Dandy-Walker Syndrome
- Protein Transport
- Endosomes/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Structure of the endosomal Commander complex linked to Ritscher-Schinzel syndrome.
**Authors:** Healy MD, McNally KE, Butkovič R, Chilton M, Kato K, Sacharz J, McConville C, Moody ERR, Shaw S, Planelles-Herrero VJ, Yadav SKN, Ross J, Borucu U, Palmer CS, Chen KE, Croll TI, Hall RJ, Caruana NJ, Ghai R, Nguyen THD, Heesom KJ, Saitoh S, Berger I, Schaffitzel C, Williams TA, Stroud DA, Derivery E, Collins BM, Cullen PJ
**Journal:** Cell (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2023.04.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2023.04.003)

## Content

1. Cell. 2023 May 11;186(10):2219-2237.e29. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2023.04.003.

Structure of the endosomal Commander complex linked to Ritscher-Schinzel 
syndrome.

Healy MD(1), McNally KE(2), Butkovič R(3), Chilton M(3), Kato K(3), Sacharz 
J(4), McConville C(4), Moody ERR(5), Shaw S(3), Planelles-Herrero VJ(6), Yadav 
SKN(3), Ross J(3), Borucu U(3), Palmer CS(4), Chen KE(1), Croll TI(7), Hall 
RJ(1), Caruana NJ(8), Ghai R(1), Nguyen THD(6), Heesom KJ(9), Saitoh S(10), 
Berger I(11), Schaffitzel C(3), Williams TA(5), Stroud DA(12), Derivery E(6), 
Collins BM(13), Cullen PJ(14).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Cell Biology of Chronic Disease, Institute for Molecular 
Bioscience, The University of Queensland, St. Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia.
(2)School of Biochemistry, Biomedical Sciences Building, University of Bristol, 
BS8 1TD Bristol, UK; MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, CB2 0QH Cambridge, UK. 
Electronic address: kmcnally@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk.
(3)School of Biochemistry, Biomedical Sciences Building, University of Bristol, 
BS8 1TD Bristol, UK.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, The Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(5)School of Biological Sciences, University of Bristol, BS8 1TD Bristol, UK.
(6)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, CB2 0QH Cambridge, UK.
(7)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, CB2 0XY 
Cambridge, UK.
(8)Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, The Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia; 
Institute of Health and Sport (iHeS), Victoria University, Melbourne, VIC 
Australia.
(9)Proteomics Facility, School of Biochemistry, Biomedical Sciences Building, 
University of Bristol, BS8 1TD Bristol, UK.
(10)Department of Pediatrics and Neonatology, Nagoya City University Graduate 
School of Medical Sciences and Medical School, Nagoya, Japan.
(11)School of Biochemistry, Biomedical Sciences Building, University of Bristol, 
BS8 1TD Bristol, UK; Max Planck Bristol Centre for Minimal Biology, Department 
of Chemistry, University of Bristol, BS8 1TS Bristol, UK.
(12)Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, The Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia; 
Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, VIC 
Australia.
(13)Centre for Cell Biology of Chronic Disease, Institute for Molecular 
Bioscience, The University of Queensland, St. Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia. 
Electronic address: b.collins@imb.uq.edu.au.
(14)School of Biochemistry, Biomedical Sciences Building, University of Bristol, 
BS8 1TD Bristol, UK. Electronic address: pete.cullen@bristol.ac.uk.

Comment in
    Signal Transduct Target Ther. 2023 Aug 4;8(1):295. doi: 
10.1038/s41392-023-01568-4.

The Commander complex is required for endosomal recycling of diverse 
transmembrane cargos and is mutated in Ritscher-Schinzel syndrome. It comprises 
two sub-assemblies: Retriever composed of VPS35L, VPS26C, and VPS29; and the CCC 
complex which contains twelve subunits: COMMD1-COMMD10 and the coiled-coil 
domain-containing (CCDC) proteins CCDC22 and CCDC93. Combining X-ray 
crystallography, electron cryomicroscopy, and in silico predictions, we have 
assembled a complete structural model of Commander. Retriever is distantly 
related to the endosomal Retromer complex but has unique features preventing the 
shared VPS29 subunit from interacting with Retromer-associated factors. The 
COMMD proteins form a distinctive hetero-decameric ring stabilized by extensive 
interactions with CCDC22 and CCDC93. These adopt a coiled-coil structure that 
connects the CCC and Retriever assemblies and recruits a 16th subunit, DENND10, 
to form the complete Commander complex. The structure allows mapping of 
disease-causing mutations and reveals the molecular features required for the 
function of this evolutionarily conserved trafficking machinery.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2023.04.003
PMCID: PMC10187114
PMID: 37172566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare 
that they have no conflicts of interest.