---
reference_id: "PMID:19465910"
title: Mutations in the beta-tubulin gene TUBB2B result in asymmetrical polymicrogyria.
authors:
- Jaglin XH
- Poirier K
- Saillour Y
- Buhler E
- Tian G
- Bahi-Buisson N
- Fallet-Bianco C
- Phan-Dinh-Tuy F
- Kong XP
- Bomont P
- Castelnau-Ptakhine L
- Odent S
- Loget P
- Kossorotoff M
- Snoeck I
- Plessis G
- Parent P
- Beldjord C
- Cardoso C
- Represa A
- Flint J
- Keays DA
- Cowan NJ
- Chelly J
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1038/ng.380
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Amino Acid Substitution
- "Cerebral Cortex/abnormalities, embryology, pathology"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Fetal Diseases/genetics
- Genetic Variation
- Humans
- Lissencephaly/genetics
- "Malformations of Cortical Development/genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- "Pia Mater/abnormalities, embryology, pathology"
- Pregnancy
- Tubulin/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the beta-tubulin gene TUBB2B result in asymmetrical polymicrogyria.
**Authors:** Jaglin XH, Poirier K, Saillour Y, Buhler E, Tian G, Bahi-Buisson N, Fallet-Bianco C, Phan-Dinh-Tuy F, Kong XP, Bomont P, Castelnau-Ptakhine L, Odent S, Loget P, Kossorotoff M, Snoeck I, Plessis G, Parent P, Beldjord C, Cardoso C, Represa A, Flint J, Keays DA, Cowan NJ, Chelly J
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.380](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.380)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2009 Jun;41(6):746-52. doi: 10.1038/ng.380. Epub 2009 May 24.

Mutations in the beta-tubulin gene TUBB2B result in asymmetrical polymicrogyria.

Jaglin XH(1), Poirier K, Saillour Y, Buhler E, Tian G, Bahi-Buisson N,
Fallet-Bianco C, Phan-Dinh-Tuy F, Kong XP, Bomont P, Castelnau-Ptakhine L, Odent
S, Loget P, Kossorotoff M, Snoeck I, Plessis G, Parent P, Beldjord C, Cardoso C,
Represa A, Flint J, Keays DA, Cowan NJ, Chelly J.

Author information:
(1)Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes CNRS (UMR 8104), Paris, France.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2009 Jun;41(6):638-40. doi: 10.1038/ng0609-638.

Polymicrogyria is a relatively common but poorly understood defect of cortical
development characterized by numerous small gyri and a thick disorganized
cortical plate lacking normal lamination. Here we report de novo mutations in a
beta-tubulin gene, TUBB2B, in four individuals and a 27-gestational-week fetus
with bilateral asymmetrical polymicrogyria. Neuropathological examination of the
fetus revealed an absence of cortical lamination associated with the presence of
ectopic neuronal cells in the white matter and in the leptomeningeal spaces due
to breaches in the pial basement membrane. In utero RNAi-based inactivation
demonstrates that TUBB2B is required for neuronal migration. We also show that
two disease-associated mutations lead to impaired formation of tubulin
heterodimers. These observations, together with previous data, show that
disruption of microtubule-based processes underlies a large spectrum of neuronal
migration disorders that includes not only lissencephaly and pachygyria, but
also polymicrogyria malformations.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.380
PMCID: PMC2883584
PMID: 19465910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
