---
reference_id: "PMID:28580712"
title: "Kawasaki disease: State of the art."
authors:
- Newburger JW
journal: Congenit Heart Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/chd.12498
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Kawasaki disease: State of the art.
**Authors:** Newburger JW
**Journal:** Congenit Heart Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/chd.12498](https://doi.org/10.1111/chd.12498)

## Content

1. Congenit Heart Dis. 2017 Sep;12(5):633-635. doi: 10.1111/chd.12498. Epub 2017 
Jun 5.

Kawasaki disease: State of the art.

Newburger JW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's Hospital, Department of 
Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.

Kawasaki disease is an acute febrile arteritis of childhood that can result in 
coronary artery aneurysms if untreated in the first 10 and ideally 7 days of 
illness. Kawasaki disease begins as a necrotizing arteritis with neutrophilic 
infiltrate, followed by subacute/chronic changes and luminal myofibroblastic 
proliferation that can cause coronary artery stenosis. Manifestations include 
the presence of ≥5 days of fever, together with clinical criteria of extremity 
changes, rash, conjunctivitis, oral changes, and unilateral cervical 
lymphadenopathy. Echocardiography should be performed at the time of diagnosis, 
then 1-2 weeks and 4-6 weeks later, with more frequent studies in individuals 
with coronary artery dilation or persistent fever. Coronary artery dimensions 
are characterized both as z-scores and absolute measurements, and coronary 
architecture evolves over time in children who have aneurysms in the first weeks 
of illness. Systematic follow-up and therapies are tailored to the degree of 
coronary disease and to coronary ischemia.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/chd.12498
PMID: 28580712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]