---
reference_id: "PMID:32713229"
title: Iron Deficiency and Its Role in Sleep Disruption in Patients With Angelman Syndrome.
authors:
- Ryan CS
- Edlund W
- Mandrekar J
- Wong-Kisiel LC
- Gavrilova RH
- Kotagal S
journal: J Child Neurol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1177/0883073820941755
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Anemia, Iron-Deficiency/complications, physiopathology"
- "Angelman Syndrome/complications, physiopathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Polysomnography
- Retrospective Studies
- "Sleep Wake Disorders/etiology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Iron Deficiency and Its Role in Sleep Disruption in Patients With Angelman Syndrome.
**Authors:** Ryan CS, Edlund W, Mandrekar J, Wong-Kisiel LC, Gavrilova RH, Kotagal S
**Journal:** J Child Neurol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0883073820941755](https://doi.org/10.1177/0883073820941755)

## Content

1. J Child Neurol. 2020 Dec;35(14):963-969. doi: 10.1177/0883073820941755. Epub
2020 Jul 27.

Iron Deficiency and Its Role in Sleep Disruption in Patients With Angelman
Syndrome.

Ryan CS(1), Edlund W(1), Mandrekar J(1)(2), Wong-Kisiel LC(1), Gavrilova
RH(1)(3), Kotagal S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, 4352Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(2)Department of Health Sciences Research, 4352Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(3)Department of Genetics, 4352Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine if Angelman syndrome patients with sleep complaints have
an increased risk of iron deficiency, and if iron therapy improves their sleep
difficulties.
BACKGROUND: About two-thirds of Angelman syndrome patients experience sleep
difficulties, which are likely multifactorial. Because iron deficiency can
contribute toward restlessness in sleep, we investigated whether it might be a
contributing factor in this special population.
METHODS: This retrospective study involved medical record review of Angelman
syndrome patients <18 years old who had attended our multidisciplinary Angelman
syndrome clinic and had sleep complaints. Serum ferritin levels were compared to
age- and sex-matched controls. Sleep history and nocturnal polysomnogram
findings of the Angelman syndrome patients were also characterized.
RESULTS: Nineteen Angelman syndrome patients (9 female, mean age 6.2±4.4 years)
were identified. All 19 reported sleep difficulties. The mean serum ferritin
level was 19.9±8.5 μg/L, while that in controls was 27.8±17.8 μg/L (P value
.13). The odds ratio of iron deficiency in Angelman syndrome compared to
controls was 4.17 (95% confidence interval 1.23-14.10), using normal serum
ferritin level of 24 μg/L based on literature. Fifteen Angelman syndrome
patients underwent nocturnal polysomnogram with 9/15 showing an elevated
periodic limb movement index (overall mean 9.8±10.4). Seventeen of 19 received
iron therapy. Twelve had follow-up after iron therapy, with parents reporting
improved sleep quality. Eight had serum ferritin levels rechecked after iron
therapy, showing a mean increase of 24±5.1 μg/L.
CONCLUSIONS: Sleep difficulties in Angelman syndrome, though multifactorial, may
in part be related to iron deficiency. Treatment with iron improved sleep to a
modest degree in this population.

DOI: 10.1177/0883073820941755
PMID: 32713229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
