---
reference_id: "PMID:20301306"
title: CLCN7-Related Osteopetrosis.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Sobacchi C
- Villa A
- Schulz A
- Kornak U
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CLCN7-Related Osteopetrosis.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Sobacchi C, Villa A, Schulz A, Kornak U

## Content

1. CLCN7-Related Osteopetrosis.

Sobacchi C(1), Villa A(1), Schulz A(2), Kornak U(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2007 Feb 12 [updated 2022 Jan 20].

Author information:
(1)CNR-IRGB, Milan Unit, Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, Rozzano, Italy
(2)Universitätsklinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Ulm, Germany
(3)Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsmedizin Göttingen, Germany

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: The spectrum of CLCN7-related osteopetrosis includes 
infantile malignant CLCN7-related autosomal recessive osteopetrosis (ARO), 
intermediate autosomal osteopetrosis (IAO), and autosomal dominant osteopetrosis 
type II (ADOII; Albers-Schönberg disease). ARO. Onset is at birth. Findings may 
include: fractures; reduced growth; sclerosis of the skull base (with or without 
choanal stenosis or hydrocephalus) resulting in optic nerve compression, facial 
palsy, and hearing loss; absence of the bone marrow cavity resulting in severe 
anemia and thrombocytopenia; dental abnormalities, odontomas, and risk for 
mandibular osteomyelitis; and hypocalcemia with tetanic seizures and secondary 
hyperparathyroidism. Without treatment maximal life span in ARO is ten years. 
IAO. Onset is in childhood. Findings may include: fractures after minor trauma, 
characteristic skeletal radiographic changes found incidentally, mild anemia, 
and occasional visual impairment secondary to optic nerve compression. Life 
expectancy in IAO is usually normal. ADOII. Onset is usually late childhood or 
adolescence. Findings may include: fractures (in any long bone and/or the 
posterior arch of a vertebra), scoliosis, hip osteoarthritis, and osteomyelitis 
of the mandible or septic osteitis or osteoarthritis elsewhere. Cranial nerve 
compression is rare.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of a CLCN7-related osteopetrosis is established 
in a proband with suggestive findings and biallelic pathogenic variants or a 
heterozygous pathogenic variant in CLCN7 identified by molecular genetic 
testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: ARO. Calcium supplementation for 
hypocalcemic convulsions; management of calcium homeostasis per individual 
needs; erythrocyte or platelet transfusions as needed; antibiotics for 
leukocytopenia; immunoglobulins for hypogammaglobulinemia. Newly diagnosed 
individuals should be transferred as soon as possible to a pediatric center 
experienced in allogeneic stem cell transplantation in this disease. The 
collaboration of pediatricians, pediatric neurologists, ophthalmologists, and 
psychologists is required to determine best treatment of neurologic and 
ophthalmic issues, which may include surgical decompression of the optic nerve 
and hearing aids. Treatment of fractures by an experienced orthopedist and 
dental care with attention to tooth eruption, ankylosis, abscesses, cysts, and 
fistulas. ADOII. Orthopedic treatment for fractures and arthritis with attention 
to potential post-surgical complications (delayed union or non-union of 
fractures, infection); fractures near joints may require total joint 
arthroplasty. Medical treatment for arthritis with anti-inflammatory agents; 
transfusions for anemia and thrombocytopenia; surgical optic nerve 
decompression, hearing aids, and regular dental care and good oral hygiene. 
Prevention of primary manifestations: In ARO, hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation (HSCT) can be curative; however, cranial nerve dysfunction is 
usually irreversible, and progressive neurologic sequelae occur in children with 
the neuronopathic form even after successful HSCT. Surveillance: Complete blood 
count, ophthalmologic examination, and audiologic evaluation at least once a 
year; dental evaluation every 6-12 months or as directed. For ARO, follow up as 
directed by the transplantation center following HSCT. Agents/circumstances to 
avoid: In ADOII, activities with high fracture risk. Orthopedic surgery should 
only be performed when absolutely necessary.
GENETIC COUNSELING: CLCN7-related osteopetrosis is inherited in an autosomal 
recessive or autosomal dominant manner: ARO is inherited in an autosomal 
recessive manner; about 40% of IAO is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner 
and about 60% in an autosomal dominant manner; and ADOII is inherited in an 
autosomal dominant manner. Autosomal recessive inheritance. If both parents are 
known to be heterozygous for a CLCN7 pathogenic variant associated with 
autosomal recessive osteopetrosis, each sib of an affected individual has at 
conception a 25% chance of inheriting biallelic pathogenic variants and being 
affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of 
inheriting neither of the familial CLCN7 pathogenic variants. Carrier testing 
for at-risk relatives requires prior identification of the CLCN7 pathogenic 
variants in the family. Autosomal dominant inheritance. Most individuals 
diagnosed with autosomal dominant CLCN7-related osteopetrosis have an affected 
parent. Each child of an individual with autosomal dominant osteopetrosis has a 
50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant. Once the CLCN7 pathogenic 
variant(s) have been identified in an affected family member, prenatal testing 
and preimplantation genetic testing for CLCN7-related osteopetrosis are 
possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301306