---
reference_id: "PMID:21349214"
title: "The ambiguous life of Dientamoeba fragilis: the need to investigate current hypotheses on transmission."
authors:
- Barratt JL
- Harkness J
- Marriott D
- Ellis JT
- Stark D
journal: Parasitology
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1017/S0031182010001733
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The ambiguous life of Dientamoeba fragilis: the need to investigate current hypotheses on transmission.
**Authors:** Barratt JL, Harkness J, Marriott D, Ellis JT, Stark D
**Journal:** Parasitology (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1017/S0031182010001733](https://doi.org/10.1017/S0031182010001733)

## Content

1. Parasitology. 2011 Apr;138(5):557-72. doi: 10.1017/S0031182010001733. Epub
2011  Feb 24.

The ambiguous life of Dientamoeba fragilis: the need to investigate current 
hypotheses on transmission.

Barratt JL(1), Harkness J, Marriott D, Ellis JT, Stark D.

Author information:
(1)Division of Microbiology, SydPath, St Vincent's Hospital, Darlinghurst, 
Australia.

Dientamoeba fragilis is an inhabitant of the human bowel and is associated with 
gastrointestinal illness. Despite its discovery over a century ago, the details 
of Dientamoeba's life cycle are unclear and its mode of transmission is unknown. 
Several theories exist which attempt to explain how Dientamoeba may be 
transmitted. One theory suggests that animals are responsible for the 
transmission of Dientamoeba. However, reports of Dientamoeba in animals are 
sporadic and most are not supported by molecular evidence. Another theory 
suggests that Dientamoeba may be transmitted via the ova of a helminth. Given 
that the closest relative of Dientamoeba is transmitted via the ova of a 
helminth, this theory seems plausible. It has also been suggested that 
Dientamoeba could be transmitted directly between humans. This theory also seems 
plausible given that other relatives of Dientamoeba are transmitted in this way. 
Despite numerous investigations, Dientamoeba's mode of transmission remains 
unknown. This review discusses the strengths and weaknesses of theories relating 
to Dientamoeba's mode of transmission and, by doing so, indicates where gaps in 
current knowledge exist. Where information is lacking, suggestions are made as 
to how future research could improve our knowledge on the life cycle of 
Dientamoeba.

DOI: 10.1017/S0031182010001733
PMID: 21349214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]