---
reference_id: "PMID:35865957"
title: Therapeutic Strategies For Tay-Sachs Disease.
authors:
- Picache JA
- Zheng W
- Chen CZ
journal: Front Pharmacol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.906647
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Therapeutic Strategies For Tay-Sachs Disease.
**Authors:** Picache JA, Zheng W, Chen CZ
**Journal:** Front Pharmacol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fphar.2022.906647](https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2022.906647)

## Content

1. Front Pharmacol. 2022 Jul 5;13:906647. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2022.906647.
eCollection 2022.

Therapeutic Strategies For Tay-Sachs Disease.

Picache JA(1), Zheng W(1), Chen CZ(1).

Author information:
(1)National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD, United States.

Tay-Sachs disease (TSD) is an autosomal recessive disease that features
progressive neurodegenerative presentations. It affects one in 100,000 live
births. Currently, there is no approved therapy or cure. This review summarizes
multiple drug development strategies for TSD, including enzyme replacement
therapy, pharmaceutical chaperone therapy, substrate reduction therapy, gene
therapy, and hematopoietic stem cell replacement therapy. In vitro and in vivo
systems are described to assess the efficacy of the aforementioned therapeutic
strategies. Furthermore, we discuss using MALDI mass spectrometry to perform a
high throughput screen of compound libraries. This enables discovery of
compounds that reduce GM2 and can lead to further development of a TSD therapy.

Copyright © 2022 Picache, Zheng and Chen.

DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2022.906647
PMCID: PMC9294361
PMID: 35865957

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
