---
reference_id: "PMID:21277508"
title: The environment, the airway, and the athlete.
authors:
- Sacha JJ
- Quinn JM
journal: Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.anai.2010.06.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The environment, the airway, and the athlete.
**Authors:** Sacha JJ, Quinn JM
**Journal:** Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.anai.2010.06.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anai.2010.06.004)

## Content

1. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2011 Feb;106(2):81-7; quiz 88. doi: 
10.1016/j.anai.2010.06.004.

The environment, the airway, and the athlete.

Sacha JJ(1), Quinn JM.

Author information:
(1)Wilford Hall Medical Center, Lackland Air Force Base, San Antonio, Texas 
78236, USA. Joshua.sacha@lackland.af.mil

Comment in
    Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2011 Aug;107(2):183-4. doi: 
10.1016/j.anai.2011.05.015.

OBJECTIVE: To review the interaction of environmental factors with host 
conditions, including atopy, the potential resulting impaired upper and lower 
airway function, and diagnostic and therapeutic considerations in the athlete.
DATA SOURCES: OVID, MEDLINE, and PubMed searches were performed 
cross-referencing the keywords asthma, athlete, atopy, bronchospasm, exercise, 
pollution, and rhinitis.
STUDY SELECTION: Articles were selected based on relevance to the subject 
matter.
RESULTS: Recent studies have yielded significant advances in our understanding 
of how intrinsic and extrinsic factors can potentially result in impaired 
function of the airways of athletes. Extrinsic factors include environmental 
exposure to temperature, humidity, aeroallergens, irritants, and pollution. 
Intrinsic factors include atopy, allergic rhinitis, asthma, and anatomical 
variants. These intrinsic and extrinsic factors can affect both the athlete's 
quality of life and athletic performance. However, uncertainty remains regarding 
relative contributions of these factors in explaining the high degree of 
bronchospasm seen in various populations of athletes with and without asthma, 
and no consensus exists regarding the most appropriate diagnostic and 
therapeutic modalities.
CONCLUSIONS: Great variability exists in the presentation, laboratory findings, 
diagnostic maneuvers, and response to therapeutic measures among populations of 
athletes in different sports and among individuals. An improved understanding of 
the unique exposures faced by athletes in different disciplines, of the 
available tests for pursuing the appropriate diagnosis, and of the available 
therapies will allow the allergist to provide clinical improvement and allow the 
athlete to find relief and achieve his/her full potential.

Copyright © 2011 American College of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.anai.2010.06.004
PMID: 21277508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]