---
reference_id: "PMID:24864506"
title: "[Diabetic retinopathy in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus]."
authors:
- Khasanova ZhZ
- Samoĭlov AN
journal: Vestn Oftalmol
year: '2014'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Diabetic retinopathy in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus].
**Authors:** Khasanova ZhZ, Samoĭlov AN
**Journal:** Vestn Oftalmol (2014)

## Content

1. Vestn Oftalmol. 2014 Mar-Apr;130(2):83-7.

[Diabetic retinopathy in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus].

[Article in Russian]

Khasanova ZhZ, Samoĭlov AN.

The paper presents an up-to-date review of scientific data. Diabetes mellitus 
(DM), due to its epidemic prevalence and high occurrence of associated 
disability, is now one of the priority medical and social problems. 
Incapacitating manifestations of diabetes include visual impairment. Thus, 
diabetic retinopathy (DR), a late nonspecific vascular complication of DM, is 
the leading cause of blindness in the working-age population. The basic 
principle of DR treatment is optimal compensation of diabetes and concomitant 
conditions, such as arterial hypertension, nephropathy, and hyperlipidemia. 
Tight glycemic control is the main method for preventing and slowing the 
progression of preproliferative DR to later stages. Currently, the optimal and 
the most promising method of insulin injection to diabetes patients is insulin 
pump, as it enables accurate imitation of physiological secretion of insulin, 
provides the possibility of tight glycemic control, considerably decreases the 
risk for acute and late complications of diabetes, etc.

PMID: 24864506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]