---
reference_id: "PMID:15505379"
title: "Isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency: isobutyrylglycinuria and ACAD8 gene mutations in two infants."
authors:
- Sass JO
- Sander S
- Zschocke J
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2004'
doi: "10.1023/B:BOLI.0000045798.12425.1b"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency: isobutyrylglycinuria and ACAD8 gene mutations in two infants.
**Authors:** Sass JO, Sander S, Zschocke J
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1023/B:BOLI.0000045798.12425.1b](https://doi.org/10.1023/B:BOLI.0000045798.12425.1b)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2004;27(6):741-5. doi:
10.1023/B:BOLI.0000045798.12425.1b.

Isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency: isobutyrylglycinuria and ACAD8 gene 
mutations in two infants.

Sass JO(1), Sander S, Zschocke J.

Author information:
(1)Stoffwechsellabor, Zentrum für Kinderheilkunde und Jugendmedizin, 
Universitätsklinikum Freiburg, D-79106 Freiburg, Germany. 
sass@kikLi.ukL.uni-freiburg.de

Isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase (IBD) is an enzyme involved in the catabolism of 
the branched-chain amino acid valine. We report a third and a fourth child with 
IBD deficiency who were both detected during newborn screening with tandem mass 
spectrometry and so far do not receive any treatment. The diagnosis was 
confirmed by biochemical and molecular studies. One of the children is 
homozygous for the mutation M128I in the ACAD8 gene, which is predicted to 
affect the substrate binding cavity. The other child is compound heterozygous 
for a frameshift mutation F33fsins and a missense mutation V203I. It is as yet 
uncertain whether IBD deficiency may cause significant morbidity in affected 
children and whether treatment is necessary. In view of the limited experience 
worldwide, careful monitoring of the children is recommended.

DOI: 10.1023/B:BOLI.0000045798.12425.1b
PMID: 15505379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]