---
reference_id: "PMID:22994670"
title: Smashed skin grafting or smash grafting - a novel method of vitiligo surgery.
authors:
- Krishnan A
- Kar S
journal: Int J Dermatol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-4632.2012.05513.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Smashed skin grafting or smash grafting - a novel method of vitiligo surgery.
**Authors:** Krishnan A, Kar S
**Journal:** Int J Dermatol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1365-4632.2012.05513.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-4632.2012.05513.x)

## Content

1. Int J Dermatol. 2012 Oct;51(10):1242-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-4632.2012.05513.x.

Smashed skin grafting or smash grafting - a novel method of vitiligo surgery.

Krishnan A(1), Kar S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Venereology & Leprosy MGIMS, Sewagram, 
Maharashtra, India. akof2k@yahoo.com

INTRODUCTION: Vitiligo is an acquired progressive disorder characterized by 
destruction of melanocytes in the lesion and the lesional hair follicles. A 
number of new therapeutic options for vitiligo have become available over the 
last decade or so both on the medical as well as surgical side. One among them 
is the smashed skin grafting or simply smash grafting, which is a modification 
of split-thickness grafting. In this method, the graft undergoes "smashing" 
before being applied to the recipient site. Though a simple and effective 
procedure, very few people are doing the procedure either due to lack of 
awareness or due to lack of published data.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Smash skin grafting was performed in 26 patients with 
vitiligo in Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences, Sewagram, Maharashtra, 
India.
RESULTS: Smashed skin grafting helped to achieve more than 90% repigmentation of 
the vitiligo patches in our patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Smashed skin grafting is a simple procedure with fewer side 
effects, better outcome, and high patient satisfaction or, in simple words, it 
can be considered as an alternative to various conventional surgical modalities 
like punch grafting and melanocyte cell culture methods. This article deals with 
the steps of the procedure, results of the surgery in a small group of patients, 
and the necessity of increasing the awareness of smash grafting.

© 2012 The International Society of Dermatology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-4632.2012.05513.x
PMID: 22994670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]