---
reference_id: "PMID:28459927"
title: Educational and Health Outcomes of Children Treated for Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder.
authors:
- Fleming M
- Fitton CA
- Steiner MFC
- McLay JS
- Clark D
- King A
- Mackay DF
- Pell JP
journal: JAMA Pediatr
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1001/jamapediatrics.2017.0691
keywords:
- Absenteeism
- Adolescent
- "Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/drug therapy, epidemiology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- "Education, Special/methods"
- Educational Status
- Female
- "Hospitalization/statistics & numerical data"
- Humans
- Male
- "Schools/statistics & numerical data"
- Scotland/epidemiology
- Sex Factors
- Social Behavior Disorders/epidemiology
- Treatment Outcome
- "Unemployment/statistics & numerical data"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Educational and Health Outcomes of Children Treated for Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder.
**Authors:** Fleming M, Fitton CA, Steiner MFC, McLay JS, Clark D, King A, Mackay DF, Pell JP
**Journal:** JAMA Pediatr (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamapediatrics.2017.0691](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapediatrics.2017.0691)

## Content

1. JAMA Pediatr. 2017 Jul 3;171(7):e170691. doi:
10.1001/jamapediatrics.2017.0691.  Epub 2017 Jul 3.

Educational and Health Outcomes of Children Treated for
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder.

Fleming M(1), Fitton CA(2), Steiner MFC(2), McLay JS(2), Clark D(3), King A(4),
Mackay DF(1), Pell JP(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Health and Wellbeing, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland.
(2)Department of Child Health, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, Scotland.
(3)Information Services Division, Edinburgh, Scotland.
(4)ScotXed, Scottish Government, Edinburgh, Scotland.

IMPORTANCE: Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) affects 39 million
people worldwide; in isolation, it doubles annual health care costs and, when
associated with comorbid mental health problems, it quadruples the costs.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the education and health outcomes of schoolchildren
treated for ADHD with their peers.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: In this population-based cohort study,
individual-level record linkage was performed of 8 Scotland-wide administrative
databases covering dispensed prescriptions, admissions to acute and psychiatric
hospitals, maternity records, annual pupil census, examinations, school absences
and exclusions, and unemployment. The study cohort comprised 766 244 children
attending Scottish primary, secondary, and special schools at any point between
September 21, 2009, and September 18, 2013. Data analysis was performed from
June 1, 2015, to December 6, 2016.
EXPOSURES: Medication approved solely for ADHD treatment.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Special educational needs, academic attainment,
unauthorized absence, exclusion, age at leaving school, unemployment after
leaving, and hospitalization. Outcomes were adjusted for potential
sociodemographic, maternity, and comorbidity confounders.
RESULTS: Of the 766 244 schoolchildren, 7413 (1.0%) were treated for ADHD; 6287
(84.8%) were male. These children had higher rates of unauthorized absence
(adjusted incidence rate ratio [IRR], 1.16; 95% CI, 1.14-1.19) and exclusion
(adjusted IRR, 5.79; 95% CI, 5.45-6.16), more commonly had a record of special
educational need (adjusted odds ratio [OR], 8.62; 95% CI, 8.26-9.00), achieved
lower academic attainment (adjusted OR, 3.35; 95% CI, 3.00-3.75), were more
likely to leave school before age 16 years (1546 [64.3%] vs 61 235 [28.4%]), and
were more likely to be unemployed (adjusted OR, 1.39; 95% CI, 1.25-1.53).
Children with ADHD were more likely to require hospitalization overall (adjusted
hazard ratio [HR], 1.25; 95% CI, 1.19-1.31) and for injury (adjusted HR, 1.52;
95% CI, 1.40-1.65).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Even while receiving medication, children with ADHD
fare worse than their peers across a wide range of outcomes relating not only to
education but also to health.

DOI: 10.1001/jamapediatrics.2017.0691
PMCID: PMC6583483
PMID: 28459927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.
