---
reference_id: "PMID:38627754"
title: "Prevalence of major depressive disorder and its associated factors among adult patients with neurolathyrism in Dawunt District, Ethiopia; 2022: community-based cross-sectional study."
authors:
- Bimerew M
- Gebremeskel T
- Beletew B
- Ayaliew W
- Wodaje M
- Ayalneh M
journal: BMC Psychiatry
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s12888-024-05755-7
keywords:
- Adult
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- Prevalence
- "Major Depressive Disorder/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Ethiopia/epidemiology
- Lathyrism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of major depressive disorder and its associated factors among adult patients with neurolathyrism in Dawunt District, Ethiopia; 2022: community-based cross-sectional study.
**Authors:** Bimerew M, Gebremeskel T, Beletew B, Ayaliew W, Wodaje M, Ayalneh M
**Journal:** BMC Psychiatry (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12888-024-05755-7](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-024-05755-7)

## Content

1. BMC Psychiatry. 2024 Apr 16;24(1):282. doi: 10.1186/s12888-024-05755-7.

Prevalence of major depressive disorder and its associated factors among adult 
patients with neurolathyrism in Dawunt District, Ethiopia; 2022: community-based 
cross-sectional study.

Bimerew M(1), Gebremeskel T(2), Beletew B(3), Ayaliew W(4), Wodaje M(5), Ayalneh 
M(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric and Child Health Nursing, College of Medicine and 
Health Science, Injibara University, Injibara, Ethiopia. mebiget@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Human Anatomy, College of Health Science, Woldia University, 
Woldia, Ethiopia.
(3)Department of Nursing, College of Health Science, Woldia University, Woldia, 
Ethiopia.
(4)Department of Plant Biotechnology, Woldia University, Woldia, Ethiopia.
(5)Department of Midwifery, College of Health Science, Woldia University, 
Woldia, Ethiopia.
(6)Department of Pediatric and Child Health Nursing, College of Medicine and 
Health Science, Injibara University, Injibara, Ethiopia.

INTRODUCTION: Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) is one of the commonest mental 
disorders affecting more than 250 million people globally. Patients with chronic 
illnesses had higher risks for developing MDD than the general population. 
Neurolathyrism is a chronic illness characterized by lifelong incurable spastic 
paralysis of lower extremities; causing permanent disability. It is highly 
prevalent in Dawunt district, Ethiopia; with a point prevalence of 2.4%. Despite 
this, there were no previous studies assessing the prevalence of MDD among 
patients with neurolathyrism in Ethiopia.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the prevalence of MDD and to identify its associated 
factors among patients with neurolathyrism in Dawunt district, Ethiopia.
METHODS: A community based cross-sectional study was conducted on 260 samples in 
Dawunt district from February 01 to March 30/ 2021. Multistage sampling 
technique was used to select study participants. The patient Health 
Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) depression screening tool was used to diagnose MDD. 
PHQ-9 is a standardized depression screening tool and a PHQ-9 score of ≥ 10 has 
a sensitivity and specificity of 88.0% [95% CI (83.0-92.0%)] and 85.0% [95% CI 
(82.0-88.0%)] for screening MDD. Data were collected by interview; entered to 
EpiData version 4.2.0; exported to SPSS version 25.0 for analysis; descriptive 
statistics and binary logistic regression model were used; AOR with 95% CI was 
used to interpret the associations; and finally results were presented by texts, 
charts, graphs, and tables.
RESULTS: A total of 256 adult patients with neurolathyrism were participated; 
and the prevalence of MDD was found to be 38.7%. Being female [AOR = 3.00; 95% 
CI (1.15, 7.84)], living alone [AOR = 2.77; 95% CI (1.02-7.53)], being on 
neurolathyrism stage-3 [AOR = 3.22; 95% CI (1.09, 9.54)] or stage-4 [AOR = 4.00; 
95% CI (1.28, 12.48)], stigma [AOR = 2.69; 95% CI (1.34, 5.39)], and lack of 
social/ family support [AOR = 3.61; 95% CI (1.80, 7.24)] were found to have 
statistically significant association with an increased odds of MDD; while 
regular exercise and ever formal counselling were found to have statistically 
significant association with a decreased odds of MDD.
CONCLUSION: The prevalence of MDD among neurolathyrism patients in Dawunt 
district was high. Lack of social support, stigma, not getting formal 
counselling, and not involving in regular exercise were modifiable risk factors. 
Therefore, social support, reducing stigma, formal counselling, and encouraging 
regular exercise might help to reduce the burden of MDD among neurolathyrism 
patients.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12888-024-05755-7
PMCID: PMC11020178
PMID: 38627754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.