---
reference_id: "PMID:6702894"
title: Osteogenesis imperfecta type II delineation of the phenotype with reference to genetic heterogeneity.
authors:
- Sillence DO
- Barlow KK
- Garber AP
- Hall JG
- Rimoin DL
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '1984'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320170204
keywords:
- Consanguinity
- Femur/abnormalities
- "Genes, Lethal"
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Infant, Small for Gestational Age"
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/classification, diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Paternal Age
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Radiography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteogenesis imperfecta type II delineation of the phenotype with reference to genetic heterogeneity.
**Authors:** Sillence DO, Barlow KK, Garber AP, Hall JG, Rimoin DL
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (1984)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.1320170204](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.1320170204)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 1984 Feb;17(2):407-23. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320170204.

Osteogenesis imperfecta type II delineation of the phenotype with reference to 
genetic heterogeneity.

Sillence DO, Barlow KK, Garber AP, Hall JG, Rimoin DL.

A group of fetuses with a perinatally lethal variety of osteogenesis imperfecta 
(O.I. type II) is characterized by short limbs, and clinical and 
roentgenological evidence of severe osseous fragility and defective 
ossification. Forty-eight cases were reviewed and can be subdivided into 3 
groups on the basis of small but probably significant differences in clinical 
and radiographic findings. Group A (38 cases): short, broad, "crumpled" long 
bones, angulation of tibiae and continuously beaded ribs. Group B (6 cases): 
short, broad, crumpled femora, angulation of tibiae but normal ribs or ribs with 
incomplete beading. Group C (4 cases): long, thin, inadequately modelled, 
rectangular long bones with multiple fractures and thin beaded ribs. Consistency 
of findings within sibships suggests the groups reflect genetic heterogeneity. 
An increased frequency of parental consanguinity, sib occurrence with normal 
parents, and normal mean paternal age at birth, suggest that most cases of O.I. 
type II represent autosomal recessive traits. Some previously reported cases and 
the biochemical findings in one case suggest still further genetic 
heterogeneity.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.1320170204
PMID: 6702894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]