---
reference_id: "PMID:20077223"
title: Risk assessment of low-level cadmium and arsenic on the kidney.
authors:
- Huang M
- Choi SJ
- Kim DW
- Kim NY
- Park CH
- Yu SD
- Kim DS
- Park KS
- Song JS
- Kim H
- Choi BS
- Yu IJ
- Park JD
journal: J Toxicol Environ Health A
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1080/15287390903213095
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk assessment of low-level cadmium and arsenic on the kidney.
**Authors:** Huang M, Choi SJ, Kim DW, Kim NY, Park CH, Yu SD, Kim DS, Park KS, Song JS, Kim H, Choi BS, Yu IJ, Park JD
**Journal:** J Toxicol Environ Health A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15287390903213095](https://doi.org/10.1080/15287390903213095)

## Content

1. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 2009;72(21-22):1493-8. doi: 
10.1080/15287390903213095.

Risk assessment of low-level cadmium and arsenic on the kidney.

Huang M(1), Choi SJ, Kim DW, Kim NY, Park CH, Yu SD, Kim DS, Park KS, Song JS, 
Kim H, Choi BS, Yu IJ, Park JD.

Author information:
(1)College of Medicine, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Korea.

Cadmium (Cd) and arsenic (As) are widely distributed in the environment and are 
known human carcinogens. Several studies reported that chronic exposure to Cd 
and As produced renal injuries in humans. As one of the mechanisms, oxidative 
stress was suggested to play a role in the early process of Cd- and/or 
As-induced tubular damage in the kidney. This study was performed to evaluate 
the significance of urinary biomarkers, role of oxidative stress, and effect of 
coexposure to environmental low-level exposure to Cd and/or As in the general 
population. Urine samples were collected from 290 adults (86 males and 204 
females). Urinary concentrations of Cd and As were measured, and kidney 
biomarkers of toxicity such as beta(2)-microglobulin and 
N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase (NAG) activity determined in urine. Urinary 
malondialdehyde (MDA) and 8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG) levels were 
measured as oxidative stress indices. The mean concentration of Cd was 1.21 
microg/L, 0.84 microg/g creatinine, and As was 5.7 microg/L, 3.95 microg/g 
creatinine in urine. NAG, MDA, and 8-OHdG were positively correlated with both 
Cd and As in urine. Positive correlations were also observed between NAG and 
oxidative indices. The effects of coexposure to Cd and As on biomarkers are more 
pronounced than for exposure to each metal alone. These findings suggest that 
chronic exposure to low levels of Cd and/or As might produce tubular damage in 
the kidney through oxidative stress in humans.

DOI: 10.1080/15287390903213095
PMID: 20077223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]