---
reference_id: "PMID:28370228"
title: "Pharmacologic Treatment of Cannabinoid Hyperemesis Syndrome: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Richards JR
- Gordon BK
- Danielson AR
- Moulin AK
journal: Pharmacotherapy
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/phar.1931
keywords:
- Antiemetics/therapeutic use
- Benzodiazepines/therapeutic use
- Cannabinoids/adverse effects
- Clinical Trials as Topic/methods
- Humans
- Ondansetron/therapeutic use
- Treatment Outcome
- "Vomiting/chemically induced, drug therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pharmacologic Treatment of Cannabinoid Hyperemesis Syndrome: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Richards JR, Gordon BK, Danielson AR, Moulin AK
**Journal:** Pharmacotherapy (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/phar.1931](https://doi.org/10.1002/phar.1931)

## Content

1. Pharmacotherapy. 2017 Jun;37(6):725-734. doi: 10.1002/phar.1931. Epub 2017 May
 12.

Pharmacologic Treatment of Cannabinoid Hyperemesis Syndrome: A Systematic
Review.

Richards JR(1), Gordon BK(1), Danielson AR(1), Moulin AK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, University of California Davis Medical
Center, Sacramento, California.

Cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome (CHS) has become more prevalent with increasing
cannabis use. CHS is often resistant to standard antiemetics. The objective of
this study is to review the current evidence for pharmacologic treatment of CHS.
Medline, PsycINFO, DARE, OpenGrey, Google Scholar, and the Cochrane Library were
searched from inception to February 2017. Articles were selected and reviewed
independently. Evidence was graded using Oxford Center for Evidence-Based
Medicine guidelines. The search resulted in 1262 articles with 63 of them
eligible for inclusion (205 human subjects). There were 4 prospective level-2, 3
retrospective level-3 studies, 12 level-4 case series, and 44 level-5 case
reports. Among level-2 studies (64 subjects), tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)
and lorazepam were discussed as effective long- and short-term treatments,
respectively, in two studies. Ondansetron, promethazine, diphenhydramine, and
opioids were also mentioned, but the authors did not comment on their efficacy.
Among level-3 studies (43 subjects), one reported effective treatment with
antiepileptics zonisamide and levetiracetam, but not TCAs. Another reported
favorable response to morphine, ondansetron, and lorazepam but did not specify
the actual number of patients receiving specific treatment. Among the level-4
case series (54 subjects), benzodiazepines, haloperidol, and capsaicin were
reported as helpful. For level-5 case reports (44 subjects), benzodiazepines,
metoclopramide, haloperidol, ondansetron, morphine, and capsaicin were reported
as effective. Effective treatments mentioned only once included fentanyl,
diazepam, promethazine, methadone, nabilone, levomepromazine, piritramide, and
pantoprazole. Hot showers and baths were cited in all level-4 and -5 articles as
universally effective. High-quality evidence for pharmacologic treatment of CHS
is limited. Benzodiazepines, followed by haloperidol and capsaicin, were most
frequently reported as effective for acute treatment, and TCAs for long-term
treatment. As the prevalence of CHS increases, future prospective trials are
greatly needed to evaluate and further define optimal pharmacologic treatment of
patients with CHS.

© 2017 Pharmacotherapy Publications, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/phar.1931
PMID: 28370228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
