---
reference_id: "PMID:40491727"
title: "Genetic and environmental factors contributing to anophthalmia and microphthalmia: Current understanding and future directions."
authors:
- Goyal S
- Tibrewal S
- Ratna R
- Vanita V
journal: World J Clin Pediatr
year: '2025'
doi: 10.5409/wjcp.v14.i2.101982
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic and environmental factors contributing to anophthalmia and microphthalmia: Current understanding and future directions.
**Authors:** Goyal S, Tibrewal S, Ratna R, Vanita V
**Journal:** World J Clin Pediatr (2025)
**DOI:** [10.5409/wjcp.v14.i2.101982](https://doi.org/10.5409/wjcp.v14.i2.101982)

## Content

1. World J Clin Pediatr. 2025 Jun 9;14(2):101982. doi:
10.5409/wjcp.v14.i2.101982.  eCollection 2025 Jun 9.

Genetic and environmental factors contributing to anophthalmia and 
microphthalmia: Current understanding and future directions.

Goyal S(1), Tibrewal S(2)(3), Ratna R(3), Vanita V(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmic Genetics and Visual Function Branch, National Eye 
Institute, Rockville, MD 20852, United States.
(2)Department of Pediatric Ophthalmology, Dr. Shroff's Charity Eye Hospital, New 
Delhi 110002, Delhi, India.
(3)Department of Ocular Genetics (Center for Unknown and Rare Eye Diseases), Dr. 
Shroff's Charity Eye Hospital, New Delhi 110002, Delhi, India.
(4)Department of Human Genetics, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar 143005, 
Punjab, India. vanita_kumar@yahoo.com.

Anophthalmia is defined as a complete absence of one eye or both the eyes, while 
microphthalmia represents the presence of a small eye within the orbit. The 
estimated birth prevalence for anophthalmia is approximately 3 per 100000 live 
births, and for microphthalmia, it is around 14 per 100000 live births. However, 
combined evidence suggests that the prevalence of these malformations could be 
as high as 30 per 100000 individuals. Microphthalmia is reported to occur in 
3.2% to 11.2% of blind children. Anophthalmia and microphthalmia (A/M) are part 
of a phenotypic spectrum alongside ocular coloboma, hypothesized to share a 
common genetic basis. Both A/M can occur in isolation or as part of a syndrome. 
Their complex etiology involves chromosomal aberrations, monogenic inheritance 
pattern, and the contribution of environmental factors such as 
gestational-acquired infections, maternal vitamin A deficiency (VAD), exposure 
to X-rays, solvent misuse, and thalidomide exposure. A/M exhibit significant 
clinical and genetic heterogeneity with over 90 genes identified so far. 
Familial cases of A/M have a complex genetic basis, including all Mendelian 
modes of inheritance, i.e., autosomal dominant, recessive, and X-linked. Most 
cases arise sporadically due to de novo mutations. Examining gene expression 
during eye development and the effects of various environmental variables will 
help us better understand the phenotypic heterogeneity found in A/M, leading to 
more effective diagnosis and management strategies. The present review focuses 
on key genetic factors, developmental abnormalities, and environmental modifiers 
linked with A/M. It also emphasizes at potential research areas including 
multiomic methods and disease modeling with induced pluripotent stem cell 
technologies, which aim to create innovative treatment options.

©The Author(s) 2025. Published by Baishideng Publishing Group Inc. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.5409/wjcp.v14.i2.101982
PMCID: PMC11947877
PMID: 40491727

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest statement: All the authors 
report no relevant conflicts of interest for this article.