---
reference_id: "PMID:17696042"
title: Prevention of meningococcal disease.
authors:
- Woodard JL
- Berman DM
journal: Fetal Pediatr Pathol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1080/15513810701209538
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevention of meningococcal disease.
**Authors:** Woodard JL, Berman DM
**Journal:** Fetal Pediatr Pathol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15513810701209538](https://doi.org/10.1080/15513810701209538)

## Content

1. Fetal Pediatr Pathol. 2006 Nov-Dec;25(6):311-9. doi:
10.1080/15513810701209538.

Prevention of meningococcal disease.

Woodard JL(1), Berman DM.

Author information:
(1)University of South Florida College of Medicine, Tampa, FL, USA.

Neisseria meningitidis is the most common cause of meningitis in children aged 
2-18 with a mortality rate ranging from 4-40% and substantial morbidity in 
11-19% of survivors. Of the four serogroups ofNeisseria meningitidis, serogroups 
B and C are the most common causes in the United States, with serogroup C 
causing most disease among adolescents, a population at risk for invasive 
meningococcal disease. The meningococcal polysaccharide vaccine was developed in 
response to increasing rates of bacterial meningitis among military recruits. 
With widespread use of the vaccine in the military, there was a dramatic 
decreased incidence in invasive meningococcal disease. However, there may be 
limitations to the polysaccharide vaccine including lack of durable protection, 
lack of induction of T-cell-dependent immune response, and lack of 
immunogenicity in children less than 2 years of age. Based on the success of 
other conjugate vaccines in pediatrics, a new conjugate polysaccharide vaccine, 
Menactra, has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration and recommended 
for routine vaccination in adolescents by the Advisory Committee on Immunization 
Practices.

DOI: 10.1080/15513810701209538
PMID: 17696042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]