---
reference_id: "PMID:35002959"
title: "Case Report: A Chinese Family of Woodhouse-Sakati Syndrome With Diabetes Mellitus, With a Novel Biallelic Deletion Mutation of the DCAF17 Gene."
authors:
- Zhou M
- Shi N
- Zheng J
- Chen Y
- Wang S
- Xiao K
- Cui Z
- Qiu K
- Zhu F
- Li H
journal: Front Endocrinol (Lausanne)
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fendo.2021.770871
keywords:
- Adult
- Alopecia/genetics
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac/genetics"
- Basal Ganglia Diseases/genetics
- China
- Diabetes Mellitus/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Hypogonadism/genetics
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Male
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Pedigree
- Sequence Deletion
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligase Complexes/genetics
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case Report: A Chinese Family of Woodhouse-Sakati Syndrome With Diabetes Mellitus, With a Novel Biallelic Deletion Mutation of the DCAF17 Gene.
**Authors:** Zhou M, Shi N, Zheng J, Chen Y, Wang S, Xiao K, Cui Z, Qiu K, Zhu F, Li H
**Journal:** Front Endocrinol (Lausanne) (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fendo.2021.770871](https://doi.org/10.3389/fendo.2021.770871)

## Content

1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2021 Dec 23;12:770871. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2021.770871. eCollection 2021.

Case Report: A Chinese Family of Woodhouse-Sakati Syndrome With Diabetes 
Mellitus, With a Novel Biallelic Deletion Mutation of the DCAF17 Gene.

Zhou M(1)(2), Shi N(3)(4), Zheng J(3)(4), Chen Y(3)(4), Wang S(3)(4), Xiao 
K(3)(4), Cui Z(3)(4), Qiu K(3)(4), Zhu F(5)(6), Li H(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Tongji Hospital, Tongji 
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Respiratory Diseases, National Ministry of Health of the 
People's Republic of China and National Clinical Research Center for Respiratory 
Disease, Wuhan, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(4)Hubei Provincial Clinical Research Center for Diabetes and Metabolic 
Disorders , Wuhan, China.
(5)Clinic Center of Human Gene Research, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
(6)Department of Cardiology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong 
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

Erratum in
    Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2022 Feb 21;13:856002. doi: 
10.3389/fendo.2022.856002.

Woodhouse-Sakati syndrome (WSS) (OMIM#241080) is a rare multi-system autosomal 
recessive disease with homozygous mutation of the DCAF17 gene. The main features 
of WSS include diabetes, hypogonadism, alopecia, deafness, intellectual 
disability and progressive extrapyramidal syndrome. We identified a WSS family 
with a novel DCAF17 gene mutation type in China. Two unconsanguineous siblings 
from the Chinese Han family exhibiting signs and symptoms of Woodhouse-Sakati 
syndrome were presented for evaluation. Whole-exome sequencing revealed a 
homozygous deletion NM_025000.4:c.1488_1489delAG in the DCAF17 gene, which 
resulted in a frameshift mutation that led to stop codon formation. We found 
that the two patients exhibited low insulin and C-peptide release after glucose 
stimulation by insulin and C-peptide release tests. These findings indicate that 
the DCAF17 gene mutation may cause pancreatic β cell functional impairment and 
contribute to the development of diabetes.

Copyright © 2021 Zhou, Shi, Zheng, Chen, Wang, Xiao, Cui, Qiu, Zhu and Li.

DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2021.770871
PMCID: PMC8734028
PMID: 35002959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.