---
reference_id: "PMID:8266781"
title: "HLA associations with Menière's disease."
authors:
- Koyama S
- Mitsuishi Y
- Bibee K
- Watanabe I
- Terasaki PI
journal: Acta Otolaryngol
year: '1993'
doi: 10.3109/00016489309135866
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HLA associations with Menière's disease.
**Authors:** Koyama S, Mitsuishi Y, Bibee K, Watanabe I, Terasaki PI
**Journal:** Acta Otolaryngol (1993)
**DOI:** [10.3109/00016489309135866](https://doi.org/10.3109/00016489309135866)

## Content

1. Acta Otolaryngol. 1993 Sep;113(5):575-8. doi: 10.3109/00016489309135866.

HLA associations with Menière's disease.

Koyama S(1), Mitsuishi Y, Bibee K, Watanabe I, Terasaki PI.

Author information:
(1)UCLA Tissue Typing Laboratory, UCLA School of Medicine.

In order to investigate the genetic background of Menière's disease, 
histocompatibility (HLA) antigens in Japanese patients were studied. HLA-class 
I: HLA-A, -B and -C were typed by the classical microcytotoxicity technique, and 
HLA-class II: HLA-DR, DQ, and DP were typed by PCR-DNA typing methods. Twenty 
patient samples tested were selected very strictly following clinical data and 
classical criteria. Most of the patients had been suffering from typical 
symptoms during a considerably long period of time (16 +/- 7 years). Normal 
controls were based on the gene frequency in the Japanese population. Compared 
with the normal controls, a higher frequency of the DRB1*1602 subtype of HLA-DR2 
was found in the patient group (chi 2 = 9,21, p < 0.04). P-values were corrected 
by multiplying by the total number of antigens. Additionally, HLA-Cw4 was 
increased, although the p-value was not significant after multiple antigen 
correction. There was no obvious relationship between the HLA-DRB1*1602 patients 
and the clinical data that included severity, age at time of onset, etc.

DOI: 10.3109/00016489309135866
PMID: 8266781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]