---
reference_id: PMID:22353939
title: In search of triallelism in Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
authors:
- Abu-Safieh L
- Al-Anazi S
- Al-Abdi L
- Hashem M
- Alkuraya H
- Alamr M
- Sirelkhatim MO
- Al-Hassnan Z
- Alkuraya B
- Mohamed JY
- Al-Salem A
- Alrashed M
- Faqeih E
- Softah A
- Al-Hashem A
- Wali S
- Rahbeeni Z
- Alsayed M
- Khan AO
- Al-Gazali L
- Taschner PE
- Al-Hazzaa S
- Alkuraya FS
journal: Eur J Hum Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.205
keywords:
- Alleles
- Bardet-Biedl Syndrome/genetics
- Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics
- Cohort Studies
- Cytoskeletal Proteins
- Family
- "Genes, Modifier"
- Humans
- Male
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In search of triallelism in Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
**Authors:** Abu-Safieh L, Al-Anazi S, Al-Abdi L, Hashem M, Alkuraya H, Alamr M, Sirelkhatim MO, Al-Hassnan Z, Alkuraya B, Mohamed JY, Al-Salem A, Alrashed M, Faqeih E, Softah A, Al-Hashem A, Wali S, Rahbeeni Z, Alsayed M, Khan AO, Al-Gazali L, Taschner PE, Al-Hazzaa S, Alkuraya FS
**Journal:** Eur J Hum Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ejhg.2011.205](https://doi.org/10.1038/ejhg.2011.205)

## Content

1. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Apr;20(4):420-7. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.205. Epub 2012
Feb  22.

In search of triallelism in Bardet-Biedl syndrome.

Abu-Safieh L(1), Al-Anazi S, Al-Abdi L, Hashem M, Alkuraya H, Alamr M, 
Sirelkhatim MO, Al-Hassnan Z, Alkuraya B, Mohamed JY, Al-Salem A, Alrashed M, 
Faqeih E, Softah A, Al-Hashem A, Wali S, Rahbeeni Z, Alsayed M, Khan AO, 
Al-Gazali L, Taschner PE, Al-Hazzaa S, Alkuraya FS.

Author information:
(1)Developmental Genetics Unit, Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist 
Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a model disease for ciliopathy in humans. The 
remarkable genetic heterogeneity that characterizes this disease is consistent 
with accumulating data on the interaction between the proteins encoded by the 14 
BBS genes identified to date. Previous reports suggested that such interaction 
may also extend to instances of oligogenic inheritance in the form of 
triallelism which defies the long held view of BBS as an autosomal recessive 
disease. In order to investigate the magnitude of triallelism in BBS, we 
conducted a comprehensive analysis of all 14 BBS genes as well as the 
CCDC28B-modifier gene in a cohort of 29 BBS families, most of which are 
multiplex. Two in trans mutations in a BBS gene were identified in each of these 
families for a total of 20 mutations including 12 that are novel. In no instance 
did we observe two mutations in unaffected members of a given family, or observe 
the presence of a third allele that convincingly acted as a modifier of 
penetrance and supported the triallelic model of BBS. In addition to presenting 
a comprehensive genotype/phenotype overview of a large set of BBS mutations, 
including the occurrence of nonsyndromic retinitis pigmentosa in a family with a 
novel BBS9 mutation, our study argues in favor of straightforward autosomal 
recessive BBS in most cases.

DOI: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.205
PMCID: PMC3306854
PMID: 22353939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]