---
reference_id: "PMID:34031074"
title: TARP syndrome associated with renal malformation and optic nerve atrophy.
authors:
- Manotas H
- Payán-Gómez C
- Roa MF
- Piñeros JG
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2020-240601
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TARP syndrome associated with renal malformation and optic nerve atrophy.
**Authors:** Manotas H, Payán-Gómez C, Roa MF, Piñeros JG
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2020-240601](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2020-240601)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2021 May 24;14(5):e240601. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2020-240601.

TARP syndrome associated with renal malformation and optic nerve atrophy.

Manotas H(1), Payán-Gómez C(2), Roa MF(3), Piñeros JG(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics at Fundación Santa Fé de Bogotá, Hospital 
Universitario de la Fundacion Santa Fe de Bogota, Bogota, Colombia 
h_manotas@hotmail.com.
(2)Faculty of Natural Sciences, Universidad del Rosario, Bogota, Colombia.
(3)Department of Pediatrics at Fundación Santa Fé de Bogotá, University Hospital 
of the Fundacion Santa Fe de Bogota, Bogota, Colombia.
(4)Department of Pediatrics at Fundación Santa Fé de Bogotá, Hospital 
Universitario de la Fundacion Santa Fe de Bogota, Bogota, Colombia.

Talipes equinovarus, atrial septal defect, Robin sequence and persistent left 
superior vena cava (TARP) syndrome is a congenital disease caused by mutations 
in the RBBM10 gene. It has a low prevalence and a high rate of mortality in the 
neonatal stage. In this case report, we present a case of a 32-week gestational 
age preterm newborn with a prenatal diagnosis of intrauterine growth 
restriction, with a persistent left superior vena cava, interatrial 
communication and a horseshoe kidney. Additionally, postnatal optic nerve 
atrophy was diagnosed. By using exome sequencing, the pathogenic variant 
c.1877del; p.his626Lefus*78 was identified in the RMB10 gene. Due to a lack of 
reports in the medical literature, the phenotype has not fully been described. 
Here, we report on a patient with TARP syndrome and a previously unreported 
mutation, c.1877del; p.his627Leufs*78, which is predicted to generate a 
truncated and/or protein decay of the RBM10 transcript.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2021. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2020-240601
PMCID: PMC8149317
PMID: 34031074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.