---
reference_id: "PMID:27974910"
title: Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency (G6PD) as a risk factor of male neonatal sepsis.
authors:
- Rostami-Far Z
- Ghadiri K
- Rostami-Far M
- Shaveisi-Zadeh F
- Amiri A
- Rahimian Zarif B
journal: J Med Life
year: '2016'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency (G6PD) as a risk factor of male neonatal sepsis.
**Authors:** Rostami-Far Z, Ghadiri K, Rostami-Far M, Shaveisi-Zadeh F, Amiri A, Rahimian Zarif B
**Journal:** J Med Life (2016)

## Content

1. J Med Life. 2016 Jan-Mar;9(1):34-38.

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency (G6PD) as a risk factor of male 
neonatal sepsis.

Rostami-Far Z(1), Ghadiri K(2), Rostami-Far M(3), Shaveisi-Zadeh F(4), Amiri 
A(4), Rahimian Zarif B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Sanandaj Branch, Islamic Azad University, Sanandaj, 
Iran.
(2)Nosocomial Infection Research Center, Kermanshah University of Medical 
Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran.
(3)Department of Environmental Health Engineering, School of Public Health, 
Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, Iran.
(4)Molecular Pathology Research Center, Imam Reza Hospital, Kermanshah, 
University of Medical Sciences, Kermanshah, Iran.

Introduction.Neonatal sepsis is a disease process, which represents the systemic 
response of bacteria entering the bloodstream during the first 28 days of life. 
The prevalence of sepsis is higher in male infants than in females, but the 
exact cause is unknown. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) is an enzyme in 
the pentose phosphate pathway, which leads to the production of NADPH. NADPH is 
required for the respiratory burst reaction in white blood cells (WBCs) to 
destroy microorganisms. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the prevalence 
of G6PD deficiency in neonates with sepsis. Materials and methods.This study was 
performed on 76 neonates with sepsis and 1214 normal neonates from February 2012 
to November 2014 in the west of Iran. The G6PD deficiency status was determined 
by fluorescent spot test. WBCs number and neutrophils percentages were measured 
and compared in patients with and without G6PD deficiency. Results.The 
prevalence of the G6PD deficiency in neonates with sepsis was significantly 
higher compared to the control group (p=0.03). WBCs number and neutrophils 
percentages in G6PD deficient patients compared with patients without G6PD 
deficiency were decreased, but were not statistically significant (p=0.77 and 
p=0.86 respectively). Conclusions.G6PD deficiency is a risk factor of neonatal 
sepsis and also a justification for more male involvement in this disease. 
Therefore, newborn screening for this disorder is recommended.

PMCID: PMC5152609
PMID: 27974910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]