---
reference_id: "PMID:28095294"
title: "A novel SLC12A1 gene mutation associated with hyperparathyroidism, hypercalcemia, nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, and nephrocalcinosis in four patients."
authors:
- Wongsaengsak S
- Vidmar AP
- Addala A
- Kamil ES
- Sequeira P
- Fass B
- Pitukcheewanont P
journal: Bone
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2017.01.011
keywords:
- "Diabetes Insipidus, Nephrogenic/genetics"
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Hypercalcemia/genetics
- "Hyperparathyroidism, Primary/genetics"
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Nephrocalcinosis/genetics
- "Solute Carrier Family 12, Member 1/chemistry, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel SLC12A1 gene mutation associated with hyperparathyroidism, hypercalcemia, nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, and nephrocalcinosis in four patients.
**Authors:** Wongsaengsak S, Vidmar AP, Addala A, Kamil ES, Sequeira P, Fass B, Pitukcheewanont P
**Journal:** Bone (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bone.2017.01.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2017.01.011)

## Content

1. Bone. 2017 Apr;97:121-125. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2017.01.011. Epub 2017 Jan 14.

A novel SLC12A1 gene mutation associated with hyperparathyroidism,
hypercalcemia, nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, and nephrocalcinosis in four
patients.

Wongsaengsak S(1), Vidmar AP(1), Addala A(2), Kamil ES(3), Sequeira P(4), Fass
B(5), Pitukcheewanont P(6).

Author information:
(1)Center for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Division of Endocrinology,
Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States.
(2)Pediatric Endocrinology, Los Angeles County and University Medical Center
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United States.
(3)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles,
CA, United States.
(4)Pediatric Endocrinology, Los Angeles County and University Medical Center
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United States; Keck
School of Medicine of University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, United
States.
(5)Pediatric Endocrinology, Kaiser Permanente Medical Center Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA, United States.
(6)Center for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Division of Endocrinology,
Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States; Keck School of
Medicine of University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, United States.
Electronic address: dpisit@chla.usc.edu.

Solute Carrier Family 12 member 1 (SLC12A1) gene encodes the
sodium-potassium-chloride co-transporter (NKCC2) at the apical membrane of the
thick ascending loop of Henle (TAL). Bartter's syndrome (BS) type I is a rare,
autosomal recessive, renal tubular disorder associated with mutation of the
SLC12A1 gene. Presenting features include: hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis,
hypercalciuria and nephrocalcinosis. The many allelic variants reported present
with a spectrum of phenotypes, biochemical abnormalities and clinical
severities. However, to date, only two reports have described
hyperparathyroidism and hypercalcemia in patients with SLC12A1 gene mutations.
We describe 4 patients with 4 novel mutation variants in the SLC12A1 gene
(c.735C>G, c.1137del, c.2498-2499del, and c.1833delT) presenting with variable
degrees of hyperparathyroidism, hypercalcemia, hypokalemic metabolic alkalosis,
nephrocalcinosis, and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. The link between calcium
and parathyroid hormone abnormalities in patients with SLC12A1 mutations is
unclear; the cases described suggest an association between primary
hyperparathyroidism and loss of function mutation of SLC12A1, which may result
in an aberrant threshold of the calcium sensing receptor at the level of the
kidney.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2017.01.011
PMID: 28095294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
