---
reference_id: "PMID:30552078"
title: "Efficacy of a Parent-Based, Indicated Prevention for Anorexia Nervosa: Randomized Controlled Trial."
authors:
- Jacobi C
- Hütter K
- Völker U
- Möbius K
- Richter R
- Trockel M
- Jones Bell M
- Lock J
- Taylor CB
journal: J Med Internet Res
year: '2018'
doi: 10.2196/jmir.9464
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Anorexia Nervosa/prevention & control"
- Body Weight
- Child
- Female
- Humans
- Internet
- Parents/psychology
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of a Parent-Based, Indicated Prevention for Anorexia Nervosa: Randomized Controlled Trial.
**Authors:** Jacobi C, Hütter K, Völker U, Möbius K, Richter R, Trockel M, Jones Bell M, Lock J, Taylor CB
**Journal:** J Med Internet Res (2018)
**DOI:** [10.2196/jmir.9464](https://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.9464)

## Content

1. J Med Internet Res. 2018 Dec 14;20(12):e296. doi: 10.2196/jmir.9464.

Efficacy of a Parent-Based, Indicated Prevention for Anorexia Nervosa:
Randomized Controlled Trial.

Jacobi C(1), Hütter K(1), Völker U(2), Möbius K(3), Richter R(4), Trockel M(5),
Jones Bell M(6), Lock J(5), Taylor CB(5).

Author information:
(1)Klinische Psychologie & E-Mental Health, Institut für Klinische Psychologie
und Psychotherapie, Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(2)Klinik für Psychiatrie und Psychotherapie, Städtisches Klinikum Görlitz,
Görlitz, Germany.
(3)Klinik für Psychosomatische Medizin und Psychotherapie, Städtisches Klinikum
Görlitz, Görlitz, Germany.
(4)Sächsische Bildungsagentur, Regionalstelle Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA, United States.
(6)Headspace, Santa Monica, CA, United States.

BACKGROUND: Web-based preventive interventions can reduce risk and incidence of
bulimia and binge eating disorders among young high-risk women. However, their
specific effects on core symptoms of anorexia nervosa (AN) are rather weak.
OBJECTIVE: The primary objective of this study was to evaluate the efficacy of
an indicated, parent-based, Web-based preventive program Eltern als Therapeuten
(E@T) in reducing risk factors and symptoms of AN.
METHODS: Girls aged between 11 and 17 years were screened by selected risk
factors and early symptoms of AN. At-risk families were then randomized to E@T
or an assessment-only control condition. Assessments took place at pre- and
postintervention (6 weeks later) and at 6- and 12-month follow-up (FU).
RESULTS: A total of 12,377 screening questionnaires were handed out in 86 German
schools, and 3941 including consent returned. Overall, 477 (447/3941, 12.10%)
girls were identified as at risk for AN and 256 of those could be contacted. In
all, 66 families (66/256, 25.8% of those contacted) were randomized to the E@T
or a wait-list control condition, 43 (43/66, 65%) participated in
postassessments, and 27 (27/66, 41%) in 12-month FUs. Due to low participation
and high dropout rates of parents, recruitment was terminated prematurely. At
12-month FU, girls' expected body weight (EBW) percentage was significantly
greater for intervention participants compared with control participants (group
by time interaction beta=21.0 [CI 5.81 to 36.13], P=.007; group by time squared
interaction beta=-15.5 [CI -26.6 to -4.49], P=.007; estimated Cohen d=0.42]. No
other significant effects were found on risk factors and attitudes of disturbed
eating.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite a significant increase in girls' EBW percentage, parental
participation and adherence to the intervention were low. Overall, parent-based,
indicated prevention for children at risk for AN does not seem very promising,
although it might be useful for parents who engage in the intervention.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: International Standard Randomized Controlled Trial Number
(ISRCTN): 18614564; http://www.isrctn.com/ISRCTN18614564 (Archived by WebCite at
http://www.webcitation.org/74FTV1EpF).

©Corinna Jacobi, Kristian Hütter, Ulrike Völker, Katharina Möbius, Robert
Richter, Mickey Trockel, Megan Jones Bell, James Lock, C Barr Taylor. Originally
published in the Journal of Medical Internet Research (http://www.jmir.org),
14.12.2018.

DOI: 10.2196/jmir.9464
PMCID: PMC6315221
PMID: 30552078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.
