---
reference_id: "PMID:12457340"
title: Connexin 43 (GJA1) mutations cause the pleiotropic phenotype of oculodentodigital dysplasia.
authors:
- Paznekas WA
- Boyadjiev SA
- Shapiro RE
- Daniels O
- Wollnik B
- Keegan CE
- Innis JW
- Dinulos MB
- Christian C
- Hannibal MC
- Jabs EW
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1086/346090
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 6"
- Connexin 43/genetics
- Conserved Sequence
- "Craniofacial Abnormalities/genetics, pathology"
- Eye Abnormalities/genetics
- Female
- Genotype
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/genetics, pathology"
- Male
- "Models, Molecular"
- Mutation
- "Odontodysplasia/genetics, pathology"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Connexin 43 (GJA1) mutations cause the pleiotropic phenotype of oculodentodigital dysplasia.
**Authors:** Paznekas WA, Boyadjiev SA, Shapiro RE, Daniels O, Wollnik B, Keegan CE, Innis JW, Dinulos MB, Christian C, Hannibal MC, Jabs EW
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1086/346090](https://doi.org/10.1086/346090)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2003 Feb;72(2):408-18. doi: 10.1086/346090. Epub 2002 Nov 27.

Connexin 43 (GJA1) mutations cause the pleiotropic phenotype of
oculodentodigital dysplasia.

Paznekas WA(1), Boyadjiev SA, Shapiro RE, Daniels O, Wollnik B, Keegan CE, Innis
JW, Dinulos MB, Christian C, Hannibal MC, Jabs EW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Craniofacial Development and Disorders,
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.

Gap junctions are assemblies of intercellular channels that regulate a variety
of physiologic and developmental processes through the exchange of small ions
and signaling molecules. These channels consist of connexin family proteins that
allow for diversity of channel composition and conductance properties. The human
connexin 43 gene, or GJA1, is located at human chromosome 6q22-q23 within the
candidate region for the oculodentodigital dysplasia locus. This autosomal
dominant syndrome presents with craniofacial (ocular, nasal, and dental) and
limb dysmorphisms, spastic paraplegia, and neurodegeneration. Syndactyly type
III and conductive deafness can occur in some cases, and cardiac abnormalities
are observed in rare instances. We found mutations in the GJA1 gene in all 17
families with oculodentodigital dysplasia that we screened. Sixteen different
missense mutations and one codon duplication were detected. These mutations may
cause misassembly of channels or alter channel conduction properties. Expression
patterns and phenotypic features of gja1 animal mutants, reported elsewhere, are
compatible with the pleiotropic clinical presentation of oculodentodigital
dysplasia.

DOI: 10.1086/346090
PMCID: PMC379233
PMID: 12457340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
