---
reference_id: "PMID:12542204"
title: "Influence of human leukocyte antigen in the pathogenesis of Ménière's disease in the South Korean population."
authors:
- Yeo SW
- Park SN
- Jeon EJ
- Lee HY
- Pyo CW
- Kim TG
journal: Acta Otolaryngol
year: '2002'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Influence of human leukocyte antigen in the pathogenesis of Ménière's disease in the South Korean population.
**Authors:** Yeo SW, Park SN, Jeon EJ, Lee HY, Pyo CW, Kim TG
**Journal:** Acta Otolaryngol (2002)

## Content

1. Acta Otolaryngol. 2002 Dec;122(8):851-6.

Influence of human leukocyte antigen in the pathogenesis of Ménière's disease in 
the South Korean population.

Yeo SW(1), Park SN, Jeon EJ, Lee HY, Pyo CW, Kim TG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of 
Korea, Seoul, South Korea.

In order to study the associations of Ménière's disease (MD) with human 
leukocyte antigen (HLA) alleles in the South Korean population, we examined the 
distribution of HLA class I and II alleles in 39 MD patients and 199 healthy 
controls. The frequencies of HLA-Cw*0303 (relative risk (RR) = 2.5; p < 0.02) 
and -Cw*0602 (RR = 3.7; p < 0.03) were significantly increased in patients with 
MD compared to controls. However, HLA-B44 (RR = 0.2, p < 0.004) and -Cw*0102 (RR 
= 0.3; p < 0.03) were significantly decreased in patients compared to controls. 
When the association between hearing level and the presence of HLA alleles was 
evaluated, the frequencies of HLA-B13 (RR = 7.4; p < 0.004), -B39 (RR = 45.7; p 
< 0.003), -Cw*0303 (RR = 4.5; p < 0.02) and -Cw*0602 (RR = 6.5; p < 0.02) were 
significantly increased and those of -B44 (RR = 0.1; p < 0.02) and -Cw*0102 (RR 
= 0.1; p < 0.03) were significantly decreased in MD patients with hearing losses 
(stages II-IV) compared to controls. The frequency of HLA-B13 was significantly 
higher in MD patients with hearing loss (stages II-IV) than in those with normal 
hearing (stage I). In terms of HLA-DRB1, -DQA1 and -DQB1 allele frequencies, a 
significantly higher frequency of DRB1*15 was seen in the patients (RR = 2.4; p 
< 0.03). These results suggest that some HLA alleles may be a useful genetic 
marker for predicting prognosis in South Korean patients with MD.

PMID: 12542204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]