---
reference_id: "PMID:19666484"
title: B-cell activating factor receptor deficiency is associated with an adult-onset antibody deficiency syndrome in humans.
authors:
- Warnatz K
- Salzer U
- Rizzi M
- Fischer B
- Gutenberger S
- Böhm J
- Kienzler AK
- Pan-Hammarström Q
- Hammarström L
- Rakhmanov M
- Schlesier M
- Grimbacher B
- Peter HH
- Eibel H
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0903543106
content_type: abstract_only
---

# B-cell activating factor receptor deficiency is associated with an adult-onset antibody deficiency syndrome in humans.
**Authors:** Warnatz K, Salzer U, Rizzi M, Fischer B, Gutenberger S, Böhm J, Kienzler AK, Pan-Hammarström Q, Hammarström L, Rakhmanov M, Schlesier M, Grimbacher B, Peter HH, Eibel H
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0903543106](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0903543106)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Aug 18;106(33):13945-50. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0903543106. Epub 2009 Aug 6.

B-cell activating factor receptor deficiency is associated with an adult-onset 
antibody deficiency syndrome in humans.

Warnatz K(1), Salzer U, Rizzi M, Fischer B, Gutenberger S, Böhm J, Kienzler AK, 
Pan-Hammarström Q, Hammarström L, Rakhmanov M, Schlesier M, Grimbacher B, Peter 
HH, Eibel H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology and Center for Chronic 
Immunodeficiencies, University Medical Center Freiburg, 79106 Freiburg, Germany.

B-cell survival depends on signals induced by B-cell activating factor (BAFF) 
binding to its receptor (BAFF-R). In mice, mutations in BAFF or BAFF-R cause 
B-cell lymphopenia and antibody deficiency. Analyzing BAFF-R expression and 
BAFF-binding to B cells in common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) patients, we 
identified two siblings carrying a homozygous deletion in the BAFF-R gene. 
Removing most of the BAFF-R transmembrane part, the deletion precludes BAFF-R 
expression. Without BAFF-R, B-cell development is arrested at the stage of 
transitional B cells and the numbers of all subsequent B-cell stages are 
severely reduced. Both siblings have lower IgG and IgM serum levels but, unlike 
most CVID patients, normal IgA concentrations. They also did not mount a 
T-independent immune response against pneumococcal cell wall polysaccharides but 
only one BAFF-R-deficient sibling developed recurrent infections. Therefore, 
deletion of the BAFF-R gene in humans causes a characteristic immunological 
phenotype but it does not necessarily lead to a clinically manifest 
immunodeficiency.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0903543106
PMCID: PMC2722504
PMID: 19666484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.