---
reference_id: "PMID:38535123"
title: Harnessing Next-Generation Sequencing as a Timely and Accurate Second-Tier Screening Test for Newborn Screening of Inborn Errors of Metabolism.
authors:
- Chan TCH
- Mak CM
- Yeung MCW
- Law EC
- Cheung J
- Wong TK
- Cheng VW
- Lee JKH
- Wong JCL
- Fung CW
- Belaramani KM
- Kwok AMK
- Tsang KY
journal: Int J Neonatal Screen
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijns10010019
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Harnessing Next-Generation Sequencing as a Timely and Accurate Second-Tier Screening Test for Newborn Screening of Inborn Errors of Metabolism.
**Authors:** Chan TCH, Mak CM, Yeung MCW, Law EC, Cheung J, Wong TK, Cheng VW, Lee JKH, Wong JCL, Fung CW, Belaramani KM, Kwok AMK, Tsang KY
**Journal:** Int J Neonatal Screen (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijns10010019](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijns10010019)

## Content

1. Int J Neonatal Screen. 2024 Mar 5;10(1):19. doi: 10.3390/ijns10010019.

Harnessing Next-Generation Sequencing as a Timely and Accurate Second-Tier 
Screening Test for Newborn Screening of Inborn Errors of Metabolism.

Chan TCH(1), Mak CM(1), Yeung MCW(1), Law EC(1), Cheung J(1), Wong TK(1), Cheng 
VW(1), Lee JKH(1), Wong JCL(1), Fung CW(2), Belaramani KM(2), Kwok AMK(2), Tsang 
KY(1).

Author information:
(1)Newborn Screening Laboratory, Department of Pathology, Hong Kong Children's 
Hospital, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(2)Metabolic Medicine Unit, Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, 
Hong Kong Children's Hospital, Hong Kong SAR, China.

In this study, we evaluated the implementation of a second-tier genetic 
screening test using an amplicon-based next-generation sequencing (NGS) panel in 
our laboratory during the period of 1 September 2021 to 31 August 2022 for the 
newborn screening (NBS) of six conditions for inborn errors of metabolism: 
citrullinemia type II (MIM #605814), systemic primary carnitine deficiency (MIM 
#212140), glutaric acidemia type I (MIM #231670), beta-ketothiolase deficiency 
(#203750), holocarboxylase synthetase deficiency (MIM #253270) and 
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA lyase deficiency (MIM # 246450). The 
custom-designed NGS panel can detect sequence variants in the relevant genes and 
also specifically screen for the presence of the hotspot variant IVS16ins3kb of 
SLC25A13 by the copy number variant calling algorithm. Genetic second-tier tests 
were performed for 1.8% of a total of 22,883 NBS samples. The false positive 
rate for these six conditions after the NGS second-tier test was only 0.017%, 
and two cases of citrullinemia type II would have been missed as false negatives 
if only biochemical first-tier testing was performed. The confirmed true 
positive cases were citrullinemia type II (n = 2) and systemic primary carnitine 
deficiency (n = 1). The false positives were later confirmed to be carrier of 
citrullinemia type II (n = 2), carrier of glutaric acidemia type I (n = 1) and 
carrier of systemic primary carnitine deficiency (n = 1). There were no false 
negatives reported. The incorporation of a second-tier genetic screening test by 
NGS greatly enhanced our program's performance with 5-working days turn-around 
time maintained as before. In addition, early genetic information is available 
at the time of recall to facilitate better clinical management and genetic 
counseling.

DOI: 10.3390/ijns10010019
PMCID: PMC10971432
PMID: 38535123

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.