---
reference_id: "PMID:20301291"
title: Hypohidrotic Ectodermal Dysplasia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Wright JT
- Grange DK
- Fete M
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypohidrotic Ectodermal Dysplasia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Wright JT, Grange DK, Fete M

## Content

1. Hypohidrotic Ectodermal Dysplasia.

Wright JT(1), Grange DK(2), Fete M(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2003 Apr 28 [updated 2025 Mar 20].

Author information:
(1)Distinguished Bawden Professor, Department of Pediatric Dentistry, University 
of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina
(2)Professor of Pediatrics, Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, 
Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
Missouri
(3)Executive Director, National Foundation for Ectodermal Dysplasias, Mascoutah, 
Illinois

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED) is 
characterized by hypotrichosis (sparseness of scalp and body hair), hypohidrosis 
(reduced ability to sweat), and hypodontia (congenital absence of teeth). The 
cardinal features of classic HED become obvious during childhood. The scalp hair 
is thin, lightly pigmented, and slow growing. Sweating, although present, is 
greatly deficient, leading to episodes of hyperthermia until the affected 
individual or family acquires experience with environmental modifications to 
control temperature. Only a few abnormally formed teeth erupt, at a 
later-than-average age. Physical growth and psychomotor development are 
otherwise within normal limits. Mild HED is characterized by mild manifestations 
of any or all the characteristic features.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: Classic HED can be diagnosed after infancy based on physical 
features in most affected individuals. Identification of a hemizygous EDA 
pathogenic variant in an affected male or biallelic EDAR, EDARADD, or WNT10A 
pathogenic variants in an affected male or female confirms the diagnosis. The 
diagnosis of mild HED is established in a female by identification of a 
heterozygous EDA, EDAR, EDARADD, or WNT10A pathogenic variant. The diagnosis of 
mild HED is established in a male by identification of a heterozygous EDAR, 
EDARADD, or WNT10A pathogenic variant.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Wigs or special hair care formulas for 
sparse, dry hair may be useful. Access to an adequate water supply and a cool 
environment during hot weather. Skin care products for eczema and exposures that 
exacerbate dry skin. Early dental treatment; bonding of conical teeth; 
orthodontics as necessary; dental implants in the anterior portion of the 
mandibular arch in older children; replacement of dental prostheses as needed, 
often every 2.5 years; dental implants in adults; dietary counseling for 
individuals with chewing and swallowing difficulties; therapeutics to maintain 
oral lubrication and control caries; fluoride treatment to prevent caries. Nasal 
and aural concretions may be removed with suction devices or forceps as needed 
by an otolaryngologist. Prevention of nasal concretions through humidification 
of ambient air is helpful. Lubrication eye drops. Management of recurrent 
respiratory infections and asthma per primary care provider with referral to 
allergist and/or pulmonologist as needed. Surveillance: Dental evaluation by age 
one year with follow-up dental evaluations every six to 12 months. Assess for 
skin, hair, ophthalmologic, and respiratory manifestations annually and/or as 
needed. Assess for abnormal nasal and aural secretions annually and/or as 
needed. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Exposure to extreme heat. Evaluation of 
relatives at risk: If the family-specific pathogenic variant(s) are known, 
molecular genetic testing of at-risk relatives should be offered to permit early 
diagnosis and treatment, especially to avoid hyperthermia. Pregnancy management: 
Optimal prenatal nutrition for mothers who are unaffected heterozygotes or those 
who are affected with HED. Affected women at risk for hyperthermia should not 
become overheated during pregnancy.
GENETIC COUNSELING: EDA-related HED is inherited in an X-linked manner. EDAR-, 
EDARADD-, and WNT10A-related HED are inherited in an autosomal recessive or an 
autosomal dominant manner. X-linked HED: If the mother of a proband is 
heterozygous for an EDA pathogenic variant, the chance of the mother 
transmitting it in each pregnancy is 50%. If the father of the proband has an 
EDA pathogenic variant, he will transmit it to all his daughters and none of his 
sons. Males who inherit the pathogenic variant will be affected; females who 
inherit the pathogenic variant will be heterozygous and may show manifestations 
of ectodermal dysplasia. Molecular genetic identification of female 
heterozygotes requires prior identification of the EDA pathogenic variant in the 
family. Autosomal recessive HED: The parents of a child with autosomal recessive 
HED are presumed to be heterozygous for a pathogenic variant in EDAR, EDARADD, 
or WNT10A. If both parents are known to be heterozygous for a pathogenic 
variant, each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of 
being affected, a 50% chance of being heterozygous, and a 25% chance of 
inheriting neither of the familial pathogenic variants. Heterozygote detection 
for at-risk relatives requires prior identification of the EDAR, EDARADD, or 
WNT10A pathogenic variants in the family. Autosomal dominant HED: Some 
individuals diagnosed with autosomal dominant HED have an affected parent. Each 
child of an individual with autosomal dominant HED has a 50% chance of 
inheriting the EDAR, EDARADD, or WNT10A pathogenic variant. Once the EDA, EDAR, 
EDARADD, or WNT10A pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in an affected 
family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing for HED are 
possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301291