---
reference_id: "PMID:27718519"
title: "Updating the diagnosis, classification and assessment of rosacea: recommendations from the global ROSacea COnsensus (ROSCO) panel."
authors:
- Tan J
- Almeida LM
- Bewley A
- Cribier B
- Dlova NC
- Gallo R
- Kautz G
- Mannis M
- Oon HH
- Rajagopalan M
- Steinhoff M
- Thiboutot D
- Troielli P
- Webster G
- Wu Y
- van Zuuren EJ
- Schaller M
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1111/bjd.15122
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- Cost of Illness
- Dermatitis/etiology
- Dermatologists
- "Eye Diseases/classification, diagnosis"
- Humans
- International Cooperation
- Life Style
- Ophthalmologists
- Patient Care Planning
- "Rosacea/classification, diagnosis"
- Severity of Illness Index
- Skin Pigmentation/physiology
- Telangiectasis/etiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Updating the diagnosis, classification and assessment of rosacea: recommendations from the global ROSacea COnsensus (ROSCO) panel.
**Authors:** Tan J, Almeida LM, Bewley A, Cribier B, Dlova NC, Gallo R, Kautz G, Mannis M, Oon HH, Rajagopalan M, Steinhoff M, Thiboutot D, Troielli P, Webster G, Wu Y, van Zuuren EJ, Schaller M
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bjd.15122](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjd.15122)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2017 Feb;176(2):431-438. doi: 10.1111/bjd.15122. Epub 2017 Jan 
23.

Updating the diagnosis, classification and assessment of rosacea: 
recommendations from the global ROSacea COnsensus (ROSCO) panel.

Tan J(1), Almeida LM(2), Bewley A(3)(4), Cribier B(5), Dlova NC(6), Gallo R(7), 
Kautz G(8), Mannis M(9), Oon HH(10), Rajagopalan M(11), Steinhoff M(12), 
Thiboutot D(13), Troielli P(14), Webster G(15), Wu Y(16), van Zuuren EJ(17), 
Schaller M(18).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Western Ontario, Windsor, ON, Canada.
(2)Faculdade de Ciências Médicas de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(3)Whipps Cross University Hospital, London, U.K.
(4)Royal London Hospital, London, U.K.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Hopitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, 
Alsace, France.
(6)Department of Dermatology, University of KwaZulu-Natal College of Health 
Sciences, Durban, South Africa.
(7)Department of Dermatology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 
U.S.A.
(8)Haut- und Laserklinik, Konz, Germany.
(9)Department of Ophthalmology and Vision Science, University of California 
Davis, Davis, CA, U.S.A.
(10)National Skin Centre, Singapore, Singapore.
(11)Department of Dermatology, Apollo Hospitals Enterprise, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, 
India.
(12)Department of Dermatology and UCD Charles Institute for Translational 
Dermatology, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.
(13)Department of Dermatology, Pennsylvania State University College of 
Medicine, Hershey, PA, U.S.A.
(14)Faculty of Dermatology, School of Medicine, Universidad de Buenos Aires, 
Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(15)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology, Sidney Kimmel Medical 
College at Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, U.S.A.
(16)Department of Dermatology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing, China.
(17)Department of Dermatology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, the 
Netherlands.
(18)Department of Dermatology, Universitatsklinikum Tubingen, Tubingen, 
Baden-Württemberg, Germany.

Comment in
    Br J Dermatol. 2017 Feb;176(2):283-284. doi: 10.1111/bjd.15252.
    Br J Dermatol. 2017 Aug;177(2):597-598. doi: 10.1111/bjd.15632.
    Br J Dermatol. 2017 Aug;177(2):598-599. doi: 10.1111/bjd.15669.

BACKGROUND: Rosacea is currently diagnosed by consensus-defined primary and 
secondary features and managed by subtype. However, individual features 
(phenotypes) can span multiple subtypes, which has implications for clinical 
practice and research. Adopting a phenotype-led approach may facilitate 
patient-centred management.
OBJECTIVES: To advance clinical practice by obtaining international consensus to 
establish a phenotype-led rosacea diagnosis and classification scheme with 
global representation.
METHODS: Seventeen dermatologists and three ophthalmologists used a modified 
Delphi approach to reach consensus on statements pertaining to critical aspects 
of rosacea diagnosis, classification and severity evaluation. All voting was 
electronic and blinded.
RESULTS: Consensus was achieved for transitioning to a phenotype-based approach 
to rosacea diagnosis and classification. The following two features were 
independently considered diagnostic for rosacea: (i) persistent, centrofacial 
erythema associated with periodic intensification; and (ii) phymatous changes. 
Flushing, telangiectasia, inflammatory lesions and ocular manifestations were 
not considered to be individually diagnostic. The panel reached agreement on 
dimensions for phenotype severity measures and established the importance of 
assessing the patient burden of rosacea.
CONCLUSIONS: The panel recommended an approach for diagnosis and classification 
of rosacea based on disease phenotype.

© 2016 The Authors. British Journal of Dermatology published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd on behalf of British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/bjd.15122
PMID: 27718519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]