---
reference_id: "PMID:30828791"
title: Interventions for infantile seborrhoeic dermatitis (including cradle cap).
authors:
- Victoire A
- Magin P
- Coughlan J
- van Driel ML
journal: Cochrane Database Syst Rev
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD011380.pub2
keywords:
- Amides/therapeutic use
- Biotin/therapeutic use
- Child
- "Dermatitis, Seborrheic/therapy"
- Emollients/therapeutic use
- Female
- Hair Preparations/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- Quality of Life
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- Scalp Dermatoses/therapy
- Vitamin B Complex/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interventions for infantile seborrhoeic dermatitis (including cradle cap).
**Authors:** Victoire A, Magin P, Coughlan J, van Driel ML
**Journal:** Cochrane Database Syst Rev (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1002/14651858.CD011380.pub2](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD011380.pub2)

## Content

1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2019 Mar 4;3(3):CD011380. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD011380.pub2.

Interventions for infantile seborrhoeic dermatitis (including cradle cap).

Victoire A(1), Magin P, Coughlan J, van Driel ML.

Author information:
(1)Discipline of General Practice, School of Medicine and Public Health, The 
University of Newcastle, Callaghan, Newcastle, Australia, 2308.

Comment in
    J Am Acad Dermatol. 2022 Feb;86(2):e87-e88. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2021.09.031.

BACKGROUND: Infantile seborrhoeic dermatitis (ISD) is a chronic, inflammatory, 
scaling skin condition, which causes redness and a greasy scaling rash in 
infants and young children. It can last from weeks to months, but rarely years. 
When it occurs on the scalp, it is referred to as 'cradle cap'. While benign and 
self-limiting, irrelevant of its location on the body, it can distress parents. 
The effectiveness of commonly promoted treatments is unclear.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the effects of interventions for infantile seborrhoeic 
dermatitis in children from birth to 24 months of age.
SEARCH METHODS: We searched the following databases up to 22 May 2018: Cochrane 
Skin Group Specialised Register, CENTRAL, MEDLINE, Embase, and LILACS. We 
searched trials registers and checked reference lists of included studies for 
further references to randomised controlled trials (RCTs). We searched for 
unpublished RCTs and grey literature via web search engines, and wrote to 
authors and pharmaceutical companies.
SELECTION CRITERIA: We included RCTs of interventions for ISD in children from 
birth up to 24 months who were clinically diagnosed by a healthcare practitioner 
with ISD or cradle cap. We allowed comparison of any treatment to no treatment 
or placebo, and the comparison of two or more treatments or a combination of 
treatments.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: We used standard methodological procedures 
expected by Cochrane. The primary outcome measures were 'Change in severity 
score from baseline to end of study' and 'Percentage of infants treated who 
develop adverse effects or intolerance to treatment'. The secondary outcome was 
'Improvement in quality of life (QoL) as reported by parents'.
MAIN RESULTS: We included six RCTs (one with a cross-over design) randomising 
310 children and reporting outcomes for 297 children. Most participants were 
aged under seven months with only two participants aged over one year (seven and 
12 years old); where specified, 60% were boys. In two studies, condition 
severity was mild to moderate; one study included two participants with severe 
ISD; the other studies did not describe baseline severity or described it as 
body surface area affected.The study setting was not always clear but likely a 
paediatric outpatient clinic in the following countries: Thailand, Israel, USA, 
France, and Australia.Two studies compared oral biotin (a B group vitamin) 
against placebo, two studies compared proprietary products against placebo cream 
or a control shampoo, and two studies compared topical corticosteroids against 
other products. The studies were generally short-term, between 10 and 42 days' 
duration; only one study followed the participants until resolution of the rash 
or eight months of age.We assessed the risk of bias as unclear for most aspects 
due to lack of reporting, but two of the studies were at high risk of 
performance and detection bias due to the appearance of the intervention, the 
trial design (open-label), or use of overlabelled tubes. Two trials had a high 
risk of attrition bias.All the results given below were based on very 
low-quality evidence. Treatment duration ranged from one week to three weeks.For 
the two trials comparing biotin versus placebo (n = 35), one did not report a 
measure of change in severity (only change in duration of rash) while the other 
did not report raw data (only 'no statistically significant difference'), 
measured at three weeks. Neither trial reported on adverse events.Two trials 
compared proprietary products against placebo (n = 160). One trial assessed 
change in severity via percentage success (96% of participants in non-steroidal 
cream Promiseb versus 92% in placebo), and reported no adverse events (both 
assessed at day 14). The other trial assessed change in severity via reduction 
in lesional score (surface area covered), finding better results for lactamide 
MEA gel (a moisturising agent) plus shampoo (81.4%) compared with shampoo only 
(70.2%; P = 0.0092). No adverse events were described, but signs of discomfort 
were similar in both groups (both assessed at day 21).In the comparison of 
topical steroids versus another product, change in severity was measured through 
evaluation of cure and body surface (n = 102).In one trial comparing 
hydrocortisone 1% lotion with licochalcone 0.025% lotion, there was no 
significant difference in participants cured (95.8% with hydrocortisone compared 
to 97.1% with licochalcone). One person in the licochalcone group developed more 
erythema, but there were no other adverse events (both outcomes assessed at day 
14). In the trial comparing flumethasone pivalate 0.02% ointment versus eosin 2% 
aqueous solution, a reduction in body surface area affected was seen in both 
groups at day 10 (9% with corticosteroid versus 7% with aqueous solution), with 
all infants showing less than 10% involvement. There were no adverse events 
(both outcomes assessed at day 10).No studies measured QoL.We found no trials 
testing commonly used treatments such as mineral oils, salicylic acid, or 
antifungals.
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Our review identified only a limited number of studies 
investigating the effects of interventions for ISD in infants and young 
children. Unlike the reviews investigating the effects of treatments in adults, 
our results showed that there is uncertainty regarding the effectiveness and 
safety of studied treatments due to the very low-certainty evidence for all 
comparisons and outcomes.We assessed most bias domains as at unclear risk, but 
there was a high risk of bias for (mainly) performance, attrition, and detection 
bias. Evidence was limited further by imprecision (small studies, low number of 
events), indirectness (mainly with the outcomes assessed), and poor trial 
reporting. In most studies, the prognosis for the condition was favourable 
regardless of intervention but interpretation is limited by the very 
low-certainty evidence.Further research is needed with large, well-conducted, 
and well-reported intervention trials, particularly of interventions commonly 
recommended or used, such as emollients or shampoos and brushing, antifungals, 
or steroids. All studies should report standardised and validated relevant 
outcome measures, including adverse events, severity, and QoL, and they should 
be conducted in primary care settings where the majority of ISD is managed. 
Future trials should compare against placebo, no treatment, or standard care.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD011380.pub2
PMCID: PMC6397947
PMID: 30828791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AV: nothing to declare.  PM: nothing to 
declare.  JC: nothing to declare.  MLD: nothing to declare. Maeve Kelleher 
(external content referee): "I have received honoraria for lecturing from 
Allergy UK and Nutricia. I do not have any relationship to the authors of this 
review."