---
reference_id: "PMID:32294086"
title: Variants encoding a restricted carboxy-terminal domain of SLC12A2 cause hereditary hearing loss in humans.
authors:
- Mutai H
- Wasano K
- Momozawa Y
- Kamatani Y
- Miya F
- Masuda S
- Morimoto N
- Nara K
- Takahashi S
- Tsunoda T
- Homma K
- Kubo M
- Matsunaga T
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008643
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- Chlorides/metabolism
- "Cochlea/metabolism, pathology"
- "Deafness/congenital, genetics"
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- Gene Expression
- HEK293 Cells
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/congenital, genetics"
- Humans
- Infant
- Macaca fascicularis
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Protein Domains/genetics
- RNA Splicing
- "RNA, Messenger/analysis, genetics"
- "Solute Carrier Family 12, Member 2/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variants encoding a restricted carboxy-terminal domain of SLC12A2 cause hereditary hearing loss in humans.
**Authors:** Mutai H, Wasano K, Momozawa Y, Kamatani Y, Miya F, Masuda S, Morimoto N, Nara K, Takahashi S, Tsunoda T, Homma K, Kubo M, Matsunaga T
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1008643](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1008643)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2020 Apr 15;16(4):e1008643. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008643.
eCollection 2020 Apr.

Variants encoding a restricted carboxy-terminal domain of SLC12A2 cause
hereditary hearing loss in humans.

Mutai H(1), Wasano K(1)(2), Momozawa Y(3), Kamatani Y(4)(5), Miya F(6)(7),
Masuda S(8), Morimoto N(9), Nara K(1), Takahashi S(2), Tsunoda T(6)(7)(10),
Homma K(2)(11), Kubo M(12), Matsunaga T(1)(13).

Author information:
(1)Division of Hearing and Balance Research, National Institute of Sensory
Organs, National Hospital Organization Tokyo Medical Center, Meguro, Tokyo,
Japan.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Northwestern University
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.
(3)Laboratory for Genotyping Development, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.
(4)Laboratory for Statistical Analysis, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.
(5)Kyoto-McGill International Collaborative School in Genomic Medicine, Graduate
School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Yoshidakonoecho, Kyoto, Japan.
(6)Laboratory for Medical Science Mathematics, RIKEN Center for Integrative
Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.
(7)Department of Medical Science Mathematics, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Bunkyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, National Hospital Organization Mie
National Hospital, Tsu, Mie, Japan.
(9)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, National Center for Child Health and
Development, Setagaya, Tokyo, Japan.
(10)Laboratory for Medical Science Mathematics, Department of Biological
Sciences, Graduate School of Science, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo, Tokyo,
Japan.
(11)The Hugh Knowles Center for Clinical and Basic Science in Hearing and Its
Disorders, Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, United States of
America.
(12)RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.
(13)Medical Genetics Center, National Hospital Organization Tokyo Medical
Center, Meguro, Tokyo, Japan.

Hereditary hearing loss is challenging to diagnose because of the heterogeneity
of the causative genes. Further, some genes involved in hereditary hearing loss
have yet to be identified. Using whole-exome analysis of three families with
congenital, severe-to-profound hearing loss, we identified a missense variant of
SLC12A2 in five affected members of one family showing a dominant inheritance
mode, along with de novo splice-site and missense variants of SLC12A2 in two
sporadic cases, as promising candidates associated with hearing loss.
Furthermore, we detected another de novo missense variant of SLC12A2 in a
sporadic case. SLC12A2 encodes Na+, K+, 2Cl- cotransporter (NKCC) 1 and plays
critical roles in the homeostasis of K+-enriched endolymph. Slc12a2-deficient
mice have congenital, profound deafness; however, no human variant of SLC12A2
has been reported as associated with hearing loss. All identified SLC12A2
variants mapped to exon 21 or its 3'-splice site. In vitro analysis indicated
that the splice-site variant generates an exon 21-skipped SLC12A2 mRNA
transcript expressed at much lower levels than the exon 21-included transcript
in the cochlea, suggesting a tissue-specific role for the exon 21-encoded region
in the carboy-terminal domain. In vitro functional analysis demonstrated that
Cl- influx was significantly decreased in all SLC12A2 variants studied.
Immunohistochemistry revealed that SLC12A2 is located on the plasma membrane of
several types of cells in the cochlea, including the strial marginal cells,
which are critical for endolymph homeostasis. Overall, this study suggests that
variants affecting exon 21 of the SLC12A2 transcript are responsible for
hereditary hearing loss in humans.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1008643
PMCID: PMC7159186
PMID: 32294086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.
