---
reference_id: "PMID:1899320"
title: Rapid detection of the A----G(8344) mutation of mtDNA in Italian families with myoclonus epilepsy and ragged-red fibers (MERRF).
authors:
- Zeviani M
- Amati P
- Bresolin N
- Antozzi C
- Piccolo G
- Toscano A
- DiDonato S
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1991'
keywords:
- Base Sequence
- "DNA, Mitochondrial/analysis, genetics"
- "Epilepsies, Myoclonic/genetics"
- Humans
- Lysine/analysis
- "Mitochondria, Muscle/pathology"
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Muscles/metabolism
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "RNA, Transfer, Lys/genetics"
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Rapid detection of the A----G(8344) mutation of mtDNA in Italian families with myoclonus epilepsy and ragged-red fibers (MERRF).
**Authors:** Zeviani M, Amati P, Bresolin N, Antozzi C, Piccolo G, Toscano A, DiDonato S
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1991)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1991 Feb;48(2):203-11.

Rapid detection of the A----G(8344) mutation of mtDNA in Italian families with 
myoclonus epilepsy and ragged-red fibers (MERRF).

Zeviani M(1), Amati P, Bresolin N, Antozzi C, Piccolo G, Toscano A, DiDonato S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, Istituto Nazionale Neurologico Carlo 
Besta, Milano, Italy.

We devised a rapid PCR-based method to screen for an A----G transition at 
nucleotide 8344 of the human mitochondrial tRNA(Lys) gene, which was recently 
reported, by Shoffner and co-workers, to be associated with myoclonus epilepsy 
and ragged-red fibers (MERRF), a maternally transmitted mitochondrial 
encephalomyopathy (Shoffner et al. 1990). We confirmed this association in five 
of seven Italian MERRF pedigrees. The mutation was specific for the MERRF trait, 
because it was never found in mtDNA of non-MERRF individuals, including 14 
normal and 110 diseased controls. Our study corroborates the idea that the 
A----G(8344) mutation is the most frequent and widespread genetic cause of 
MERRF.

PMCID: PMC1683006
PMID: 1899320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]