---
reference_id: "PMID:36535760"
title: Cholangiocarcinomes avancés et gènes de fusion.
authors:
- Mas L
- Perrier A
- Coulet F
- Bachet JB
journal: Bull Cancer
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/S0007-4551(22)00466-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cholangiocarcinomes avancés et gènes de fusion.
**Authors:** Mas L, Perrier A, Coulet F, Bachet JB
**Journal:** Bull Cancer (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0007-4551(22)00466-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0007-4551(22)00466-0)

## Content

1. Bull Cancer. 2022 Nov;109(11S):11S28-11S34. doi:
10.1016/S0007-4551(22)00466-0.

Cholangiocarcinomes avancés et gènes de fusion.

[Article in French]

Mas L(1), Perrier A(2), Coulet F(2), Bachet JB(3).

Author information:
(1)Sorbonne Université, AP-HP, service d'Hépato-Gastroentérologie et Oncologie 
digestive, Hôpital Universitaire Pitié-Salpêtrière, 75013 Paris, France. 
Electronic address: leo.mas@aphp.fr.
(2)Sorbonne Université, AP-HP, Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital 
Universitaire Pitié-Salpêtrière, 75013 Paris, France.
(3)Sorbonne Université, AP-HP, service d'Hépato-Gastroentérologie et Oncologie 
digestive, Hôpital Universitaire Pitié-Salpêtrière, 75013 Paris, France.

Advanced cholangiocarcinoma and gene fusions Cholangiocarcinomas (CCAs) are rare 
digestive tumors classified as intrahepatic (iCCA), perihilar (pCCA), and distal 
(dCCA) CCAs. These tumors are most often diagnosed at an advanced stage, 
unresectable or metastatic, and associated with a poor prognosis. The 
identification in recent years of multiple molecular alterations of interest, 
particularly in iCCA, has nevertheless allowed the development of new targeted 
therapeutic options for a significant proportion of patients. Gene fusions are 
among the most frequent alterations, involving FGFR2 in 10-15% of iCCAs in 
particular, and NTRK genes at a lower frequency (<1%). A dedicated analysis, 
most often based on RNA sequencing, is required to identify such alterations. 
Three FGFR inhibitors, pemigatinib, infigratinib and futinatinib, have recently 
received FDA approval for use in pre-treated patients. These compounds are 
currently being evaluated as first-line therapy in several phase III trials. 
Promising results have also been reported with new-generation inhibitors such as 
RLY-4008, which may soon constitute new therapeutic options. In the case of NTRK 
fusion, larotrectinib and entrectinib have also demonstrated their efficacy. The 
objectives of this review are to clarify the specific diagnostic modalities for 
gene fusions and to summarize the results of the main trials and developments 
underway for the management of advanced CCA with gene fusions.

Copyright © 2022 Société Française du Cancer. Publié par Elsevier Masson SAS. 
Tous droits réservés. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0007-4551(22)00466-0
PMID: 36535760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]