---
reference_id: "PMID:11895040"
title: "Familial Danish dementia: a novel form of cerebral amyloidosis associated with deposition of both amyloid-Dan and amyloid-beta."
authors:
- Holton JL
- Lashley T
- Ghiso J
- Braendgaard H
- Vidal R
- Guerin CJ
- Gibb G
- Hanger DP
- Rostagno A
- Anderton BH
- Strand C
- Ayling H
- Plant G
- Frangione B
- Bojsen-Møller M
- Revesz T
journal: J Neuropathol Exp Neurol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1093/jnen/61.3.254
keywords:
- Adult
- Amyloid beta-Peptides/metabolism
- "Amyloidosis/metabolism, pathology"
- "Antigens, CD/metabolism"
- "Antigens, Differentiation, Myelomonocytic/metabolism"
- Benzothiazoles
- Blood Vessels/metabolism
- "Brain Diseases/metabolism, pathology"
- Coloring Agents
- Congo Red
- "Dementia/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Denmark
- Female
- Fluorescent Dyes
- Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein/metabolism
- Histocompatibility Antigens Class II/metabolism
- Humans
- Immunoblotting
- Immunohistochemistry
- Male
- "Microscopy, Electron"
- "Microscopy, Immunoelectron"
- Middle Aged
- Pedigree
- Staining and Labeling
- Thiazoles
- tau Proteins/metabolism
- CD68 Molecule
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Familial Danish dementia: a novel form of cerebral amyloidosis associated with deposition of both amyloid-Dan and amyloid-beta.
**Authors:** Holton JL, Lashley T, Ghiso J, Braendgaard H, Vidal R, Guerin CJ, Gibb G, Hanger DP, Rostagno A, Anderton BH, Strand C, Ayling H, Plant G, Frangione B, Bojsen-Møller M, Revesz T
**Journal:** J Neuropathol Exp Neurol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jnen/61.3.254](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnen/61.3.254)

## Content

1. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2002 Mar;61(3):254-67. doi: 10.1093/jnen/61.3.254.

Familial Danish dementia: a novel form of cerebral amyloidosis associated with 
deposition of both amyloid-Dan and amyloid-beta.

Holton JL(1), Lashley T, Ghiso J, Braendgaard H, Vidal R, Guerin CJ, Gibb G, 
Hanger DP, Rostagno A, Anderton BH, Strand C, Ayling H, Plant G, Frangione B, 
Bojsen-Møller M, Revesz T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pathogenesis, Queen Square Brain Bank, London, United 
Kingdom.

Familial Danish dementia (FDD) is pathologically characterized by widespread 
cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA), parenchymal protein deposits, and 
neurofibrillary degeneration. FDD is associated with a mutation of the BRI2 gene 
located on chromosome 13. In FDD there is a decamer duplication, which abolishes 
the normal stop codon, resulting in an extended precursor protein and the 
release of an amyloidogenic fragment, ADan. The aim of this study was to 
describe the major neuropathological changes in FDD and to assess the 
distribution of ADan lesions, neurofibrillary pathology, glial, and microglial 
response using conventional techniques, immunohistochemistry, confocal 
microscopy, and immunoelectron microscopy. We showed that ADan is widely 
distributed in the central nervous system (CNS) in the leptomeninges, blood 
vessels, and parenchyma. A predominance of parenchymal pre-amyloid 
(non-fibrillary) lesions was found. Abeta was also present in a proportion of 
both vascular and parenchymal lesions. There was severe neurofibrillary 
pathology, and tau immunoblotting revealed a triplet electrophoretic migration 
pattern comparable with PHF-tau. FDD is a novel form of CNS amyloidosis with 
extensive neurofibrillary degeneration occurring with parenchymal, predominantly 
pre-amyloid rather than amyloid, deposition. These findings support the notion 
that parenchymal amyloid fibril formation is not a prerequisite for the 
development of neurofibrillary tangles. The significance of concurrent ADan and 
Abeta deposition in FDD is under further investigation.

DOI: 10.1093/jnen/61.3.254
PMID: 11895040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]