---
reference_id: "PMID:25611785"
title: Asthma-COPD overlap. Clinical relevance of genomic signatures of type 2 inflammation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
authors:
- Christenson SA
- Steiling K
- van den Berge M
- Hijazi K
- Hiemstra PS
- Postma DS
- Lenburg ME
- Spira A
- Woodruff PG
journal: Am J Respir Crit Care Med
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1164/rccm.201408-1458OC
keywords:
- Asthma/genetics
- Cohort Studies
- Datasets as Topic
- Female
- Forced Expiratory Volume/genetics
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Humans
- Inflammation/genetics
- Male
- "Pulmonary Disease, Chronic Obstructive/genetics"
- Transcriptome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Asthma-COPD overlap. Clinical relevance of genomic signatures of type 2 inflammation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
**Authors:** Christenson SA, Steiling K, van den Berge M, Hijazi K, Hiemstra PS, Postma DS, Lenburg ME, Spira A, Woodruff PG
**Journal:** Am J Respir Crit Care Med (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1164/rccm.201408-1458OC](https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.201408-1458OC)

## Content

1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2015 Apr 1;191(7):758-66. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201408-1458OC.

Asthma-COPD overlap. Clinical relevance of genomic signatures of type 2
inflammation in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Christenson SA(1), Steiling K, van den Berge M, Hijazi K, Hiemstra PS, Postma
DS, Lenburg ME, Spira A, Woodruff PG.

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Allergy, and
Sleep and.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2015 Apr 1;191(7):722-3. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201501-0178ED.

RATIONALE: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a heterogeneous
disease and likely includes a subgroup that is biologically comparable to
asthma. Studying asthma-associated gene expression changes in COPD could add
insight into COPD pathogenesis and reveal biomarkers that predict a favorable
response to corticosteroids.
OBJECTIVES: To determine whether asthma-associated gene signatures are increased
in COPD and associated with asthma-related features.
METHODS: We compared disease-associated airway epithelial gene expression
alterations in an asthma cohort (n = 105) and two COPD cohorts (n = 237, 171).
The T helper type 2 (Th2) signature (T2S) score, a gene expression metric
induced in Th2-high asthma, was evaluated in these COPD cohorts. The T2S score
was correlated with asthma-related features and response to corticosteroids in
COPD in a randomized, placebo-controlled trial, the Groningen and Leiden
Universities study of Corticosteroids in Obstructive Lung Disease (GLUCOLD; n =
89).
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: The 200 genes most differentially expressed in
asthma versus healthy control subjects were enriched among genes associated with
more severe airflow obstruction in these COPD cohorts (P < 0.001), suggesting
significant gene expression overlap. A higher T2S score was associated with
decreased lung function (P < 0.001), but not asthma history, in both COPD
cohorts. Higher T2S scores correlated with increased airway wall eosinophil
counts (P = 0.003), blood eosinophil percentage (P = 0.03), bronchodilator
reversibility (P = 0.01), and improvement in hyperinflation after corticosteroid
treatment (P = 0.019) in GLUCOLD.
CONCLUSIONS: These data identify airway gene expression alterations that can
co-occur in asthma and COPD. The association of the T2S score with increased
severity and "asthma-like" features (including a favorable corticosteroid
response) in COPD suggests that Th2 inflammation is important in a COPD subset
that cannot be identified by clinical history of asthma.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201408-1458OC
PMCID: PMC4407484
PMID: 25611785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
