---
reference_id: "PMID:36280495"
title: Mechanistic perspectives on anti-aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase syndrome.
authors:
- Kanaji S
- Chen W
- Morodomi Y
- Shapiro R
- Kanaji T
- Yang XL
journal: Trends Biochem Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.2022.09.011
keywords:
- Humans
- Amino Acyl-tRNA Synthetases/genetics
- Myositis
- "RNA, Transfer/genetics"
- Autoantibodies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanistic perspectives on anti-aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase syndrome.
**Authors:** Kanaji S, Chen W, Morodomi Y, Shapiro R, Kanaji T, Yang XL
**Journal:** Trends Biochem Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.tibs.2022.09.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibs.2022.09.011)

## Content

1. Trends Biochem Sci. 2023 Mar;48(3):288-302. doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.2022.09.011. 
Epub 2022 Oct 21.

Mechanistic perspectives on anti-aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase syndrome.

Kanaji S(1), Chen W(1), Morodomi Y(1), Shapiro R(1), Kanaji T(1), Yang XL(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, 
CA 92037, USA.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, 
CA 92037, USA. Electronic address: xlyang@scripps.edu.

Antisynthetase syndrome (ASSD) is an autoimmune disease characterized by 
circulating autoantibodies against one of eight aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases 
(aaRSs). Although these autoantibodies are believed to play critical roles in 
ASSD pathogenesis, the nature of their roles remains unclear. Here we describe 
ASSD pathogenesis and discuss ASSD-linked aaRSs - from the WHEP domain that may 
impart immunogenicity to the role of tRNA in eliciting the innate immune 
response and the secretion of aaRSs from cells. Through these explorations, we 
propose that ASSD pathogenesis involves the tissue-specific secretion of aaRSs 
and that extracellular tRNAs or tRNA fragments and their ability to engage 
Toll-like receptor signaling may be important disease factors.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tibs.2022.09.011
PMCID: PMC9974581
PMID: 36280495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors have no 
interests to declare.