---
reference_id: "PMID:38857303"
title: Growth deficiency in a mouse model of Kabuki syndrome 2 bears mechanistic similarities to Kabuki syndrome 1.
authors:
- Gao CW
- Lin W
- Riddle RC
- Chopra S
- Kim J
- Boukas L
- Hansen KD
- Björnsson HT
- Fahrner JA
journal: PLoS Genet
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1011310
keywords:
- Animals
- "Vestibular Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Mice
- Face/abnormalities
- "Histone Demethylases/genetics, metabolism"
- "Hematologic Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Chondrocytes/metabolism
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- Cell Differentiation/genetics
- Chondrogenesis/genetics
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics, deficiency"
- Humans
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Phenotype
- Histone-Lysine N-Methyltransferase
- Myeloid-Lymphoid Leukemia Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Growth deficiency in a mouse model of Kabuki syndrome 2 bears mechanistic similarities to Kabuki syndrome 1.
**Authors:** Gao CW, Lin W, Riddle RC, Chopra S, Kim J, Boukas L, Hansen KD, Björnsson HT, Fahrner JA
**Journal:** PLoS Genet (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pgen.1011310](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pgen.1011310)

## Content

1. PLoS Genet. 2024 Jun 10;20(6):e1011310. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1011310. 
eCollection 2024 Jun.

Growth deficiency in a mouse model of Kabuki syndrome 2 bears mechanistic 
similarities to Kabuki syndrome 1.

Gao CW(1)(2), Lin W(1), Riddle RC(3)(4)(5), Chopra S(1), Kim J(1), Boukas 
L(1)(6), Hansen KD(1)(6)(7), Björnsson HT(1)(8)(9)(10), Fahrner JA(1)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(2)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(4)Department of Orthopaedics, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(5)Research and Development Service, Baltimore Veterans Administration Medical 
Center, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(6)Department of Biostatistics, Johns Hopkins University School of Public 
Health, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(7)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(9)Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavík, Iceland.
(10)Landspítali University Hospital, Reykjavík, Iceland.

Growth deficiency is a characteristic feature of both Kabuki syndrome 1 (KS1) 
and Kabuki syndrome 2 (KS2), Mendelian disorders of the epigenetic machinery 
with similar phenotypes but distinct genetic etiologies. We previously described 
skeletal growth deficiency in a mouse model of KS1 and further established that 
a Kmt2d-/- chondrocyte model of KS1 exhibits precocious differentiation. Here we 
characterized growth deficiency in a mouse model of KS2, Kdm6atm1d/+. We show 
that Kdm6atm1d/+ mice have decreased femur and tibia length compared to controls 
and exhibit abnormalities in cortical and trabecular bone structure. Kdm6atm1d/+ 
growth plates are also shorter, due to decreases in hypertrophic chondrocyte 
size and hypertrophic zone height. Given these disturbances in the growth plate, 
we generated Kdm6a-/- chondrogenic cell lines. Similar to our prior in vitro 
model of KS1, we found that Kdm6a-/- cells undergo premature, enhanced 
differentiation towards chondrocytes compared to Kdm6a+/+ controls. RNA-seq 
showed that Kdm6a-/- cells have a distinct transcriptomic profile that indicates 
dysregulation of cartilage development. Finally, we performed RNA-seq 
simultaneously on Kmt2d-/-, Kdm6a-/-, and control lines at Days 7 and 14 of 
differentiation. This revealed surprising resemblance in gene expression between 
Kmt2d-/- and Kdm6a-/- at both time points and indicates that the similarity in 
phenotype between KS1 and KS2 also exists at the transcriptional level.

Copyright: © 2024 Gao et al. This is an open access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits 
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the 
original author and source are credited.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1011310
PMCID: PMC11192384
PMID: 38857303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal’s policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests:HTB is a consultant 
for Mahzi therapeutics. The authors declare no other conflicts of interest 
relevant to this manuscript.