---
reference_id: "PMID:33210096"
title: Apnoeic ventilation for shared airway surgery during the COVID-19 pandemic.
authors:
- Rotman A
- Dando AJ
- Shorthouse J
- Girgis M
- Nouraei SAR
journal: Anaesth Rep
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/anr3.12082
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Apnoeic ventilation for shared airway surgery during the COVID-19 pandemic.
**Authors:** Rotman A, Dando AJ, Shorthouse J, Girgis M, Nouraei SAR
**Journal:** Anaesth Rep (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/anr3.12082](https://doi.org/10.1002/anr3.12082)

## Content

1. Anaesth Rep. 2020 Nov 8;8(2):e12082. doi: 10.1002/anr3.12082. eCollection 2020
 Jul-Dec.

Apnoeic ventilation for shared airway surgery during the COVID-19 pandemic.

Rotman A(1), Dando AJ(1), Shorthouse J(2), Girgis M(2), Nouraei SAR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ear, Nose and Throat Surgery Poole Hospital NHS Foundation 
Trust Poole UK.
(2)Department of Anaesthesia Poole Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Poole UK.

This report describes the care provided to a 64-year-old woman presenting with 
airway obstruction following recovery from COVID-19 pneumonitis, prolonged 
tracheal intubation and tracheostomy weaning. Her initial admission was with 
COVID-19 pneumonitis during the first surge of cases in early 2020, and was 
complicated by multiple bilateral segmental pulmonary emboli, a 28-day stay in 
intensive care, 16 days of mechanical ventilation and finally, a tracheostomy 
with subsequent weaning of respiratory support and rehabilitation. On 
presentation, her symptoms of airway obstruction were because of significant 
granuloma of the posterior glottis and subglottis, as well as a mild lambdoid 
deformity at the site of her previous tracheostomy. The key learning points 
described relate to the use of apnoeic oxygenation during the COVID-19 pandemic, 
managing the shared airway, as well as the management of post-intubation 
laryngotracheal complications.

© 2020 Association of Anaesthetists.

DOI: 10.1002/anr3.12082
PMCID: PMC7649047
PMID: 33210096