---
reference_id: "PMID:19920720"
title: Widespread sensory hypersensitivity is not a feature of chronic headache in elders.
authors:
- Uthaikhup S
- Sterling M
- Jull G
journal: Clin J Pain
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1097/AJP.0b013e3181a38f88
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Widespread sensory hypersensitivity is not a feature of chronic headache in elders.
**Authors:** Uthaikhup S, Sterling M, Jull G
**Journal:** Clin J Pain (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1097/AJP.0b013e3181a38f88](https://doi.org/10.1097/AJP.0b013e3181a38f88)

## Content

1. Clin J Pain. 2009 Oct;25(8):699-704. doi: 10.1097/AJP.0b013e3181a38f88.

Widespread sensory hypersensitivity is not a feature of chronic headache in 
elders.

Uthaikhup S(1), Sterling M, Jull G.

Author information:
(1)Division of Physiotherapy and National Health and Medical Research Council 
Centre for Clinical Research Excellence in Spinal Pain, Injury and Health (CCRE 
Spine), School of Health and Rehabilitation Sciences, University of Queensland, 
Queensland, Australia. s.uthaikhup@uq.edu.au

OBJECTIVES: To investigate if hypersensitivity is present in elders with pain. 
Chronic headache was used as a model of chronic pain and mechanical and thermal 
pain thresholds were measured.
METHODS: Ninety-three people with headache and 44 control individuals 
participated in the study. Headache patients completed a headache questionnaire. 
Pressure pain thresholds were measured over the forehead, upper neck, and at a 
remote site (tibialis anterior). Heat and cold pain thresholds were measured 
over the upper neck.
RESULTS: In the headache group, 26 had headaches classifiable as migraine, 10 
with tension-type, 24 with cervicogenic, and 33 headaches were unclassifiable. 
There were no significant differences between the headache groups and controls 
in pressure and cold pain thresholds (all P>0.05). Heat pain thresholds were 
significantly lower in the headache groups (all P<0.01) but there were no 
differences between headache types (all P>0.05). No strong relationships were 
found between any headache variables and pain thresholds.
DISCUSSION: Central hyperexcitability does not seem to be a feature of elders 
with headache. This may be as a consequence of age-related changes in the 
sensory system but could also be related to the nature of the stimulus provided. 
Further research in this area is required to better understand pain processing 
in elders.

DOI: 10.1097/AJP.0b013e3181a38f88
PMID: 19920720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]