---
reference_id: "PMID:33783133"
title: "Fatigue: A forgotten symptom of asthma."
authors:
- Günaydın FE
- Ediger D
- Erbay M
journal: Clin Respir J
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/crj.13356
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fatigue: A forgotten symptom of asthma.
**Authors:** Günaydın FE, Ediger D, Erbay M
**Journal:** Clin Respir J (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/crj.13356](https://doi.org/10.1111/crj.13356)

## Content

1. Clin Respir J. 2021 Jul;15(7):741-752. doi: 10.1111/crj.13356. Epub 2021 Mar
29.

Fatigue: A forgotten symptom of asthma.

Günaydın FE(1), Ediger D(1), Erbay M(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Immunology and Allergy Diseases, Department of Chest Diseases, 
Medical Faculty, Uludağ University, Bursa, Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: Fatigue is a common symptom frequently reported in many disorders but 
little is known about the prevalence of fatigue in asthma. The objective of this 
study was to determine the prevalence of fatigue in asthmatic patients, the 
effect of fatigue on asthma quality of life and the relationship between fatigue 
and anxiety/depression MATERIALS AND METHODS: This prospective cross-sectional 
study was conducted in Uludağ University Faculty of Medicine, Department of 
Immunology and Allergic Diseases outpatient clinic from June 2019 to December 
2019. Fatigue was assessed using the Checklist Individual Strength-Fatigue 
(CIS-Fatigue), psychological distress was assessed using the Beck Depression 
Inventory (BDI) and the Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI) and quality of life were 
assessed using the Asthma Quality of Life Questionnaire (AQLQ).
RESULTS: In the present study, a total of 168 patients are included with an 
average age of 43.8 ± 4.3 years. Nearly 64.8% of patients had controlled asthma 
and (35.2%) patients had uncontrolled asthma. Fatigue (CIS-Fatigue ≥ 27 points) 
was detected in 62.6% of patients and associated with asthma-related quality of 
life, asthma control, dyspnea, depression and anxiety (P < 0.05). However, the 
degree of lung function impairment and asthma severity were not associated with 
fatigue.
CONCLUSIONS: Fatigue as a symptom is common in asthmatic patients and correlates 
with asthma-related quality of life, asthma control, dyspnea, depression and 
anxiety. Future studies are needed to better understand the physical, 
psychological, behavioural and systemic factors that precipitate or perpetuate 
fatigue in asthma.

© 2021 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/crj.13356
PMID: 33783133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]