---
reference_id: "PMID:38372889"
title: "Establishment and characterization of ZJUCHi003: an induced pluripotent stem cell line from a patient with Temple-Baraitser/Zimmermann-Laband syndrome carrying KCNH1 c.1070G > A (p.R357Q) variant."
authors:
- Chen D
- Su J
- Huang X
- Chen H
- Jiang T
- Zhi C
- Zhou Z
- Zhang B
- Yu L
- Jiang X
journal: Hum Cell
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s13577-024-01031-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Establishment and characterization of ZJUCHi003: an induced pluripotent stem cell line from a patient with Temple-Baraitser/Zimmermann-Laband syndrome carrying KCNH1 c.1070G > A (p.R357Q) variant.
**Authors:** Chen D, Su J, Huang X, Chen H, Jiang T, Zhi C, Zhou Z, Zhang B, Yu L, Jiang X
**Journal:** Hum Cell (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13577-024-01031-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13577-024-01031-8)

## Content

1. Hum Cell. 2024 May;37(3):832-839. doi: 10.1007/s13577-024-01031-8. Epub 2024
Feb  19.

Establishment and characterization of ZJUCHi003: an induced pluripotent stem 
cell line from a patient with Temple-Baraitser/Zimmermann-Laband syndrome 
carrying KCNH1 c.1070G > A (p.R357Q) variant.

Chen D(#)(1)(2), Su J(#)(3), Huang X(#)(4), Chen H(1), Jiang T(5), Zhi C(1)(2), 
Zhou Z(1)(2), Zhang B(4), Yu L(6), Jiang X(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Children's Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, National 
Clinical Research Center for Child Health, Hangzhou, 310052, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Genetic and Developmental Disorders of Zhejiang Province, 
Hangzhou, China.
(3)Department of Stomatology, Children's Hospital, Zhejiang University School of 
Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Child Health, Hangzhou, 310052, 
China.
(4)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Maternal Fetal Medicine, Clinical and 
Translational Research Center, Shanghai First Maternity and Infant Hospital, 
School of Medicine, Shanghai Institute of Maternal-Fetal Medicine and 
Gynecologic Oncology, Tongji University, Shanghai, 201204, China.
(5)Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital, Zhejiang University School of 
Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Child Health, Hangzhou, 310052, 
China.
(6)Children's Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, National 
Clinical Research Center for Child Health, Hangzhou, 310052, China. 
yulan20@zju.edu.cn.
(7)Children's Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, National 
Clinical Research Center for Child Health, Hangzhou, 310052, China. 
JiangGenetics@126.com.
(8)Key Laboratory of Genetic and Developmental Disorders of Zhejiang Province, 
Hangzhou, China. JiangGenetics@126.com.
(#)Contributed equally

Pathogenic variants of the KCNH1 gene can cause dominant-inherited 
Temple-Baraitser/Zimmermann-Laband syndrome with severe mental retardation, 
seizure, gingival hyperplasia and nail hypoplasia. This study established an 
induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) line using urinary cells from a girl with 
KCNH1 recurrent/hotspot pathogenic variant c.1070G > A (p.R357Q). The cell 
identity, pluripotency, karyotypic integrity, absence of reprogramming virus and 
mycoplasma contamination, and differential potential to three germ layers of the 
iPSC line, named as ZJUCHi003, were characterized and confirmed. Furthermore, 
ZJUCHi003-derived neurons manifested slower action potential repolarization 
process and wider action potential half-width than the normal neurons. This cell 
line will be useful for investigating the pathogenic mechanisms of KCNH1 
variants-associated symptoms, as well as for evaluating novel therapeutic 
approaches.

© 2024. The Author(s) under exclusive licence to Japan Human Cell Society.

DOI: 10.1007/s13577-024-01031-8
PMID: 38372889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]