---
reference_id: "PMID:36334424"
title: Clinical relevance of globotriaosylceramide accumulation in Fabry disease and the effect of agalsidase beta in affected tissues.
authors:
- Tøndel C
- Thurberg BL
- DasMahapatra P
- Lyn N
- Maski M
- Batista JL
- George K
- Patel H
- Hariri A
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.10.005
keywords:
- Humans
- alpha-Galactosidase/therapeutic use
- Fabry Disease/pathology
- Clinical Relevance
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy/adverse effects
- Recombinant Proteins/therapeutic use
- Isoenzymes
- Trihexosylceramides
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical relevance of globotriaosylceramide accumulation in Fabry disease and the effect of agalsidase beta in affected tissues.
**Authors:** Tøndel C, Thurberg BL, DasMahapatra P, Lyn N, Maski M, Batista JL, George K, Patel H, Hariri A
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.10.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.10.005)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2022 Dec;137(4):328-341. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.10.005.
Epub  2022 Oct 29.

Clinical relevance of globotriaosylceramide accumulation in Fabry disease and
the effect of agalsidase beta in affected tissues.

Tøndel C(1), Thurberg BL(2), DasMahapatra P(3), Lyn N(3), Maski M(3), Batista
JL(3), George K(4), Patel H(3), Hariri A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway;
Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway. Electronic
address: Camilla.tondel@helse-bergen.no.
(2)Department of Pathology, Sanofi, Framingham, MA, USA.
(3)Sanofi, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)Metabolic and Lysosomal Storage Disease Research, Rare and Neurological
Diseases Therapeutic Area, Sanofi, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Fabry disease (FD) is a rare lysosomal storage disorder, characterized by a
reduction in α-galactosidase A enzyme activity and the progressive accumulation
of globotriaosylceramide (GL3) and its metabolites in the cells of various
organs. Agalsidase beta, an enzyme replacement therapy (ERT), is approved for
use in patients with FD in Europe, Canada, Australia, South America, and Asia,
and is the only ERT approved for use in the United States. In this review, we
discuss the clinical relevance of GL3 accumulation, the effect of agalsidase
beta on GL3 in target tissues, and the association between treatment-related
tissue GL3 clearance and long-term structure, function, or clinical outcomes.
Accumulation of GL3 in the kidney, heart, vasculature, neurons, skin,
gastrointestinal tract and auditory system correlates to cellular damage and
irreversible organ damage, as a result of sclerosis, fibrosis, apoptosis,
inflammation, and endothelial dysfunction. Damage leads to renal dysfunction and
end-stage renal disease; myocardial hypertrophy with heart failure and
arrhythmias; ischemic stroke; neuropathic pain; skin lesions; intestinal
ischemia and dysmotility; and hearing loss. Treatment with agalsidase beta is
effective in substantially clearing GL3 in a range of cells from the tissues
affected by FD. Agalsidase beta has also been shown to slow renal decline and
lower the overall risk of clinical progression, demonstrating an indirect link
between treatment-related GL3 clearance and stabilization of FD.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2022.10.005
PMID: 36334424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
