---
reference_id: "PMID:37703344"
title: Barriers and Strategies for Hepatitis B and C Elimination in Pakistan.
authors:
- Qureshi H
- Mahmood H
- Sabry A
- Hermez J
journal: J Infect Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiad022
keywords:
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Humans
- Pakistan/epidemiology
- Hepatitis B Vaccines
- "Hepatitis B/epidemiology, prevention & control"
- Hepatitis A
- "Hepatitis C/epidemiology, prevention & control"
- Hepacivirus
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Barriers and Strategies for Hepatitis B and C Elimination in Pakistan.
**Authors:** Qureshi H, Mahmood H, Sabry A, Hermez J
**Journal:** J Infect Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/infdis/jiad022](https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiad022)

## Content

1. J Infect Dis. 2023 Sep 13;228(Suppl 3):S204-S210. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiad022.

Barriers and Strategies for Hepatitis B and C Elimination in Pakistan.

Qureshi H(1), Mahmood H(2), Sabry A(3), Hermez J(3).

Author information:
(1)Gastroenterologist and National Focal Point Hepatitis, Hepatitis Control,
Ministry of National Health Services, Regulations and Coordination, Islamabad,
Pakistan.
(2)In-Charge Hepatitis Planning, Development and Monitoring Unit, USAID Funded
GHSC PSM Project seconded at Ministry of Health, Hepatitis Control, Ministry of
National Health Services, Regulations and Coordination, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(3)Universal Health Coverage/Department of Communicable Disease Prevention and
Control, World Health Organization Regional Office for the Eastern
Mediterranean, Cairo, Egypt.

BACKGROUND: Pakistan has a high hepatitis burden for both hepatitis C virus
(HCV) and hepatitis B virus (HBV). To achieve World Health Organization (WHO)
2030 targets for hepatitis elimination, there is a need to constitute progress
in the country, find the barriers and strategies for HCV elimination, and take
actions to address the gaps.
METHODS: We collected data from (1) WHO estimates in 2020, (2) midterm review
questionnaire of the WHO regional action plan, and (3) WHO estimates on
immunization. We analyzed these data to inform (1) the burden defined as
prevalence and mortality and (2) response in 3 thematic areas: governance,
policy, and finance; strategic information; and service delivery.
RESULTS: The prevalence of hepatitis B in the general population is 1.6% with 12
000 deaths/year. The prevalence of hepatitis C in the general population is 7.5%
with 19 000 deaths and 545 000 new cases (incidence)/year. The selected
indicators to monitor progress on viral hepatitis in Pakistan were governance
and financing, policies and guidelines, and strategic information. The overall
governance indicators are good with a focal point, a national hepatitis
strategy, an operational plan, strategy for price reduction, and involvement of
civil society but the costed action plan and the advocacy strategy are missing.
The indicators on policies and guidelines are also adequately addressed. The
hepatitis B and C testing and treatment guidelines are available, there is a
policy to screen all blood donations, and there is an injection safety policy,
but the policy for timely hepatitis B vaccine birth dose and hepatitis B
vaccination for the vulnerable is missing. Both indicators regarding strategic
information, that is measures of key hepatitis indicators and regular data
review, are missing. The status of 5 key interventions in Pakistan show that the
hepatitis B vaccination coverage is 74% and only 3% of newborn children are
given the hepatitis B vaccine birth dose. Only 22% of HCV cases have been
diagnosed and 2% have received treatment. Treatment response is 96%. Same-day
testing and treatment of hepatitis C reduced the overall dropout rate and
improved the cascade of care. Decentralization and task shifting are important
tools to improve service delivery and reach communities. Finances to implement
hepatitis elimination is a major barrier.
CONCLUSIONS: Pakistan has the highest hepatitis disease burden. With the current
pace, hepatitis elimination appears impossible. Introduction of the birth dose
of hepatitis B vaccine and improving access and affordability of testing can
improve the testing and treatment numbers. Finances need to be mobilized from
within the country and outside to support disease elimination.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions,
please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiad022
PMID: 37703344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
