---
reference_id: "PMID:10348966"
title: "The inherited long QT syndrome: from ion channel to bedside."
authors:
- Vincent GM
- Timothy K
- Fox J
- Zhang L
journal: Cardiol Rev
year: '1999'
keywords:
- "Adrenergic beta-Antagonists/administration & dosage"
- Cation Transport Proteins
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 4"
- DNA-Binding Proteins
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac/etiology, prevention & control"
- ERG1 Potassium Channel
- Electrocardiography
- Ether-A-Go-Go Potassium Channels
- Humans
- "Long QT Syndrome/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Potassium/administration & dosage"
- "Potassium Channels/genetics, physiology"
- "Potassium Channels, Voltage-Gated"
- Risk Factors
- "Sodium Channels/genetics, physiology"
- "Torsades de Pointes/diagnosis, drug therapy, genetics, physiopathology"
- Trans-Activators
- Transcriptional Regulator ERG
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The inherited long QT syndrome: from ion channel to bedside.
**Authors:** Vincent GM, Timothy K, Fox J, Zhang L
**Journal:** Cardiol Rev (1999)

## Content

1. Cardiol Rev. 1999 Jan-Feb;7(1):44-55.

The inherited long QT syndrome: from ion channel to bedside.

Vincent GM(1), Timothy K, Fox J, Zhang L.

Author information:
(1)LDS Hospital University of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt Lake City, Utah.

The inherited long QT syndrome is caused by mutations of at least 5 ion channel
genes. Mutations of the cardiac sodium ion channel gene and 3 potassium channel
genes have been identified to this time. A genetic locus on chromosome 4 has
been identified, but no gene has been discovered as of yet. More than 120
mutations of the genes have been discovered. The majority of cases are inherited
by autosomal dominant transmission. Syncope occurs in approximately two-thirds
of gene carriers, with sudden death in 10% to 15% of untreated patients. The
primary electrophysiologic disturbance is delayed recovery of the action
potential, because of diverse physiologic perturbations dependent upon the
specific ion channel and mutation. The delayed recovery predisposes individuals
to the development of early afterdepolarizations and initiation of torsade de
pointes arrhythmias. The torsade produces the syncope and sudden death. Patients
with self-terminating torsade have syncope, whereas those whose torsade
degenerates to ventricular fibrillation experience sudden death. The torsade
maintenance appears to be because of complex reentry or repetitive triggered
beats, both of which have been proposed as capable of explaining the unique and
characteristic QRS morphology of torsade. It is proposed that the degree of
dispersion of recovery at the time of torsade determines whether the torsade
degenerates to ventricular fibrillation or self-terminates. The signs of long QT
syndrome are prolongation of the QT interval on the electrocardiogram and
abnormalities of T wave morphology. QTc values average 0.49 seconds and vary
somewhat by genotype. Approximately 12% of long QT gene carriers have a normal
QTc, < or =0. 44 seconds. Thus, a normal QTc interval does not exclude long QT
syndrome. T wave morphology is relatively characteristic for each genotype.
Diagnosis is likely with a QTc > or =0.48 seconds in females and > or =0.47
seconds in males. Values between 0.41 and 0.46 seconds require additional
evaluation, as the disorder can neither be excluded nor made with those QTc
intervals. Diagnosis is enhanced by identification of T wave abnormalities
consistent with long QT syndrome. The principal treatment is beta-blocker
therapy. Appropriate dosing, with ascertainment of efficacy and compliance with
administration, are the key elements in therapeutic success. Molecular
physiology-based strategies are being considered, including the use of sodium
channel blockers in LQT3 and potassium administration in LQT1 patients.

PMID: 10348966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
