---
reference_id: "PMID:9949810"
title: Mechanisms for isoniazid action and resistance.
authors:
- Miesel L
- Rozwarski DA
- Sacchettini JC
- Jacobs WR Jr
journal: Novartis Found Symp
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1002/0470846526.ch15
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms for isoniazid action and resistance.
**Authors:** Miesel L, Rozwarski DA, Sacchettini JC, Jacobs WR Jr
**Journal:** Novartis Found Symp (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1002/0470846526.ch15](https://doi.org/10.1002/0470846526.ch15)

## Content

1. Novartis Found Symp. 1998;217:209-20; discussion 220-1. doi: 
10.1002/0470846526.ch15.

Mechanisms for isoniazid action and resistance.

Miesel L(1), Rozwarski DA, Sacchettini JC, Jacobs WR Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 
Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva University, Bronx, New York 
10461, USA.

Isoniazid is the most widely used antituberculosis drug. Genetic studies in 
Mycobacterium smegmatis identified the inhA-encoded, NADH-dependent enoyl acyl 
carrier protein reductase as the primary target for this drug. A reactive form 
of isoniazid inhibits InhA by reacting with the NAD(H) cofactor bound to the 
enzyme active site forming a covalent adduct (isonicotinic acyl NADH) that is 
apt to bind with high affinity. Resistance can occur by increased expression of 
InhA or by mutations that lower the enzyme's affinity to NADH. Both of these 
resistance mechanisms are observed in 30% of clinical tuberculosis isolates. 
Mutation in katG, which encodes catalase peroxidase, is the most common source 
for resistance. Another mechanism for isoniazid resistance, in M. smegmatis, 
occurs by defects in NADH dehydrogenase (Ndh) of the respiratory chain. Genetic 
data indicated that ndh mutations confer resistance by lowering the rate of NADH 
oxidation and increasing the intracellular NADH/NAD+ ratio. An increased amount 
of NADH may prevent formation of isonicotinic acyl NADH or may promote 
displacement of the isonicotinic acyl NADH from InhA. While our studies have 
identified this mechanism in M. smegmatis, results reported in early literature 
lead us to believe that it can occur in Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

DOI: 10.1002/0470846526.ch15
PMID: 9949810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]