---
reference_id: "PMID:19503089"
title: "Mutation in TACO1, encoding a translational activator of COX I, results in cytochrome c oxidase deficiency and late-onset Leigh syndrome."
authors:
- Weraarpachai W
- Antonicka H
- Sasarman F
- Seeger J
- Schrank B
- Kolesar JE
- Lochmüller H
- Chevrette M
- Kaufman BA
- Horvath R
- Shoubridge EA
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1038/ng.390
keywords:
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 17"
- Cytochrome-c Oxidase Deficiency/genetics
- "Electron Transport Complex IV/genetics, metabolism"
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Humans
- Leigh Disease/genetics
- Microfilament Proteins/genetics
- Microsatellite Repeats
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation in TACO1, encoding a translational activator of COX I, results in cytochrome c oxidase deficiency and late-onset Leigh syndrome.
**Authors:** Weraarpachai W, Antonicka H, Sasarman F, Seeger J, Schrank B, Kolesar JE, Lochmüller H, Chevrette M, Kaufman BA, Horvath R, Shoubridge EA
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng.390](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.390)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2009 Jul;41(7):833-7. doi: 10.1038/ng.390. Epub 2009 Jun 7.

Mutation in TACO1, encoding a translational activator of COX I, results in 
cytochrome c oxidase deficiency and late-onset Leigh syndrome.

Weraarpachai W(1), Antonicka H, Sasarman F, Seeger J, Schrank B, Kolesar JE, 
Lochmüller H, Chevrette M, Kaufman BA, Horvath R, Shoubridge EA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Defects in mitochondrial translation are among the most common causes of 
mitochondrial disease, but the mechanisms that regulate mitochondrial 
translation remain largely unknown. In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, all 
mitochondrial mRNAs require specific translational activators, which recognize 
sequences in 5' UTRs and mediate translation. As mammalian mitochondrial mRNAs 
do not have significant 5' UTRs, alternate mechanisms must exist to promote 
translation. We identified a specific defect in the synthesis of the 
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)-encoded COX I subunit in a pedigree segregating 
late-onset Leigh syndrome and cytochrome c oxidase (COX) deficiency. We mapped 
the defect to chromosome 17q by functional complementation and identified a 
homozygous single-base-pair insertion in CCDC44, encoding a member of a large 
family of hypothetical proteins containing a conserved DUF28 domain. CCDC44, 
renamed TACO1 for translational activator of COX I, shares a notable degree of 
structural similarity with bacterial homologs, and our findings suggest that it 
is one of a family of specific mammalian mitochondrial translational activators.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.390
PMID: 19503089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]