---
reference_id: "PMID:23633551"
title: Tetraploidy in hydatidiform moles.
authors:
- Sundvall L
- Lund H
- Niemann I
- Jensen UB
- Bolund L
- Sunde L
journal: Hum Reprod
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1093/humrep/det132
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tetraploidy in hydatidiform moles.
**Authors:** Sundvall L, Lund H, Niemann I, Jensen UB, Bolund L, Sunde L
**Journal:** Hum Reprod (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1093/humrep/det132](https://doi.org/10.1093/humrep/det132)

## Content

1. Hum Reprod. 2013 Jul;28(7):2010-20. doi: 10.1093/humrep/det132. Epub 2013 Apr 
30.

Tetraploidy in hydatidiform moles.

Sundvall L(1), Lund H, Niemann I, Jensen UB, Bolund L, Sunde L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus DK-8000, Denmark.

STUDY QUESTION: How does tetraploidy develop in hydatidiform moles (HMs), and 
what is the frequency of the different origins?
SUMMARY ANSWER: Most molar pregnancies with tetraploid cells appear to be 
produced by somatic endoreduplications, while a minority originate from a 
tetraploid zygote. The frequency of zygotic tetraploidy was estimated to be 
0.7%.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: The parental origin of the genome in tetraploid HMs has 
only been evaluated in a few cases, most showing three genome sets from the 
father (PPPM). Estimates of the proportion of HMs that are tetraploid vary 
between 2 and 28%.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: From 1986 to 2010, unfixed samples of clinically 
suspected molar pregnancies were forwarded to the Danish Mole Project. For this 
cohort study 442 samples fulfilled the following criteria for inclusion: 
macroscopic appearance of HM and ≥ 10 vesicular chorionic villi with a diameter 
of ≥ 1 mm.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: Of 403 karyotyped samples, 21 cases 
disclosed ≥ 2 tetraploid metaphases. The 21 cases were scrutinized by 
karyotyping, flow cytometry (FC) and DNA-marker analysis.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: Among 20 HMs, 3 showed the genotype PPPM: 
one with the sex chromosomes XXYY and two with XXXY, indicating that they 
originated in tetraploid zygotes. In 14 androgenetic, one likely androgenetic 
and two mosaics, the tetraploid cells likely developed by endoreduplications of 
diploid cells. One case did not fulfil the histopathological criteria for HM.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: As an inclusion criterion was the macroscopic 
observation of vesicular chorionic villi, some non-molar hydropic placentas may 
have been included and some early moles may have been excluded.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: In future, studies to determine that an HM 
is tetraploid and discriminate cases of mosaicism and to deduce the origin of 
the tetraploidy must use the techniques of karyotyping, DNA-marker analysis and 
FC in combination.

DOI: 10.1093/humrep/det132
PMID: 23633551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]