---
reference_id: "PMID:41356730"
title: "Back to the Diving Board: A Rare Cause of Hemoptysis in a Healthy Female Athlete."
authors:
- Blumenfeld M
- Silvernale C
- Stekolchik E
- Rani S
journal: Case Rep Pulmonol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1155/crpu/5227230
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Back to the Diving Board: A Rare Cause of Hemoptysis in a Healthy Female Athlete.
**Authors:** Blumenfeld M, Silvernale C, Stekolchik E, Rani S
**Journal:** Case Rep Pulmonol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1155/crpu/5227230](https://doi.org/10.1155/crpu/5227230)

## Content

1. Case Rep Pulmonol. 2025 Nov 28;2025:5227230. doi: 10.1155/crpu/5227230. 
eCollection 2025.

Back to the Diving Board: A Rare Cause of Hemoptysis in a Healthy Female 
Athlete.

Blumenfeld M(1)(2), Silvernale C(2), Stekolchik E(1), Rani S(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Sleep Medicine, Nemours Children's Health, 
Wilmington, Delaware, USA.
(2)Sidney Kimmel Medical College at Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA.

Lane-Hamilton syndrome is a rare association between idiopathic pulmonary 
hemosiderosis (IPH) and celiac disease that can present with isolated 
hemoptysis. We describe a case of a previously healthy 15-year-old female who 
presented with 1 month of intermittent hemoptysis, chest pain, and severe iron 
deficiency anemia. Physical examination was remarkable for mild conjunctival 
pallor and livedo reticularis. Extensive laboratory studies were obtained to 
rule out infectious, rheumatological, and oncological explanations of anemia. A 
chest radiograph showed an increased density in the left mid-lung and bilateral 
opacities, and computed tomography showed scattered multifocal ground glass 
opacities. Bronchoalveolar lavage revealed hemosiderin-laden macrophages 
consistent with the diagnosis of IPH. Additional workup for IPH revealed 
elevated celiac titers. Upper endoscopy confirmed the diagnosis of celiac 
disease, which led to a final diagnosis of Lane-Hamilton syndrome, a rare 
co-occurrence of IPH and celiac disease. The treatment plan included a course of 
systemic steroids and a gluten-free diet. Given this known association, workup 
for IPH should include testing for celiac disease since a gluten-free diet may 
prevent future occurrences of alveolar hemorrhage.

Copyright © 2025 Mary Blumenfeld et al. Case Reports in Pulmonology published by 
John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1155/crpu/5227230
PMCID: PMC12680453
PMID: 41356730

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.