---
reference_id: "PMID:23506377"
title: "Insulin neuritis and diabetic cachectic neuropathy: a review."
authors:
- Knopp M
- Srikantha M
- Rajabally YA
journal: Curr Diabetes Rev
year: '2013'
doi: 10.2174/1573399811309030007
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Insulin neuritis and diabetic cachectic neuropathy: a review.
**Authors:** Knopp M, Srikantha M, Rajabally YA
**Journal:** Curr Diabetes Rev (2013)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1573399811309030007](https://doi.org/10.2174/1573399811309030007)

## Content

1. Curr Diabetes Rev. 2013 May;9(3):267-74. doi: 10.2174/1573399811309030007.

Insulin neuritis and diabetic cachectic neuropathy: a review.

Knopp M(1), Srikantha M, Rajabally YA.

Author information:
(1)Neuromuscular Clinic, Department of Neurology, University Hospitals of 
Leicester, Leicester General Hospital, Leicester LE5 4PW, United Kingdom.

Diabetic patients can be affected by a wide range of peripheral nerve disorders, 
the rarer of which are often poorly recognised and understood. "Insulin 
neuritis" or "treatment induced neuropathy" is a reversible disorder 
characterised by acute severe distal limb pain, peripheral nerve fibre damage 
and autonomic dysfunction, preceded by a period of rapid glycaemic control. The 
condition has been reported in both type 1 and type 2 diabetics treated with 
insulin or oral hypoglycaemic agents who typically have a history of poor 
glycaemic control. Pathogenesis of the condition and its associated pain is 
poorly understood, with proposed mechanisms including endoneurial ischaemia, 
hypoglycaemic microvascular neuronal damage and regenerating nerve firing. Pain 
can affect other areas including the trunk and abdomen, or be more generalised. 
"Diabetic neuropathic cachexia" is a rare disorder associated with poor diabetic 
control that presents with large amounts of unintentional weight loss associated 
with an acute symmetrical painful peripheral neuropathy without weakness. Pain 
is characteristically burning in nature with predominant lower limb involvement 
and allodynia. The disorder can also affect type 1 and type 2 diabetics and 
occur irrespective of the duration of their diabetes. Depression and in males, 
impotence, appear to be common, although other autonomic features can be 
present. Typically it has a monophasic course but has been reported to be 
recurrent. As with insulin neuritis, this condition is reversible over weeks to 
months after adequate diabetic control. For both disorders, the pain can be 
treatment resistant despite the use of multiple analgesics.

DOI: 10.2174/1573399811309030007
PMID: 23506377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]