---
reference_id: "PMID:23486063"
title: Dipeptidyl peptidase 4 is a functional receptor for the emerging human coronavirus-EMC.
authors:
- Raj VS
- Mou H
- Smits SL
- Dekkers DH
- Müller MA
- Dijkman R
- Muth D
- Demmers JA
- Zaki A
- Fouchier RA
- Thiel V
- Drosten C
- Rottier PJ
- Osterhaus AD
- Bosch BJ
- Haagmans BL
journal: Nature
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1038/nature12005
keywords:
- Animals
- Bronchioles/cytology
- COS Cells
- Chiroptera
- Chlorocebus aethiops
- "Coronavirus/classification, metabolism"
- "Coronavirus Infections/epidemiology, genetics, metabolism, virology"
- "Dipeptidyl Peptidase 4/genetics, metabolism"
- Epithelial Cells/virology
- Host Specificity
- Humans
- Molecular Sequence Data
- "Receptors, Virus/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dipeptidyl peptidase 4 is a functional receptor for the emerging human coronavirus-EMC.
**Authors:** Raj VS, Mou H, Smits SL, Dekkers DH, Müller MA, Dijkman R, Muth D, Demmers JA, Zaki A, Fouchier RA, Thiel V, Drosten C, Rottier PJ, Osterhaus AD, Bosch BJ, Haagmans BL
**Journal:** Nature (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature12005](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature12005)

## Content

1. Nature. 2013 Mar 14;495(7440):251-4. doi: 10.1038/nature12005.

Dipeptidyl peptidase 4 is a functional receptor for the emerging human 
coronavirus-EMC.

Raj VS(1), Mou H, Smits SL, Dekkers DH, Müller MA, Dijkman R, Muth D, Demmers 
JA, Zaki A, Fouchier RA, Thiel V, Drosten C, Rottier PJ, Osterhaus AD, Bosch BJ, 
Haagmans BL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Viroscience, Erasmus Medical Center, 3000 CA Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.

Comment in
    Nature. 2013 Mar 14;495(7440):176-7. doi: 10.1038/495176a.

Most human coronaviruses cause mild upper respiratory tract disease but may be 
associated with more severe pulmonary disease in immunocompromised individuals. 
However, SARS coronavirus caused severe lower respiratory disease with nearly 
10% mortality and evidence of systemic spread. Recently, another coronavirus 
(human coronavirus-Erasmus Medical Center (hCoV-EMC)) was identified in patients 
with severe and sometimes lethal lower respiratory tract infection. Viral genome 
analysis revealed close relatedness to coronaviruses found in bats. Here we 
identify dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4; also known as CD26) as a functional 
receptor for hCoV-EMC. DPP4 specifically co-purified with the receptor-binding 
S1 domain of the hCoV-EMC spike protein from lysates of susceptible Huh-7 cells. 
Antibodies directed against DPP4 inhibited hCoV-EMC infection of primary human 
bronchial epithelial cells and Huh-7 cells. Expression of human and bat 
(Pipistrellus pipistrellus) DPP4 in non-susceptible COS-7 cells enabled 
infection by hCoV-EMC. The use of the evolutionarily conserved DPP4 protein from 
different species as a functional receptor provides clues about the host range 
potential of hCoV-EMC. In addition, it will contribute critically to our 
understanding of the pathogenesis and epidemiology of this emerging human 
coronavirus, and may facilitate the development of intervention strategies.

DOI: 10.1038/nature12005
PMCID: PMC7095326
PMID: 23486063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: V.S.R., B.J.B., R.A.M.F., A.D.M.E.O. and B.L.H. 
are inventors on a patent application related to this work.