---
reference_id: "PMID:10693759"
title: Hedgehog-regulated processing of Gli3 produces an anterior/posterior repressor gradient in the developing vertebrate limb.
authors:
- Wang B
- Fallon JF
- Beachy PA
journal: Cell
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80678-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hedgehog-regulated processing of Gli3 produces an anterior/posterior repressor gradient in the developing vertebrate limb.
**Authors:** Wang B, Fallon JF, Beachy PA
**Journal:** Cell (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80678-9](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80678-9)

## Content

1. Cell. 2000 Feb 18;100(4):423-34. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80678-9.

Hedgehog-regulated processing of Gli3 produces an anterior/posterior repressor 
gradient in the developing vertebrate limb.

Wang B(1), Fallon JF, Beachy PA.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Biology and 
Genetics, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 
21205, USA.

Ci/Gli zinc finger proteins mediate the transcriptional effects of Hedgehog 
protein signals. In Drosophila, Ci action as transcriptional repressor or 
activator is contingent upon Hedgehog-regulated, PKA-dependent proteolytic 
processing. We demonstrate that PKA-dependent processing of vertebrate Gli3 in 
developing limb similarly generates a potent repressor in a manner antagonized 
by apparent long-range signaling from posteriorly localized Sonic hedgehog 
protein. The resulting anterior/posterior Gli3 repressor gradient can be 
perturbed by mutations of Gli3 in human genetic syndromes or by misregulation of 
Gli3 processing in the chicken mutant talpid2, producing a range of limb 
patterning malformations. The high relative abundance and potency of Gli3 
repressor suggest specialization of Gli3 and its products for negative Hedgehog 
pathway regulation.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)80678-9
PMID: 10693759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]