---
reference_id: "PMID:39179905"
title: HiPSC-derived 3D neural models reveal neurodevelopmental pathomechanisms of the Cockayne Syndrome B.
authors:
- Kapr J
- Scharkin I
- Ramachandran H
- Westhoff P
- Pollet M
- Dangeleit S
- Brockerhoff G
- Rossi A
- Koch K
- Krutmann J
- Fritsche E
journal: Cell Mol Life Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00018-024-05406-w
keywords:
- Humans
- "Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism, cytology, pathology"
- "Cockayne Syndrome/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Oligodendroglia/metabolism, cytology"
- Cell Movement
- "DNA Repair Enzymes/metabolism, genetics"
- "Neurons/metabolism, pathology"
- Autophagy
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- "Poly-ADP-Ribose Binding Proteins/metabolism, genetics"
- gamma-Aminobutyric Acid/metabolism
- "DNA Helicases/metabolism, genetics"
- "Microcephaly/pathology, metabolism, genetics"
- "Demyelinating Diseases/pathology, metabolism"
- Cell Differentiation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HiPSC-derived 3D neural models reveal neurodevelopmental pathomechanisms of the Cockayne Syndrome B.
**Authors:** Kapr J, Scharkin I, Ramachandran H, Westhoff P, Pollet M, Dangeleit S, Brockerhoff G, Rossi A, Koch K, Krutmann J, Fritsche E
**Journal:** Cell Mol Life Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00018-024-05406-w](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-024-05406-w)

## Content

1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2024 Aug 23;81(1):368. doi: 10.1007/s00018-024-05406-w.

HiPSC-derived 3D neural models reveal neurodevelopmental pathomechanisms of the 
Cockayne Syndrome B.

Kapr J(1), Scharkin I(1), Ramachandran H(1), Westhoff P(2), Pollet M(1), 
Dangeleit S(1), Brockerhoff G(1), Rossi A(1), Koch K(3)(4), Krutmann J(1)(5), 
Fritsche E(1)(5)(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)IUF-Leibniz Research Institute for Environmental Medicine, Duesseldorf, 
Germany.
(2)CEPLAS Metabolism and Metabolomics Laboratory, Cluster of Excellence on Plant 
Science (CEPLAS), Heinrich Heine University Duesseldorf, Duesseldorf, Germany.
(3)IUF-Leibniz Research Institute for Environmental Medicine, Duesseldorf, 
Germany. katharina.koch@iuf-duesseldorf.de.
(4)DNTOX GmbH, Duesseldorf, Germany. katharina.koch@iuf-duesseldorf.de.
(5)Medical Faculty, Heinrich Heine University Duesseldorf, Duesseldorf, Germany.
(6)DNTOX GmbH, Duesseldorf, Germany.
(7)SCAHT, Swiss Centre for Applied Human Toxicology, University of Basel, Basel, 
Switzerland.

Cockayne Syndrome B (CSB) is a hereditary multiorgan syndrome which-through 
largely unknown mechanisms-can affect the brain where it clinically presents 
with microcephaly, intellectual disability and demyelination. Using human 
induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived neural 3D models generated from 
CSB patient-derived and isogenic control lines, we here provide explanations for 
these three major neuropathological phenotypes. In our models, CSB deficiency is 
associated with (i) impaired cellular migration due to defective autophagy as an 
explanation for clinical microcephaly; (ii) altered neuronal network 
functionality and neurotransmitter GABA levels, which is suggestive of a 
disturbed GABA switch that likely impairs brain circuit formation and ultimately 
causes intellectual disability; and (iii) impaired oligodendrocyte maturation as 
a possible cause of the demyelination observed in children with CSB. Of note, 
the impaired migration and oligodendrocyte maturation could both be partially 
rescued by pharmacological HDAC inhibition.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-024-05406-w
PMCID: PMC11343962
PMID: 39179905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: K.K. and E.F. are founders and shareholders of 
and partly employed at the company DNTOX GmbH which provides DNT-IVB assay 
services. The funders had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, 
analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the 
decision to publish the results.