---
reference_id: "PMID:16021471"
title: "DNA sequencing of CREBBP demonstrates mutations in 56% of patients with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) and in another patient with incomplete RSTS."
authors:
- Bartsch O
- Schmidt S
- Richter M
- Morlot S
- Seemanová E
- Wiebe G
- Rasi S
journal: Hum Genet
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1007/s00439-005-1331-y
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- CREB-Binding Protein
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- "Polymorphism, Single Nucleotide"
- "Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome/genetics, pathology"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Severity of Illness Index
- Trans-Activators/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DNA sequencing of CREBBP demonstrates mutations in 56% of patients with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) and in another patient with incomplete RSTS.
**Authors:** Bartsch O, Schmidt S, Richter M, Morlot S, Seemanová E, Wiebe G, Rasi S
**Journal:** Hum Genet (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00439-005-1331-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00439-005-1331-y)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 2005 Sep;117(5):485-93. doi: 10.1007/s00439-005-1331-y. Epub 2005
Jul  14.

DNA sequencing of CREBBP demonstrates mutations in 56% of patients with 
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) and in another patient with incomplete RSTS.

Bartsch O(1), Schmidt S, Richter M, Morlot S, Seemanová E, Wiebe G, Rasi S.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Klinikum, Universität Mainz, 55101, Mainz, 
Germany. bartsch@humgen.klinik.uni-mainz.de

Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) is a distinct dominant disorder characterized 
by short stature, typical face, broad angulated thumbs and halluces, and mental 
retardation. The RSTS can be caused by chromosomal microdeletions and molecular 
mutations in the CREBBP gene; however, relatively few mutations have been 
reported to date. Here, we aimed to determine the rate of point mutations and 
other small molecular lesions in true RSTS and possible mild variants, by using 
genomic DNA sequencing. A consecutive series of patients including 17 patients 
from our previous study was investigated. We identified 19 causative mutations 
of CREBBP in a total of 45 patients representing three different diagnostic 
groups: (a) 17 mutations in 30 patients with unequivocal RSTS (detection rate 
56.6%), (b) two mutations in eight patients with features suggestive of RSTS 
("moderate or incomplete RSTS", detection rate 25%), and (c) no mutation in 
seven patients with undiagnosed syndromes and isolated features of RSTS. In 
general, the mutations were distributed without hot spots and most were unique; 
however, three recurrent mutations (R370X, R1664H, and N1978S) were identified. 
Furthermore, we detected 15 different intragenic polymorphisms, including two 
non-synonymous coding polymorphisms, L551I and Q2208H. We report not only the 
highest detection rate (56.6%) of CREBBP mutations in patients with RSTS to 
date, but also the second missense mutation (N1978S) in a patient with moderate 
or incomplete RSTS. Previous studies have identified cytogenetic deletions in 
the CREBBP gene in eight to 12% of patients and very recently, Roelfsema et al. 
reported EP300 gene mutations in three of 92 (3.3%) patients with either true 
RSTS or different syndromes resembling RSTS. Our 56.6% detection rate of 
molecular mutations in CREBBP in patients with unequivocal RSTS supports the new 
concept that RSTS is a genetically heterogeneous disorder and furthermore, 
indicates that RSTS may be caused by gene/s other than CREBBP in up to 30% of 
cases.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-005-1331-y
PMID: 16021471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]