---
reference_id: "PMID:32412053"
title: "Myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody-associated disease: an immunopathological study."
authors:
- Takai Y
- Misu T
- Kaneko K
- Chihara N
- Narikawa K
- Tsuchida S
- Nishida H
- Komori T
- Seki M
- Komatsu T
- Nakamagoe K
- Ikeda T
- Yoshida M
- Takahashi T
- Ono H
- Nishiyama S
- Kuroda H
- Nakashima I
- Suzuki H
- Bradl M
- Lassmann H
- Fujihara K
- Aoki M
- Japan MOG-antibody Disease Consortium
journal: Brain
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awaa102
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- Autoantigens/immunology
- Brain/pathology
- Child
- "Demyelinating Autoimmune Diseases, CNS/immunology, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Myelin-Oligodendrocyte Glycoprotein/immunology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody-associated disease: an immunopathological study.
**Authors:** Takai Y, Misu T, Kaneko K, Chihara N, Narikawa K, Tsuchida S, Nishida H, Komori T, Seki M, Komatsu T, Nakamagoe K, Ikeda T, Yoshida M, Takahashi T, Ono H, Nishiyama S, Kuroda H, Nakashima I, Suzuki H, Bradl M, Lassmann H, Fujihara K, Aoki M, Japan MOG-antibody Disease Consortium
**Journal:** Brain (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awaa102](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awaa102)

## Content

1. Brain. 2020 May 1;143(5):1431-1446. doi: 10.1093/brain/awaa102.

Myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody-associated disease: an
immunopathological study.

Takai Y(1), Misu T(1)(2), Kaneko K(1)(3), Chihara N(4), Narikawa K(5), Tsuchida
S(6), Nishida H(7), Komori T(8), Seki M(9), Komatsu T(10), Nakamagoe K(11),
Ikeda T(12), Yoshida M(12), Takahashi T(13), Ono H(1), Nishiyama S(1), Kuroda
H(1), Nakashima I(14), Suzuki H(15), Bradl M(16), Lassmann H(16), Fujihara
K(1)(17), Aoki M(1); Japan MOG-antibody Disease Consortium.

Collaborators: Otsuka Y, Nishimaki K, Ishigaki S, Yoshida K, Iguchi Y, Fukuda T,
Nohara S, Tamaoka A, Fujimori J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.
(2)Department of Multiple Sclerosis Therapeutics, Tohoku University Graduate
School of Medicine, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization Miyagi National
Hospital, Watari, Miyagi, Japan.
(4)Division of Neurology, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe,
Hyogo, Japan.
(5)Department of Neurology, Japanese Red Cross Ishinomaki Hospital, Ishinomaki,
Miyagi, Japan.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Japanese Red Cross Akita Hospital, Akita, Akita,
Japan.
(7)Department of Neuropediatrics, Tokyo Metropolitan Neurological Hospital,
Fuchu, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Tokyo Metropolitan
Neurological Hospital, Fuchu, Tokyo, Japan.
(9)Department of Neurology, Keio University School of Medicine, Shinjuku-ku,
Tokyo, Japan.
(10)Department of Neurology, the Jikei University School of Medicine, Minato-ku,
Tokyo, Japan.
(11)Department of Neurology, Division of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
(12)Department of Neuropathology, Institute for Medical Science of Aging, Aichi
Medical University, Nagakute, Aichi, Japan.
(13)Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization Yonezawa National
Hospital, Yonezawa, Yamagata, Japan.
(14)Department of Neurology, Tohoku Medical and Pharmaceutical University,
Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.
(15)Department of Pathology, National Hospital Organization Sendai Medical
Center, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.
(16)Department of Neuroimmunology, Center for Brain Research, Medical University
of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
(17)Department of Multiple Sclerosis Therapeutics, Fukushima Medical University,
Fukushima, Fukushima, Japan.

Conformation-sensitive antibodies against myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein
(MOG) are detectable in patients with optic neuritis, myelitis, opticomyelitis,
acute or multiphasic disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM/MDEM) and
brainstem/cerebral cortical encephalitis, but are rarely detected in patients
with prototypic multiple sclerosis. So far, there has been no systematic study
on the pathological relationship between demyelinating lesions and
cellular/humoral immunity in MOG antibody-associated disease. Furthermore, it is
unclear whether the pathomechanisms of MOG antibody-mediated demyelination are
similar to the demyelination patterns of multiple sclerosis, neuromyelitis
optica spectrum disorders (NMOSD) with AQP4 antibody, or ADEM. In this study, we
immunohistochemically analysed biopsied brain tissues from 11 patients with MOG
antibody-associated disease and other inflammatory demyelinating diseases.
Patient median onset age was 29 years (range 9-64), and the median interval from
attack to biopsy was 1 month (range 0.5-96). The clinical diagnoses were ADEM
(n = 2), MDEM (n = 1), multiple brain lesions without encephalopathy (n = 3),
leukoencephalopathy (n = 3) and cortical encephalitis (n = 2). All these cases
had multiple/extensive lesions on MRI and were oligoclonal IgG band-negative.
Most demyelinating lesions in 10 of 11 cases showed a perivenous demyelinating
pattern previously reported in ADEM (153/167 lesions) and a fusion pattern
(11/167 lesions) mainly in the cortico-medullary junctions and white matter, and
only three lesions in two cases showed confluent demyelinated plaques. In
addition, 60 of 167 demyelinating lesions (mainly in the early phase) showed
MOG-dominant myelin loss, but relatively preserved oligodendrocytes, which were
distinct from those of AQP4 antibody-positive NMOSD exhibiting myelin-associated
glycoprotein-dominant oligodendrogliopathy. In MOG antibody-associated diseases,
MOG-laden macrophages were found in the perivascular spaces and demyelinating
lesions, and infiltrated cells were abundant surrounding multiple blood vessels
in and around the demyelinating lesions, mainly consisting of macrophages (CD68;
1814 ± 1188 cells/mm2), B cells (CD20; 468 ± 817 cells/mm2), and T cells (CD3;
2286 ± 1951 cells/mm2), with CD4-dominance (CD4+ versus CD8+; 1281 ± 1196
cells/mm2 versus 851 ± 762 cells/mm2, P < 0.01). Humoral immunity, evidenced by
perivascular deposits of activated complements and immunoglobulins, was
occasionally observed in some MOG antibody-associated demyelinating lesions, and
the frequency was much lower than that in AQP4 antibody-positive NMOSD. Subpial
lesions with perivenous demyelination were observed in both ADEM and cortical
encephalitis. Our study suggests that ADEM-like perivenous inflammatory
demyelination with MOG-dominant myelin loss is a characteristic finding of MOG
antibody-associated disease regardless of whether the diagnostic criteria of
ADEM are met. These pathological features are clearly different from those of
multiple sclerosis and AQP4 antibody-positive NMOSD, suggesting an independent
autoimmune demyelinating disease entity.

© The Author(s) (2020). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Guarantors of Brain. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awaa102
PMID: 32412053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
