---
reference_id: "PMID:38532649"
title: "Pycnodysostosis: Characteristics of teeth, mouth and jaws."
authors:
- Ferlias N
- Gjørup H
- Doherty MA
- Pedersen TK
journal: Orthod Craniofac Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/ocr.12782
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- Cone-Beam Computed Tomography
- "Pycnodysostosis/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Malocclusion/diagnostic imaging
- Adolescent
- Child
- Young Adult
- Temporomandibular Joint Disorders/diagnostic imaging
- Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pycnodysostosis: Characteristics of teeth, mouth and jaws.
**Authors:** Ferlias N, Gjørup H, Doherty MA, Pedersen TK
**Journal:** Orthod Craniofac Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ocr.12782](https://doi.org/10.1111/ocr.12782)

## Content

1. Orthod Craniofac Res. 2024 Aug;27(4):656-664. doi: 10.1111/ocr.12782. Epub
2024  Mar 26.

Pycnodysostosis: Characteristics of teeth, mouth and jaws.

Ferlias N(1), Gjørup H(2), Doherty MA(3)(4), Pedersen TK(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dentistry and Oral Health, Section of Orthodontics, Aarhus 
University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Center for Oral Health in Rare 
Diseases, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.
(3)Childhood Cancer Research Group, Danish Cancer Research Institute, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(4)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital, 
Aarhus, Denmark.
(5)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Aarhus University Hospital, 
Aarhus, Denmark.

OBJECTIVES: To describe the clinical and radiographic oro-dental characteristics 
of patients with pycnodysostosis (PDO).
MATERIALS & METHODS: A short interview and clinical examination of seven 
patients with PDO were performed as well as assessment of the temporomandibular 
joints and masticatory muscles using the diagnostic criteria for 
temporomandibular disorders, DC-TMD form. A full set of records were taken 
including photos and intraoral scan. Finally, existing cone beam computed 
tomography (CBCT) images and radiographs were also studied.
RESULTS: All patients presented with bimaxillary micrognathia, five had a convex 
profile, and two had a straight profile. In addition, posterior open bite, Angle 
Class III molar relation with accompanying anterior crossbite and a grooved 
median palate were common findings. No patient showed symptoms of 
temporomandibular disorder (TMD) apart from some clicking. Finally, the main 
radiographic findings were the obtuse mandibular angle, the frontal bossing, the 
elongation of the coronoid/condylar process and the presence of hypercementosis 
with obliterated pulp chambers.
CONCLUSION: The examined patients with PDO were characterized by dental 
crowding, malocclusion (anterior crossbite, posterior open bite), 
hypercementosis, obliterated pulp chambers and deviations in mandibular 
morphology. In conclusion, patients with PDO have a specific need for dental and 
orthodontic monitoring with focus on crowding and posterior open bite. The 
patients will benefit from a long-term orthodontic plan including extractions.

© 2024 The Authors. Orthodontics & Craniofacial Research published by John Wiley 
& Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ocr.12782
PMID: 38532649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]