---
reference_id: PMID:11985579
title: "Protein methylation as a marker of aspartate damage in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase-deficient erythrocytes: role of oxidative stress."
authors:
- Ingrosso D
- Cimmino A
- "D'Angelo S"
- Alfinito F
- Zappia V
- Galletti P
journal: Eur J Biochem
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1046/j.1432-1033.2002.02838.x
keywords:
- Aspartic Acid/metabolism
- Case-Control Studies
- Cellular Senescence
- Erythrocytes/physiology
- "Glucosephosphate Dehydrogenase/genetics, metabolism"
- "Glucosephosphate Dehydrogenase Deficiency/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Male
- Methylation
- Oxidative Stress/physiology
- Point Mutation
- Protein Methyltransferases/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Protein methylation as a marker of aspartate damage in glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase-deficient erythrocytes: role of oxidative stress.
**Authors:** Ingrosso D, Cimmino A, D'Angelo S, Alfinito F, Zappia V, Galletti P
**Journal:** Eur J Biochem (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1046/j.1432-1033.2002.02838.x](https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1432-1033.2002.02838.x)

## Content

1. Eur J Biochem. 2002 Apr;269(8):2032-9. doi: 10.1046/j.1432-1033.2002.02838.x.

Protein methylation as a marker of aspartate damage in glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase-deficient erythrocytes: role of oxidative stress.

Ingrosso D(1), Cimmino A, D'Angelo S, Alfinito F, Zappia V, Galletti P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Medicine, Second 
University of Naples, Italy. diego.ingrosso@unina2.it

The 'Mediterranean' variant of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) 
deficiency is due to the C563CT point mutation, leading to replacement of Ser 
with Phe at position 188, resulting in acute haemolysis triggered by oxidants. 
Previous work has shown increased formation of altered aspartate residues in 
membrane proteins during cell ageing and in response to oxidative stress in 
normal erythrocytes. These abnormal residues are specifically recognized by the 
repair enzyme L-isoaspartate (d-aspartate) protein O-methyltransferase (PCMT; EC 
2.1.1.77). The aim of this work was to study the possible involvement of protein 
aspartate damage in the mechanism linking the G6PD defect and erythrocyte 
injury, through oxidative stress. Patients affected by G6PD deficiency 
(Mediterranean variant) were selected. In situ methylation assays were performed 
by incubating intact erythrocytes in the presence of methyl-labelled methionine. 
Altered aspartate residues were detected in membrane proteins by methyl ester 
quantification. We present here evidence that, in G6PD-deficient erythrocytes, 
damaged residues are significantly increased in membrane proteins, in parallel 
with the decay of pyruvate kinase activity, used as a cell age marker. 
Erythrocytes from patients were subjected to oxidative stress in vitro, by 
treatment with t-butylhydroperoxide, monitored by a rise in concentration of 
both methaemoglobin and thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances. L-Isoaspartate 
residues increased dramatically in G6PD-deficient erythrocytes in response to 
such treatment, compared with baseline conditions. The increased susceptibility 
of G6PD-deficient erythrocytes to membrane protein aspartate damage in response 
to oxidative stress suggests the involvement of protein 
deamidation/isomerization in the mechanisms of cell injury and haemolysis.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1432-1033.2002.02838.x
PMID: 11985579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]