---
reference_id: "PMID:40944955"
title: Hydatid Disease.
authors:
- Jarvis J
journal: J Spec Oper Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.55460/WGHA-6HET
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hydatid Disease.
**Authors:** Jarvis J
**Journal:** J Spec Oper Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.55460/WGHA-6HET](https://doi.org/10.55460/WGHA-6HET)

## Content

1. J Spec Oper Med. 2025 Sep 1;25(3):110-114. doi: 10.55460/WGHA-6HET.

Hydatid Disease.

Jarvis J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Remote and Offshore Medicine, Birz¨ebbuz¨a, Malta.
(2)Health Professions Education at Widener University, Chester, PA.

Hydatid disease is a zoonosis in which humans become the accidental host to the 
larval stage of Echinococcus granulosus, also known as the dog tapeworm. 
Occurring worldwide, the natural lifecycle of E. granulosus tapeworms consists 
of a canid definitive host for the adult tapeworm stage, and an herbivorous 
animal (sheep, in most cases) intermediate host for the tissueinvasive and 
cyst-forming larval stage. Dogs and other canids harboring gut-resident 
tapeworms readily transmit the tapeworm eggs (and subsequent formation of larval 
cysts) to humans in close contact with them. It is this author's experience that 
adoption of indigenous dogs as "camp mascots" is a common tradition in the 
military deployed setting. This practice puts troops in danger of acquiring 
hydatid disease. The U.S. Veterans Health Ad-ministration 2025 report on 
echinococcosis in Veterans states there were 1,059 diagnoses of the disease in 
their system from 2000 to 2024. In addition, deployed healthcare practitioners 
should include hydatid disease in the differential diagnosis of host-country 
nationals presenting with spaceoccupying lesions and/or anaphylaxis of uncertain 
etiology.

2025.

DOI: 10.55460/WGHA-6HET
PMID: 40944955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author has nothing to disclose.