---
reference_id: "PMID:12045735"
title: Immunopathogenesis of acute transverse myelitis.
authors:
- Kerr DA
- Ayetey H
journal: Curr Opin Neurol
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1097/00019052-200206000-00019
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunopathogenesis of acute transverse myelitis.
**Authors:** Kerr DA, Ayetey H
**Journal:** Curr Opin Neurol (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00019052-200206000-00019](https://doi.org/10.1097/00019052-200206000-00019)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Neurol. 2002 Jun;15(3):339-47. doi:
10.1097/00019052-200206000-00019.

Immunopathogenesis of acute transverse myelitis.

Kerr DA(1), Ayetey H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, 
Pathology 627 C, 6000 N Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21287-6965, USA. 
dkerr@jhmi.edu

Acute transverse myelitis is a group of disorders characterized by focal 
inflammation of the spinal cord and resultant neural injury. Acute transverse 
myelitis may be an isolated entity or may occur in the context of multifocal or 
even multisystemic disease. It is clear that the pathological substrate--injury 
and dysfunction of neural cells within the spinal cord--may be caused by a 
variety of immunological mechanisms. For example, in acute transverse myelitis 
associated with systemic disease (i.e. systemic lupus erythematosus or 
sarcoidosis), a vasculitic or granulomatous process can often be identified. In 
idiopathic acute transverse myelitis, there is an intraparenchymal or 
perivascular cellular influx into the spinal cord, resulting in the breakdown of 
the blood-brain barrier and variable demyelination and neuronal injury. There 
are several critical questions that must be answered before we truly understand 
acute transverse myelitis: (1) What are the various triggers for the 
inflammatory process that induces neural injury in the spinal cord? (2) What are 
the cellular and humoral factors that induce this neural injury? and (3) Is 
there a way to modulate the inflammatory response in order to improve patient 
outcome? Although much remains to be elucidated about the causes of acute 
transverse myelitis, tantalizing clues as to the potential immunopathogenic 
mechanisms in acute transverse myelitis and related inflammatory disorders of 
the spinal cord have recently emerged. It is the purpose of this review to 
illustrate recent discoveries that shed light on this topic, relying when 
necessary on data from related diseases such as acute disseminated 
encephalomyelitis, Guillain-Barré syndrome and neuromyelitis optica. Developing 
a further understanding of how the immune system induces neural injury will 
depend upon confirmation and extension of these findings and will require 
multicenter collaborative efforts.

DOI: 10.1097/00019052-200206000-00019
PMID: 12045735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]