---
reference_id: "PMID:15666299"
title: DLX3 mutation associated with autosomal dominant amelogenesis imperfecta with taurodontism.
authors:
- Dong J
- Amor D
- Aldred MJ
- Gu T
- Escamilla M
- MacDougall M
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30521
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DLX3 mutation associated with autosomal dominant amelogenesis imperfecta with taurodontism.
**Authors:** Dong J, Amor D, Aldred MJ, Gu T, Escamilla M, MacDougall M
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.30521](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.30521)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Mar 1;133A(2):138-41. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30521.

DLX3 mutation associated with autosomal dominant amelogenesis imperfecta with 
taurodontism.

Dong J(1), Amor D, Aldred MJ, Gu T, Escamilla M, MacDougall M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Dental School, University of Texas Health 
Science Center at San Antonio, 7703 Floyd Curl Drive, MC 7888, San Antonio, TX 
78229, USA.

Amelogenesis imperfecta hypoplastic-hypomaturation with taurodontism (AIHHT) is 
an autosomal dominant (AD) trait associated with enamel defects and enlarged 
pulp chambers. In this study, we mapped an AIHHT family to human chromosome 17 
q21-q22 (lod score 3.3) and identify a two basepair deletion (CT) at nucleotide 
560 in DLX3 associated with the disease. This mutation causes a frameshift 
altering the last two amino acids of the DNA-binding homeodomain introducing a 
premature stop codon truncating the protein by 88 amino acids. This is the first 
report of a mutation within the homeodomain of DLX3. Previous studies have shown 
a DLX3 mutation outside the homeodomain associated with tricho-dento-osseous 
syndrome (TDO) suggesting TDO and some forms of AIHHT are allelic.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.30521
PMID: 15666299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]