---
reference_id: "PMID:26439718"
title: "Huntington Disease: Molecular Diagnostics Approach."
authors:
- Bastepe M
- Xin W
journal: Curr Protoc Hum Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/0471142905.hg0926s87
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Huntington Disease: Molecular Diagnostics Approach.
**Authors:** Bastepe M, Xin W
**Journal:** Curr Protoc Hum Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/0471142905.hg0926s87](https://doi.org/10.1002/0471142905.hg0926s87)

## Content

1. Curr Protoc Hum Genet. 2015 Oct 6;87:9.26.1-9.26.23. doi: 
10.1002/0471142905.hg0926s87.

Huntington Disease: Molecular Diagnostics Approach.

Bastepe M(1)(2)(3), Xin W(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Neurogenetics DNA Diagnostic Laboratory, Department of Neurology, 
Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(2)Genetics Training Program, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Endocrine Unit, Department of Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital and 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.

Huntington disease (HD) is caused by expansion of a CAG trinucleotide repeat in 
the first exon of the Huntingtin (HTT) gene. Molecular testing of Huntington 
disease for diagnostic confirmation and disease prediction requires detection of 
the CAG repeat expansion. There are three main types of HD genetic testing: (1) 
diagnostic testing to confirm or rule out disease, (2) presymptomatic testing to 
determine whether an at-risk individual inherited the expanded allele, and (3) 
prenatal testing to determine whether the fetus has inherited the expanded 
allele. This unit includes protocols that describe the complementary use of 
polymerase chain reactions (PCR) and Southern blot hybridization to accurately 
measure the CAG trinucleotide repeat size and interpret the test results. In 
addition, an indirect linkage analysis that does not reveal the unwanted 
parental HD status in a prenatal testing will also be discussed.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/0471142905.hg0926s87
PMID: 26439718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]