---
reference_id: "PMID:36685824"
title: Two novel variants in CEP152 caused Seckel syndrome 5 in a Chinese family.
authors:
- Zhang L
- Teng Y
- Hu H
- Zhu H
- Wen J
- Liang D
- Li Z
- Wu L
journal: Front Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.1052915
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Two novel variants in CEP152 caused Seckel syndrome 5 in a Chinese family.
**Authors:** Zhang L, Teng Y, Hu H, Zhu H, Wen J, Liang D, Li Z, Wu L
**Journal:** Front Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2022.1052915](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2022.1052915)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2023 Jan 4;13:1052915. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.1052915.
eCollection  2022.

Two novel variants in CEP152 caused Seckel syndrome 5 in a Chinese family.

Zhang L(1), Teng Y(1), Hu H(1), Zhu H(1), Wen J(1), Liang D(1)(2), Li Z(1), Wu 
L(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Hunan Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Hunan 
Key Laboratory of Animal Models for Human Diseases, School of Life Sciences, 
Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China.
(2)Hunan Jiahui Genetics Hospital, Changsha, Hunan, China.

Background: Seckel syndrome (SCKL) is a rare autosomal recessive inherited 
disorder, which is mainly characterized by intrauterine and postnatal growth 
restrictions, microcephaly, intellectual disability, and a typical "bird-head" 
facial appearance. Here, we aimed to identify the genetic etiology of a family 
with suspected SCKL. Methods: This study enrolled a Chinese family suspected of 
SCKL with their detailed family history and clinical data. We performed 
karyotype analysis, copy number variation sequencing (CNV-seq), and trio 
whole-exome sequencing (WES) to explore the genetic etiology in the proband. 
Furthermore, the quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and 
reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR) were conducted to confirm the pathogenicity 
of novel variants. Results: The karyotype analysis and CNV-seq were normal in 
the proband. Two novel variants in CEP152, c.1060C>T (p.Arg354*) and 
c.1414-14A>G, were identified in the proband through trio-WES. The qPCR results 
showed that the total CEP152 mRNA expression levels were significantly reduced 
in c.1060C>T (p.Arg354*) and c.1414-14A>G compared with healthy control 
individuals. Moreover, aberrant skipping of exon 12 due to the non-canonical 
splice-site variant was revealed by RT-PCR and Sanger sequencing. Conclusion: 
Our findings expanded pathogenic variant spectra in SCKL and offered new 
insights into the pathogenicity of a non-classical splice-site variant in 
CEP152, which provided additional information for helping the family improve 
pregnancy plans in the future.

Copyright © 2023 Zhang, Teng, Hu, Zhu, Wen, Liang, Li and Wu.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.1052915
PMCID: PMC9845263
PMID: 36685824

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.