---
reference_id: "PMID:36580738"
title: "Clinical and genetic spectrum from a prototype of ciliopathy: Joubert syndrome."
authors:
- Aksu Uzunhan T
- Ertürk B
- Aydın K
- Ayaz A
- Altunoğlu U
- Yarar MH
- Gezdirici A
- İçağasıoğlu DF
- Gökpınar İli E
- Uyanık B
- Eser M
- Kutbay YB
- Topçu Y
- Kılıç B
- Bektaş G
- Arduç Akçay A
- Ekici B
- Chousein A
- Avcı Ş
- Yüksel A
- Kayserili H
journal: Clin Neurol Neurosurg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.clineuro.2022.107560
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and genetic spectrum from a prototype of ciliopathy: Joubert syndrome.
**Authors:** Aksu Uzunhan T, Ertürk B, Aydın K, Ayaz A, Altunoğlu U, Yarar MH, Gezdirici A, İçağasıoğlu DF, Gökpınar İli E, Uyanık B, Eser M, Kutbay YB, Topçu Y, Kılıç B, Bektaş G, Arduç Akçay A, Ekici B, Chousein A, Avcı Ş, Yüksel A, Kayserili H
**Journal:** Clin Neurol Neurosurg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clineuro.2022.107560](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clineuro.2022.107560)

## Content

1. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2023 Jan;224:107560. doi:
10.1016/j.clineuro.2022.107560.  Epub 2022 Dec 13.

Clinical and genetic spectrum from a prototype of ciliopathy: Joubert syndrome.

Aksu Uzunhan T(1), Ertürk B(2), Aydın K(3), Ayaz A(4), Altunoğlu U(5), Yarar 
MH(6), Gezdirici A(7), İçağasıoğlu DF(8), Gökpınar İli E(7), Uyanık B(9), Eser 
M(6), Kutbay YB(10), Topçu Y(3), Kılıç B(3), Bektaş G(11), Arduç Akçay A(12), 
Ekici B(13), Chousein A(14), Avcı Ş(5), Yüksel A(15), Kayserili H(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Prof. Dr. Cemil Taşcıoğlu City Hospital, 
İstanbul, Türkiye. Electronic address: tugceuzunhan@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Prof. Dr. Cemil Taşcıoğlu City Hospital, 
İstanbul, Türkiye.
(3)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Medipol University, İstanbul, Türkiye.
(4)Department of Medical Genetics, Medipol University, İstanbul, Türkiye.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, Koc University School of Medicine (KUSOM), 
Istanbul, Turkey.
(6)Department of Medical Genetics, Ümraniye Research and Training Hospital, 
İstanbul, Türkiye.
(7)Department of Medical Genetics, Başakşehir Çam ve Sakura City Hospital, 
İstanbul, Türkiye.
(8)Department of Pediatric Neurology, BezmiAlem Vakif University, İstanbul, 
Türkiye.
(9)Department of Medical Genetics, BezmiAlem Vakif University, İstanbul, 
Türkiye.
(10)Department of Medical Genetics, İzmir Tepecik Research and Training 
Hospital, İstanbul, Türkiye.
(11)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Bakırköy Dr. Sadi Konuk Research and 
Training Hospital, İstanbul, Türkiye.
(12)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Koç University School of Medicine 
(KUSOM), İstanbul, Türkiye.
(13)Pediatric Neurology Clinic, İstanbul, Türkiye.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, Biruni University, İstanbul, Türkiye.
(15)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, İstanbul University, İstanbul 
Faculty of Medicine, İstanbul, Türkiye.

OBJECTIVE: Joubert syndrome is a neurodevelopmental disorder with a distinctive 
hindbrain malformation called molar tooth sign, causing motor and cognitive 
impairments. More than 40 genes have been associated with Joubert syndrome. We 
aim to describe a group of Joubert syndrome patients clinically and genetically 
emphasizing organ involvement.
METHODS: We retrospectively collected clinical information and molecular 
diagnosis data of 22 patients with Joubert syndrome from multiple facilities. 
Clinical exome or whole-exome sequencing were performed to identify causal 
variations in genes.
RESULTS: The most common variants were in the CPLANE1, CEP290, and TMEM67 genes, 
and other causative genes were AHI1, ARMC9, CEP41, CSPP1, HYLS1, KATNIP, 
KIAA0586, KIF7, RPGRIP1L, including some previously unreported variants in these 
genes. Multi-systemic organ involvement was observed in nine (40%) patients, 
with the eye being the most common, including Leber's congenital amaurosis, 
ptosis, and optic nerve coloboma. Portal hypertension and esophageal varices as 
liver and polycystic kidney disease and nephronophthisis as kidney involvement 
was encountered in our patients. The HYLS1 gene, which commonly causes 
hydrolethalus syndrome 1, was also associated with Joubert syndrome in one of 
our patients. A mild phenotype with hypophyseal hormone deficiencies without the 
classical molar tooth sign was observed with compound heterozygous and likely 
pathogenic variants not reported before in the KATNIP gene.
CONCLUSION: Some rare variants that display prominent genetic heterogeneity with 
variable severity are first reported in our patients. In our study of 22 Joubert 
syndrome patients, CPLANE1 is the most affected gene, and Joubert syndrome as a 
ciliopathy is possible without a classical molar tooth sign, like in the KATNIP 
gene-affected patients.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clineuro.2022.107560
PMID: 36580738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]