---
reference_id: "PMID:37565822"
title: Multi-omics analysis of adamantinomatous craniopharyngiomas reveals distinct molecular subgroups with prognostic and treatment response significance.
authors:
- Wang X
- Zhao C
- Lin J
- Liu H
- Zeng Q
- Chen H
- Wang Y
- Xu D
- Chen W
- Xu M
- Zhang E
- Lin D
- Lin Z
journal: Chin Med J (Engl)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1097/CM9.0000000000002774
keywords:
- Humans
- Child
- "Craniopharyngioma/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Prognosis
- Multiomics
- "Pituitary Neoplasms/genetics, pathology"
- Wnt Signaling Pathway
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multi-omics analysis of adamantinomatous craniopharyngiomas reveals distinct molecular subgroups with prognostic and treatment response significance.
**Authors:** Wang X, Zhao C, Lin J, Liu H, Zeng Q, Chen H, Wang Y, Xu D, Chen W, Xu M, Zhang E, Lin D, Lin Z
**Journal:** Chin Med J (Engl) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1097/CM9.0000000000002774](https://doi.org/10.1097/CM9.0000000000002774)

## Content

1. Chin Med J (Engl). 2024 Apr 5;137(7):859-870. doi:
10.1097/CM9.0000000000002774.  Epub 2023 Aug 11.

Multi-omics analysis of adamantinomatous craniopharyngiomas reveals distinct 
molecular subgroups with prognostic and treatment response significance.

Wang X(1), Zhao C(2), Lin J(1), Liu H(2), Zeng Q(1), Chen H(1), Wang Y(2), Xu 
D(1), Chen W(1), Xu M(1), Zhang E(1), Lin D(2), Lin Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, School of Medical Technology and Engineering, 
Key Laboratory of Medical Bioinformatics, Key Laboratory of Ministry of 
Education for Gastrointestinal Cancer, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, Fujian 
350122, China.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Sanbo Brain Hospital, Capital Medical University, 
Beijing 100093, China.

BACKGROUND: Adamantinomatous craniopharyngioma (ACP) is the commonest pediatric 
sellar tumor. No effective drug is available and interpatient heterogeneity is 
prominent. This study aimed to identify distinct molecular subgroups of ACP 
based on the multi-omics profiles, imaging findings, and histological features, 
in order to predict the response to anti-inflammatory treatment and 
immunotherapies.
METHODS: Totally 142 Chinese cases diagnosed with craniopharyngiomas were 
profiled, including 119 ACPs and 23 papillary craniopharyngiomas. Whole-exome 
sequencing (151 tumors, including recurrent ones), RNA sequencing (84 tumors), 
and DNA methylome profiling (95 tumors) were performed. Consensus clustering and 
non-negative matrix factorization were used for subgrouping, and Cox regression 
were utilized for prognostic evaluation, respectively.
RESULTS: Three distinct molecular subgroups were identified: WNT, ImA, and ImB. 
The WNT subgroup showed higher Wnt/β-catenin pathway activity, with a greater 
number of epithelial cells and more predominantly solid tumors. The ImA and ImB 
subgroups had activated inflammatory and interferon response pathways, with 
enhanced immune cell infiltration and more predominantly cystic tumors. 
Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MEK/MAPK) signaling was activated only in ImA 
samples, while IL-6 and epithelial-mesenchymal transition biomarkers were highly 
expressed in the ImB group, mostly consisting of children. The degree of 
astrogliosis was significantly elevated in the ImA group, with severe 
finger-like protrusions at the invasive front of the tumor. The molecular 
subgrouping was an independent prognostic factor, with the WNT group having 
longer event-free survival than ImB (Cox, P = 0.04). ImA/ImB cases were more 
likely to respond to immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) therapy than the WNT group 
( P <0.01). In the preliminary screening of subtyping markers, CD38 was 
significantly downregulated in WNT compared with ImA and ImB ( P = 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: ACP comprises three molecular subtypes with distinct imaging and 
histological features. The prognosis of the WNT type is better than that of the 
ImB group, which is more likely to benefit from the ICB treatment.

Copyright © 2024 The Chinese Medical Association, produced by Wolters Kluwer, 
Inc. under the CC-BY-NC-ND license.

DOI: 10.1097/CM9.0000000000002774
PMCID: PMC10997223
PMID: 37565822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None.