---
reference_id: "PMID:32813703"
title: Epidemiology of dengue fever in Guatemala.
authors:
- Castillo Signor LDC
- Edwards T
- Escobar LE
- Mencos Y
- Matope A
- Castaneda-Guzman M
- Adams ER
- Cuevas LE
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0008535
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of dengue fever in Guatemala.
**Authors:** Castillo Signor LDC, Edwards T, Escobar LE, Mencos Y, Matope A, Castaneda-Guzman M, Adams ER, Cuevas LE
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0008535](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008535)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2020 Aug 19;14(8):e0008535. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0008535. eCollection 2020 Aug.

Epidemiology of dengue fever in Guatemala.

Castillo Signor LDC(1), Edwards T(2), Escobar LE(3), Mencos Y(1), Matope A(4), 
Castaneda-Guzman M(3), Adams ER(2), Cuevas LE(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Ministerio de Salud Publica y Asistencia Social de Guatemala, Guatemala City, 
Guatemala.
(2)Centre for Drugs and Diagnostics Research, Liverpool School of Tropical 
Medicine, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Fish and Wildlife Conservation, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, 
United States of America.
(4)Tropical Clinical Trials Unit. Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, 
Liverpool, United Kingdom.

Dengue fever occurs worldwide and about 1% of cases progress to severe 
haemorrhage and shock. Dengue is endemic in Guatemala and its surveillance 
system could document long term trends. We analysed 17 years of country-wide 
dengue surveillance data in Guatemala to describe epidemiological trends from 
2000 to 2016.Data from the national dengue surveillance database were analysed 
to describe dengue serotype frequency, seasonality, and outbreaks. We used 
Poisson regression models to compare the number of cases each year with 
subsequent years and to estimate incidence ratios within serotype adjusted by 
age and gender. 91,554 samples were tested. Dengue was confirmed by RT-qPCR, 
culture or NS1-ELISA in 7097 (7.8%) cases and was IgM ELISA-positive in 19,290 
(21.1%) cases. DENV1, DENV2, DENV3, and DENV4 were detected in 2218 (39.5%), 
2580 (45.9%), 591 (10.5%), and 230 (4.1%) cases. DENV1 and DENV2 were the 
predominant serotypes, but all serotypes caused epidemics. The largest outbreak 
occurred in 2010 with 1080 DENV2 cases reported. The incidence was higher among 
adults during epidemic years, with significant increases in 2005, 2007, and 2013 
DENV1 outbreaks, the 2010 DENV2 and 2003 DENV3 outbreaks. Adults had a lower 
incidence immediately after epidemics, which is likely linked to increased 
immunity.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0008535
PMCID: PMC7458341
PMID: 32813703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.