---
reference_id: "PMID:20301712"
title: PORCN-Related Developmental Disorders.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Sutton VR
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PORCN-Related Developmental Disorders.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Sutton VR

## Content

1. PORCN-Related Developmental Disorders.

Sutton VR(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2008 May 15 [updated 2023 Jun 15].

Author information:
(1)Professor, Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Texas

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: PORCN-related developmental disorders include a 
spectrum of highly variable multisystem disorders caused by developmental 
abnormalities in mesodermal and ectodermal structures primarily involving the 
skin, limbs, eyes, and face. The manifestations vary among affected individuals, 
and many have only a subset of the characteristic features. Skin manifestations 
present at birth include atrophic and hypoplastic areas of skin; cutis aplasia; 
fat nodules in the dermis manifesting as soft, yellow-pink cutaneous nodules; 
and pigmentary changes. Verrucous papillomas of the skin and mucous membranes 
may appear later. The nails can be ridged, dysplastic, or hypoplastic; hair can 
be sparse or absent. Limb malformations include oligo- and syndactyly and split 
hand/foot. Developmental abnormalities of the eye can include 
anophthalmia/microphthalmia, iris and chorioretinal coloboma, and lacrimal duct 
abnormalities. Craniofacial findings can include facial asymmetry, notched alae 
nasi, cleft lip and palate, pointed chin, and small, underfolded pinnae. Dental 
anomalies can include hypodontia, enamel defects, and/or abnormally shaped 
teeth. Occasional findings include abdominal wall defects, diaphragmatic hernia, 
and kidney anomalies. Psychomotor development is usually normal; some 
individuals have cognitive impairment and/or behavioral issues.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: A PORCN-related developmental disorder can be diagnosed in a 
proband with characteristic clinical features and a heterozygous pathogenic 
variant in PORCN identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Care by a dermatologist for painful and 
pruritic erosive lesions that are prone to infection; laser therapy for atrophic 
areas and granulation tissue may be helpful; lotion for pruritic lesions; 
preoperative evaluation by an otolaryngologist for hypopharyngeal and/or 
tonsillar papillomas; management of large papillomas of the larynx, trachea, 
and/or esophagus per otolaryngologist or gastroenterologist; referral to a 
physical/occupational therapist and hand surgeon for management of hand and foot 
malformations; standard management of structural abnormalities of the eyes, 
kidneys, diaphragmatic hernia, and abdominal wall defects; visual aids or other 
resources for reduced vision; dental care, good oral hygiene, dietary 
counseling; consider fissure sealants to reduce dental caries; orthodontic care 
as needed for malocclusion, veneers as needed; hearing aids and community 
hearing services as needed; developmental services and educational support; 
standard management for behavioral issues. Surveillance: Annual evaluation with 
a dermatologist; monitor for gastroesophageal reflux disease, swallowing 
difficulties, and symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea at each visit; annual 
physical examination for scoliosis, particularly in individuals with 
costovertebral segmentation abnormalities; annual eye examinations; dental 
examination every six months; annual hearing evaluation or as needed; assess 
growth and body composition to determine need for nutritional intervention at 
each visit; annual screening for cognitive, emotional, behavioral, and adaptive 
issues. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Prevent exposure to extreme heat in those 
with hypohidrosis.
GENETIC COUNSELING: PORCN-related developmental disorders are inherited in an 
X-linked manner. Females (90% of affected individuals) are heterozygous or 
mosaic for a PORCN pathogenic variant; most live-born affected males (10% of 
affected individuals) are mosaic for a de novo PORCN pathogenic variant. It is 
presumed that most non-mosaic hemizygous males are not viable. Approximately 95% 
of females with PORCN-related developmental disorders have a de novo pathogenic 
variant; ~5% inherited the pathogenic variant from a parent. The risk that the 
PORCN pathogenic variant will be transmitted by an affected heterozygous female 
is 50%; however, because most male conceptuses with a PORCN pathogenic variant 
are presumed to be spontaneously aborted, at delivery the expected sex ratio of 
offspring is: 33% unaffected females; 33% affected females; 33% unaffected 
males. If the affected female is mosaic for a PORCN pathogenic variant, the risk 
to her female offspring of inheriting the pathogenic variant depends on the 
level of mosaicism in her germline and can be as high as 50%. Once the PORCN 
pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, prenatal 
and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301712