---
reference_id: "PMID:29488455"
title: Sensitivity, Specificity, and Public-Health Utility of Clinical Case Definitions Based on the Signs and Symptoms of Cholera in Africa.
authors:
- Nadri J
- Sauvageot D
- Njanpop-Lafourcade BM
- Baltazar CS
- Banla Kere A
- Bwire G
- Coulibaly D
- Kacou N'Douba A
- Kagirita A
- Keita S
- Koivogui L
- Landoh DE
- Langa JP
- Miwanda BN
- Mutombo Ndongala G
- Mwakapeje ER
- Mwambeta JL
- Mengel MA
- Gessner BD
journal: Am J Trop Med Hyg
year: '2018'
doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.16-0523
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sensitivity, Specificity, and Public-Health Utility of Clinical Case Definitions Based on the Signs and Symptoms of Cholera in Africa.
**Authors:** Nadri J, Sauvageot D, Njanpop-Lafourcade BM, Baltazar CS, Banla Kere A, Bwire G, Coulibaly D, Kacou N'Douba A, Kagirita A, Keita S, Koivogui L, Landoh DE, Langa JP, Miwanda BN, Mutombo Ndongala G, Mwakapeje ER, Mwambeta JL, Mengel MA, Gessner BD
**Journal:** Am J Trop Med Hyg (2018)
**DOI:** [10.4269/ajtmh.16-0523](https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.16-0523)

## Content

1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2018 Apr;98(4):1021-1030. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.16-0523. Epub 
2018 Feb 22.

Sensitivity, Specificity, and Public-Health Utility of Clinical Case Definitions 
Based on the Signs and Symptoms of Cholera in Africa.

Nadri J(1), Sauvageot D(1), Njanpop-Lafourcade BM(1), Baltazar CS(2), Banla Kere 
A(3)(4), Bwire G(5), Coulibaly D(6), Kacou N'Douba A(7), Kagirita A(8), Keita 
S(9), Koivogui L(10), Landoh DE(11), Langa JP(2), Miwanda BN(12), Mutombo 
Ndongala G(13), Mwakapeje ER(14), Mwambeta JL(15), Mengel MA(1), Gessner BD(1).

Author information:
(1)Agence de Medecine Préventive, Paris, France.
(2)Instituto Nacional de Saúde, Ministry of Health, Maputo, Mozambique.
(3)Ministry of Health, Lomé, Togo.
(4)Institut National d'Hygiène, Lomé, Togo.
(5)Control of Diarrheal Diseases, Community Health Department, Ministry of 
Health, Kampala, Uganda.
(6)Institut National d'Hygiène Publique, Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire.
(7)Institut Pasteur de Côte d'Ivoire, Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire.
(8)Central Public Health Laboratory, Ministry of Health, Kampala, Uganda.
(9)Division Prévention et Lutte contre la Maladie, Ministry of Health, Conakry, 
Guinea.
(10)Institut National de Santé Publique, Conakry, Guinea.
(11)Division de l'Epidémiologie, Ministry of Health, Lomé, Togo.
(12)Institut National de Recherche Biomédicale, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of 
Congo.
(13)Division Provinciale de la Santé du Nord Kivu, Goma, Democratic Republic of 
Congo.
(14)Epidemiology and Diseases Control Section, Preventive Department, Ministry 
of Health, Community Development, Gender, Elderly and Children, Dar es Salaam, 
Tanzania.
(15)Curative Department, National Health Laboratory Quality Assurance and 
Training Center, Ministry of Health, Community Development, Gender, Elderly and 
Children, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.

During 2014, Africa reported more than half of the global suspected cholera 
cases. Based on the data collected from seven countries in the African Cholera 
Surveillance Network (Africhol), we assessed the sensitivity, specificity, and 
positive and negative predictive values of clinical cholera case definitions, 
including that recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO) using culture 
confirmation as the gold standard. The study was designed to assess results in 
real-world field situations in settings with recent cholera outbreaks or 
endemicity. From June 2011 to July 2015, a total of 5,084 persons with suspected 
cholera were tested for Vibrio cholerae in seven different countries of which 
35.7% had culture confirmation. For all countries combined, the WHO case 
definition had a sensitivity = 92.7%, specificity = 8.1%, positive predictive 
value = 36.1%, and negative predictive value = 66.6%. Adding dehydration, 
vomiting, or rice water stools to the case definition could increase the 
specificity without a substantial decrease in sensitivity. Future studies could 
further refine our findings primarily by using more sensitive methods for 
cholera confirmation.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.16-0523
PMCID: PMC5928804
PMID: 29488455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]