---
reference_id: "PMID:26009577"
title: Protocol for a multicentre randomiSed controlled TRial of IntraVEnous immunoglobulin versus standard therapy for the treatment of transverse myelitis in adults and children (STRIVE).
authors:
- Absoud M
- Gadian J
- Hellier J
- Brex PA
- Ciccarelli O
- Giovannoni G
- Kelly J
- McCrone P
- Murphy C
- Palace J
- Pickles A
- Pike M
- Robertson N
- Jacob A
- Lim M
journal: BMJ Open
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-008312
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Protocol for a multicentre randomiSed controlled TRial of IntraVEnous immunoglobulin versus standard therapy for the treatment of transverse myelitis in adults and children (STRIVE).
**Authors:** Absoud M, Gadian J, Hellier J, Brex PA, Ciccarelli O, Giovannoni G, Kelly J, McCrone P, Murphy C, Palace J, Pickles A, Pike M, Robertson N, Jacob A, Lim M
**Journal:** BMJ Open (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bmjopen-2015-008312](https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2015-008312)

## Content

1. BMJ Open. 2015 May 25;5(5):e008312. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-008312.

Protocol for a multicentre randomiSed controlled TRial of IntraVEnous 
immunoglobulin versus standard therapy for the treatment of transverse myelitis 
in adults and children (STRIVE).

Absoud M(1), Gadian J(1), Hellier J(2), Brex PA(3), Ciccarelli O(4), Giovannoni 
G(5), Kelly J(6), McCrone P(7), Murphy C(6), Palace J(8), Pickles A(2), Pike 
M(9), Robertson N(10), Jacob A(11), Lim M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Children's Neurosciences, Evelina Children's Hospital at Guy's 
and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, King's Health Partners Academic Health 
Science Centre, London, UK.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and 
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK.
(3)Department of Neurology, King's College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, King's 
Health Partners Academic Health Science Centre, London, UK.
(4)UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, London, UK.
(5)Centre for Neuroscience and Trauma, Blizard Institute, University of London 
and Bart's Health NHS Trust, London, UK.
(6)King's Clinical Trials Unit, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and 
Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK.
(7)Centre for the Economics of Mental and Physical Health, Institute of 
Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, London, UK.
(8)Department of Neurology, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford, UK.
(9)Department of Paediatric Neurology, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, 
Oxford, UK.
(10)Institute of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, Cardiff 
University and Cardiff and Vale NHS Trust, Cardiff, UK.
(11)The Walton Centre, Walton Centre NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Transverse myelitis (TM) is an immune-mediated disorder of the 
spinal cord which causes motor and sensory disturbance and limited recovery in 
50% of patients. Standard treatment is steroids, and patients with more severe 
disease appear to respond to plasma exchange (PLEX). Intravenous immunoglobulin 
(IVIG) has also been used as an adjunct to steroids, but evidence is lacking. We 
propose the first randomised control trial in adults and children, to determine 
the benefit of additional treatment with IVIG.
METHODS AND ANALYSIS: 170 adults and children aged over 1 year with acute first 
episode TM or neuromyelitis optica (with myelitis) will be recruited over a 
2.5-year period and followed up for 12 months. Participants randomised to the 
control arm will receive standard therapy of intravenous methylprednisolone 
(IVMP). The intervention arm will receive the above standard therapy, plus 
additional IVIG. Primary outcome will be a 2-point improvement on the American 
Spinal Injury Association (ASIA) Impairment scale at 6 months postrandomisation 
by blinded assessors. Additional secondary and tertiary outcome measures will be 
collected: ASIA motor and sensory scales, Kurtzke expanded disability status 
scale, International Spinal Cord Injury (SCI) Bladder/Bowel Data Set, Client 
Services Receipt Index, Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory, EQ-5D, SCI Pain and 
SCI Quality of Life Data Sets. Biological samples will be biobanked for future 
studies. After 6-months' follow-up of the first 52 recruited patients futility 
analysis will be carried out. Health economics analysis will be performed to 
calculate cost-effectiveness. After 6 months' recruitment futility analysis will 
be performed.
ETHICS AND DISSEMINATION: Research Ethics Committee Approval was obtained: 
14/SC/1329. Current protocol: v3.0 (15/01/2015). Study findings will be 
published in peer-reviewed journals.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBERS: This study is registered with EudraCT (REF: 
2014-002335-34), Clinicaltrials.gov (REF: NCT02398994) and ISRCTN (REF: 
12127581).

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-008312
PMCID: PMC4452744
PMID: 26009577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]