---
reference_id: "PMID:35886001"
title: Ophthalmic and Genetic Features of Bardet Biedl Syndrome in a German Cohort.
authors:
- Nasser F
- Kohl S
- Kurtenbach A
- Kempf M
- Biskup S
- Zuleger T
- Haack TB
- Weisschuh N
- Stingl K
- Zrenner E
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/genes13071218
keywords:
- Aging
- "Bardet-Biedl Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Electroretinography
- Eye Diseases
- Humans
- Microtubule-Associated Proteins/genetics
- Mutation
- Retina
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ophthalmic and Genetic Features of Bardet Biedl Syndrome in a German Cohort.
**Authors:** Nasser F, Kohl S, Kurtenbach A, Kempf M, Biskup S, Zuleger T, Haack TB, Weisschuh N, Stingl K, Zrenner E
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes13071218](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes13071218)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2022 Jul 8;13(7):1218. doi: 10.3390/genes13071218.

Ophthalmic and Genetic Features of Bardet Biedl Syndrome in a German Cohort.

Nasser F(1)(2), Kohl S(1), Kurtenbach A(1), Kempf M(1)(3), Biskup S(4), Zuleger
T(5), Haack TB(5), Weisschuh N(1), Stingl K(1)(3), Zrenner E(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Ophthalmology, University of Tübingen, 72076 Tuebingen, Germany.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Leipzig, 04103 Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Center for Rare Eye Diseases, University of Tübingen, 72076 Tuebingen,
Germany.
(4)Praxis für Humangenetik, 72076 Tuebingen, Germany.
(5)Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen,
72076 Tuebingen, Germany.
(6)Werner Reichardt Centre for Integrative Neuroscience (CIN), University of
Tübingen, 72076 Tuebingen, Germany.

The aim of this study was to characterize the ophthalmic and genetic features of
Bardet Biedl (BBS) syndrome in a cohort of patients from a German specialized
ophthalmic care center. Sixty-one patients, aged 5−56 years, underwent a
detailed ophthalmic examination including visual acuity and color vision
testing, electroretinography (ERG), visually evoked potential recording (VEP),
fundus examination, and spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT).
Adaptive optics flood illumination ophthalmoscopy was performed in five
patients. All patients had received diagnostic genetic testing and were selected
upon the presence of apparent biallelic variants in known BBS-associated genes.
All patients had retinal dystrophy with morphologic changes of the retina.
Visual acuity decreased from ~0.2 (decimal) at age 5 to blindness 0 at 50 years.
Visual field examination could be performed in only half of the patients and
showed a concentric constriction with remaining islands of function in the
periphery. ERG recordings were mostly extinguished whereas VEP recordings were
reduced in about half of the patients. The cohort of patients showed 51
different likely biallelic mutations—of which 11 are novel—in 12 different
BBS-associated genes. The most common associated genes were BBS10 (32.8%) and
BBS1 (24.6%), and by far the most commonly observed variants were BBS10
c.271dup;p.C91Lfs*5 (21 alleles) and BBS1 c.1169T>G;p.M390R (18 alleles). The
phenotype associated with the different BBS-associated genes and genotypes in
our cohort is heterogeneous, with diverse features without genotype−phenotype
correlation. The results confirm and expand our knowledge of this rare disease.

DOI: 10.3390/genes13071218
PMCID: PMC9322102
PMID: 35886001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
