---
reference_id: "PMID:28066726"
title: Functional Intestinal Bile Acid 7α-Dehydroxylation by Clostridium scindens Associated with Protection from Clostridium difficile Infection in a Gnotobiotic Mouse Model.
authors:
- Studer N
- Desharnais L
- Beutler M
- Brugiroux S
- Terrazos MA
- Menin L
- Schürch CM
- McCoy KD
- Kuehne SA
- Minton NP
- Stecher B
- Bernier-Latmani R
- Hapfelmeier S
journal: Front Cell Infect Microbiol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2016.00191
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Functional Intestinal Bile Acid 7α-Dehydroxylation by Clostridium scindens Associated with Protection from Clostridium difficile Infection in a Gnotobiotic Mouse Model.
**Authors:** Studer N, Desharnais L, Beutler M, Brugiroux S, Terrazos MA, Menin L, Schürch CM, McCoy KD, Kuehne SA, Minton NP, Stecher B, Bernier-Latmani R, Hapfelmeier S
**Journal:** Front Cell Infect Microbiol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcimb.2016.00191](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcimb.2016.00191)

## Content

1. Front Cell Infect Microbiol. 2016 Dec 20;6:191. doi: 10.3389/fcimb.2016.00191.
 eCollection 2016.

Functional Intestinal Bile Acid 7α-Dehydroxylation by Clostridium scindens 
Associated with Protection from Clostridium difficile Infection in a Gnotobiotic 
Mouse Model.

Studer N(1), Desharnais L(2), Beutler M(3), Brugiroux S(3), Terrazos MA(4), 
Menin L(5), Schürch CM(6), McCoy KD(7), Kuehne SA(8), Minton NP(8), Stecher 
B(9), Bernier-Latmani R(2), Hapfelmeier S(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Infectious Diseases, University of BernBern, Switzerland; 
Graduate School for Cellular and Biomedical Sciences, University of BernBern, 
Switzerland.
(2)Environmental Microbiology Laboratory, École Polytechnique Fédérale de 
Lausanne (EPFL) Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Max von Pettenkofer Institute of Hygiene and Medical Microbiology, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich (LMU) Munich, Germany.
(4)Institute for Infectious Diseases, University of Bern Bern, Switzerland.
(5)Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale 
de Lausanne (EPFL) Lausanne, Switzerland.
(6)Institute of Pathology University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(7)Maurice Müller Laboratories (DKF), Universitätsklinik für Viszerale Chirurgie 
und Medizin Inselspital, University of Bern Bern, Switzerland.
(8)Clostridia Research Group, Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research 
Council (BBSRC) and the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council 
(EPSRC) Synthetic Biology Research Centre, School of Life Sciences, University 
of Nottingham Nottingham, UK.
(9)Max von Pettenkofer Institute of Hygiene and Medical Microbiology, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich (LMU)Munich, Germany; German Center for 
Infection Research, Deutsches Zentrum für Infektionsforschung (DZIF), Partner 
Site Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich (LMU)Munich, Germany.

Bile acids, important mediators of lipid absorption, also act as hormone-like 
regulators and as antimicrobial molecules. In all these functions their potency 
is modulated by a variety of chemical modifications catalyzed by bacteria of the 
healthy gut microbiota, generating a complex variety of secondary bile acids. 
Intestinal commensal organisms are well-adapted to normal concentrations of bile 
acids in the gut. In contrast, physiological concentrations of the various 
intestinal bile acid species play an important role in the resistance to 
intestinal colonization by pathogens such as Clostridium difficile. Antibiotic 
therapy can perturb the gut microbiota and thereby impair the production of 
protective secondary bile acids. The most important bile acid transformation is 
7α-dehydroxylation, producing deoxycholic acid (DCA) and lithocholic acid (LCA). 
The enzymatic pathway carrying out 7α-dehydroxylation is restricted to a narrow 
phylogenetic group of commensal bacteria, the best-characterized of which is 
Clostridium scindens. Like many other intestinal commensal species, 
7-dehydroxylating bacteria are understudied in vivo. Conventional animals 
contain variable and uncharacterized indigenous 7α-dehydroxylating organisms 
that cannot be selectively removed, making controlled colonization with a 
specific strain in the context of an undisturbed microbiota unfeasible. In the 
present study, we used a recently established, standardized gnotobiotic mouse 
model that is stably associated with a simplified murine 12-species "oligo-mouse 
microbiota" (Oligo-MM12). It is representative of the major murine intestinal 
bacterial phyla, but is deficient for 7α-dehydroxylation. We find that the 
Oligo-MM12 consortium carries out bile acid deconjugation, a prerequisite for 
7α-dehydroxylation, and confers no resistance to C. difficile infection (CDI). 
Amendment of Oligo-MM12 with C. scindens normalized the large intestinal bile 
acid composition by reconstituting 7α-dehydroxylation. These changes had only 
minor effects on the composition of the native Oligo-MM12, but significantly 
decreased early large intestinal C. difficile colonization and pathogenesis. The 
delayed pathogenesis of C. difficile in C. scindens-colonized mice was 
associated with breakdown of cecal microbial bile acid transformation.

DOI: 10.3389/fcimb.2016.00191
PMCID: PMC5168579
PMID: 28066726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]