---
reference_id: "PMID:31138930"
title: SMAD6 is frequently mutated in nonsyndromic radioulnar synostosis.
authors:
- Yang Y
- Zheng Y
- Li W
- Li L
- Tu M
- Zhao L
- Mei H
- Zhu G
- Zhu Y
journal: Genet Med
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41436-019-0552-8
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Alleles
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Family
- Female
- Gene Frequency/genetics
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Pedigree
- Penetrance
- Radius/abnormalities
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA/methods"
- "Smad6 Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- Synostosis/genetics
- Ulna/abnormalities
- Exome Sequencing/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SMAD6 is frequently mutated in nonsyndromic radioulnar synostosis.
**Authors:** Yang Y, Zheng Y, Li W, Li L, Tu M, Zhao L, Mei H, Zhu G, Zhu Y
**Journal:** Genet Med (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41436-019-0552-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41436-019-0552-8)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2019 Nov;21(11):2577-2585. doi: 10.1038/s41436-019-0552-8. Epub
2019  May 29.

SMAD6 is frequently mutated in nonsyndromic radioulnar synostosis.

Yang Y(1), Zheng Y(2), Li W(3), Li L(2), Tu M(2), Zhao L(2), Mei H(4), Zhu G(4),
Zhu Y(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)The Laboratory of Genetics and Metabolism, Hunan Children's Research
Institute (HCRI), Hunan Children's Hospital, University of South China,
Changsha, China. yongjia727@aliyun.com.
(2)The Laboratory of Genetics and Metabolism, Hunan Children's Research
Institute (HCRI), Hunan Children's Hospital, University of South China,
Changsha, China.
(3)Department of Radiology, Hunan Children's Hospital, University of South
China, Changsha, China.
(4)Department of Orthopedics, Hunan Children's Hospital, University of South
China, Changsha, China.
(5)The Laboratory of Genetics and Metabolism, Hunan Children's Research
Institute (HCRI), Hunan Children's Hospital, University of South China,
Changsha, China. xiangeryiym@aliyun.com.
(6)Hunan Institute of Emergency Medicine, Hunan People's Hospital, Changsha,
China. xiangeryiym@aliyun.com.

Erratum in
    Genet Med. 2019 Oct;21(10):2409. doi: 10.1038/s41436-019-0578-y.

PURPOSE: Radioulnar synostosis (RUS) can be syndromic or nonsyndromic.
The genetic basis for several RUS syndromes have been reported. However, the
genetic cause of nonsyndromic RUS (nsRUS) remains unknown.
METHODS: We performed Giemsa (GTG) banding, Sanger sequencing, and exome
sequencing on patients (n = 140) and families (n = 11) who suffered from RUS.
RESULTS: GTG banding identified 10% RUS sporadic cases affected by sex
chromosome aneuploidy. Sanger sequencing on candidate genes revealed noggin
(NOG) rarely mutated in nsRUS. Exome sequencing identified 16 loss-of-function
(LOF) and 6 missense variants (minor allele frequency [MAF] < 0.0001) in 22/117
nsRUS sporadic patients. Genetic association analysis found a significant
association between SMAD6-LOF variants and nsRUS risk (odds ratio [OR] = 430,
95% confidence interval [CI]: 238-780, P < 0.000001). SMAD6 mutated in nsRUS was
further confirmed by direct Sanger sequencing of SMAD6-coding regions on other
unrelated cohorts of nsRUS cases or families. In summary, we detected 27 SMAD6
rare variants in nsRUS, most of which were LOF variants, 4 were de novo, and 3
were transmitted in families with autosomal dominant inheritance.
CONCLUSION: As an intracellular bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) antagonist
gene, SMAD6 is frequently mutated in nsRUS. NOG, which encodes an extracellular
BMP antagonist, is rarely mutated in nsRUS. This work is the first genetic study
on nsRUS.

DOI: 10.1038/s41436-019-0552-8
PMID: 31138930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
