---
reference_id: "PMID:25145405"
title: Drug resistance to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors for non-small cell lung cancer.
authors:
- Shien K
- Yamamoto H
- Soh J
- Miyoshi S
- Toyooka S
journal: Acta Med Okayama
year: '2014'
doi: 10.18926/AMO/52785
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Drug resistance to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors for non-small cell lung cancer.
**Authors:** Shien K, Yamamoto H, Soh J, Miyoshi S, Toyooka S
**Journal:** Acta Med Okayama (2014)
**DOI:** [10.18926/AMO/52785](https://doi.org/10.18926/AMO/52785)

## Content

1. Acta Med Okayama. 2014;68(4):191-200. doi: 10.18926/AMO/52785.

Drug resistance to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors for non-small cell lung 
cancer.

Shien K(1), Yamamoto H, Soh J, Miyoshi S, Toyooka S.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Clinical Genomic Medicine, and General Thoracic Surgery and 
Breast and Endocrinological Surgery, Okayama University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama 700-8558, Japan.

Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) harboring an activating mutation within the 
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) was defined as a clinically distinct 
molecular group. These lesions show oncogene addiction to EGFR and dramatic 
responses to the EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). Several large Phase III 
trials have shown that EGFR-TKIs improved the progression-free survival of 
patients with EGFR mutant NSCLC compared to conventional chemotherapy. However, 
the long-term effectiveness of EGFR-TKIs is usually limited because of acquired 
drug resistance. To overcome this resistance to EGFR-TKIs, it will be essential 
to identify the specific mechanisms underlying the resistance. Many 
investigators have attempted to identify the mechanisms using preclinical models 
and drug-resistant clinical samples. As a result, several mechanisms have been 
showed to be responsible for the resistance, but not all of the relevant 
mechanisms have been uncovered. In this review, we provide an overview of 
mechanisms underlying drug-resistance to EGFR-TKIs, focusing on results obtained 
with preclinical models, and we present some possible strategies to overcome the 
EGFR-TKI resistance.

DOI: 10.18926/AMO/52785
PMID: 25145405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]