---
reference_id: "PMID:12118255"
title: Identification of the gene (BBS1) most commonly involved in Bardet-Biedl syndrome, a complex human obesity syndrome.
authors:
- Mykytyn K
- Nishimura DY
- Searby CC
- Shastri M
- Yen HJ
- Beck JS
- Braun T
- Streb LM
- Cornier AS
- Cox GF
- Fulton AB
- Carmi R
- Lüleci G
- Chandrasekharappa SC
- Collins FS
- Jacobson SG
- Heckenlively JR
- Weleber RG
- Stone EM
- Sheffield VC
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1038/ng935
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Identification of the gene (BBS1) most commonly involved in Bardet-Biedl syndrome, a complex human obesity syndrome.
**Authors:** Mykytyn K, Nishimura DY, Searby CC, Shastri M, Yen HJ, Beck JS, Braun T, Streb LM, Cornier AS, Cox GF, Fulton AB, Carmi R, Lüleci G, Chandrasekharappa SC, Collins FS, Jacobson SG, Heckenlively JR, Weleber RG, Stone EM, Sheffield VC
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng935](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng935)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2002 Aug;31(4):435-8. doi: 10.1038/ng935. Epub 2002 Jul 15.

Identification of the gene (BBS1) most commonly involved in Bardet-Biedl 
syndrome, a complex human obesity syndrome.

Mykytyn K(1), Nishimura DY, Searby CC, Shastri M, Yen HJ, Beck JS, Braun T, 
Streb LM, Cornier AS, Cox GF, Fulton AB, Carmi R, Lüleci G, Chandrasekharappa 
SC, Collins FS, Jacobson SG, Heckenlively JR, Weleber RG, Stone EM, Sheffield 
VC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics and the Howard Hughes 
Medical Institute, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS, OMIM 209900) is a genetic disorder with the primary 
features of obesity, pigmentary retinopathy, polydactyly, renal malformations, 
mental retardation and hypogenitalism. Individuals with BBS are also at 
increased risk for diabetes mellitus, hypertension and congenital heart disease. 
What was once thought to be a homogeneous autosomal recessive disorder is now 
known to map to at least six loci: 11q13 (BBS1), 16q21 (BBS2), 3p13 p12 (BBS3), 
15q22.3 q23 (BBS4), 2q31 (BBS5) and 20p12 (BBS6). There has been considerable 
interest in identifying the genes that underlie BBS, because some components of 
the phenotype are common. Cases of BBS mapping ro BBS6 are caused by mutations 
in MKKS; mutations in this gene also cause McKusick-Kaufman syndrome 
(hydrometrocolpos, post-axial polydactyly and congenital heart defects). In 
addition, we recently used positional cloning to identify the genes underlying 
BBS2 (ref. 16) and BBS4 (ref. 17). The BBS6 protein has similarity to a 
Thermoplasma acidophilum chaperonin, whereas BBS2 and BBS4 have no significant 
similarity to chaperonins. It has recently been suggested that three mutated 
alleles (two at one locus, and a third at a second locus) may be required for 
manifestation of BBS (triallelic inheritance). Here we report the identification 
of the gene BBS1 and show that a missense mutation of this gene is a frequent 
cause of BBS. In addition, we provide data showing that this common mutation is 
not involved in triallelic inheritance.

DOI: 10.1038/ng935
PMID: 12118255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]