---
reference_id: "PMID:21104191"
title: Involvement of protein synthesis in recovery from refractory period of electrical depolarization induced by osmotic stimulation in Chara corallina.
authors:
- Shimmen T
journal: J Plant Res
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s10265-010-0391-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Involvement of protein synthesis in recovery from refractory period of electrical depolarization induced by osmotic stimulation in Chara corallina.
**Authors:** Shimmen T
**Journal:** J Plant Res (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10265-010-0391-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10265-010-0391-9)

## Content

1. J Plant Res. 2011 Sep;124(5):639-44. doi: 10.1007/s10265-010-0391-9. Epub 2010
 Nov 23.

Involvement of protein synthesis in recovery from refractory period of 
electrical depolarization induced by osmotic stimulation in Chara corallina.

Shimmen T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Life Science, Graduate School of Life Science, University of 
Hyogo, Harima Science Park City, Hyogo, Japan. shimmen@sci.u-hyogo.ac.jp

Upon addition of sorbitol to the external medium of an internodal cell of Chara 
corallina, a transient depolarization is induced at its nodal end (Shimmen in 
Plant Cell Physiol 44:1215-1224, 2003). In the present study, refractory period 
was found to be very long, 2-4 h. Recovery from refractoriness was completely 
inhibited by inhibitors of eukaryote-type protein synthesis, cycloheximide or 
anisomysin, but not by inhibitors of prokaryote-type protein synthesis. This 
suggested that proteinous factor(s) responsible for generation of the 
depolarization is lost or inactivated upon depolarization and synthesized during 
the resting state. Low temperature, which is supposed to inhibit protein 
synthesis, also inhibited recovery from refractoriness. When unstimulated 
internodal cells were incubated in the medium containing an inhibitor of 
eukaryote-type protein synthesis, generation of the depolarization was almost 
completely inhibited. This result suggested that the factor is slowly turning 
over even in the absence of osmotic stimulation.

DOI: 10.1007/s10265-010-0391-9
PMID: 21104191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]