---
reference_id: "PMID:24876791"
title: "Angelman syndrome: review of clinical and molecular aspects."
authors:
- Bird LM
journal: Appl Clin Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.2147/TACG.S57386
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Angelman syndrome: review of clinical and molecular aspects.
**Authors:** Bird LM
**Journal:** Appl Clin Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.2147/TACG.S57386](https://doi.org/10.2147/TACG.S57386)

## Content

1. Appl Clin Genet. 2014 May 16;7:93-104. doi: 10.2147/TACG.S57386. eCollection 
2014.

Angelman syndrome: review of clinical and molecular aspects.

Bird LM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, Division of Genetics, 
Rady Children's Hospital, San Diego, California, USA.

"Angelman syndrome" (AS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder whose main features 
are intellectual disability, lack of speech, seizures, and a characteristic 
behavioral profile. The behavioral features of AS include a happy demeanor, 
easily provoked laughter, short attention span, hypermotoric behavior, mouthing 
of objects, sleep disturbance, and an affinity for water. Microcephaly and 
subtle dysmorphic features, as well as ataxia and other movement disturbances, 
are additional features seen in most affected individuals. AS is due to 
deficient expression of the ubiquitin protein ligase E3A (UBE3A) gene, which 
displays paternal imprinting. There are four molecular classes of AS, and some 
genotype-phenotype correlations have emerged. Much remains to be understood 
regarding how insufficiency of E6-AP, the protein product of UBE3A, results in 
the observed neurodevelopmental deficits. Studies of mouse models of AS have 
implicated UBE3A in experience-dependent synaptic remodeling.

DOI: 10.2147/TACG.S57386
PMCID: PMC4036146
PMID: 24876791