---
reference_id: "PMID:24403053"
title: Human COX20 cooperates with SCO1 and SCO2 to mature COX2 and promote the assembly of cytochrome c oxidase.
authors:
- Bourens M
- Boulet A
- Leary SC
- Barrientos A
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu003
keywords:
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Line
- "Cyclooxygenase 2/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cytochrome-c Oxidase Deficiency/enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- "Electron Transport Complex IV/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Membrane Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Mitochondria/enzymology, genetics, metabolism"
- "Mitochondrial Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Molecular Chaperones
- Protein Stability
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human COX20 cooperates with SCO1 and SCO2 to mature COX2 and promote the assembly of cytochrome c oxidase.
**Authors:** Bourens M, Boulet A, Leary SC, Barrientos A
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddu003](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddu003)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Jun 1;23(11):2901-13. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu003. Epub 2014
Jan  8.

Human COX20 cooperates with SCO1 and SCO2 to mature COX2 and promote the 
assembly of cytochrome c oxidase.

Bourens M(1), Boulet A, Leary SC, Barrientos A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, and.

Cytochrome c oxidase (CIV) deficiency is one of the most common respiratory 
chain defects in patients presenting with mitochondrial 
encephalocardiomyopathies. CIV biogenesis is complicated by the dual genetic 
origin of its structural subunits, and assembly of a functional holoenzyme 
complex requires a large number of nucleus-encoded assembly factors. In general, 
the functions of these assembly factors remain poorly understood, and 
mechanistic investigations of human CIV biogenesis have been limited by the 
availability of model cell lines. Here, we have used small interference RNA and 
transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs) technology to create 
knockdown and knockout human cell lines, respectively, to study the function of 
the CIV assembly factor COX20 (FAM36A). These cell lines exhibit a severe, 
isolated CIV deficiency due to instability of COX2, a mitochondrion-encoded CIV 
subunit. Mitochondria lacking COX20 accumulate CIV subassemblies containing COX1 
and COX4, similar to those detected in fibroblasts from patients carrying 
mutations in the COX2 copper chaperones SCO1 and SCO2. These results imply that 
in the absence of COX20, COX2 is inefficiently incorporated into early CIV 
subassemblies. Immunoprecipitation assays using a stable COX20 knockout cell 
line expressing functional COX20-FLAG allowed us to identify an interaction 
between COX20 and newly synthesized COX2. Additionally, we show that SCO1 and 
SCO2 act on COX20-bound COX2. We propose that COX20 acts as a chaperone in the 
early steps of COX2 maturation, stabilizing the newly synthesized protein and 
presenting COX2 to its metallochaperone module, which in turn facilitates the 
incorporation of mature COX2 into the CIV assembly line.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddu003
PMCID: PMC4014192
PMID: 24403053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]