---
reference_id: "PMID:33721817"
title: "Efficacy of linezolid on Treponema pallidum, the syphilis agent: A preclinical study."
authors:
- Haynes AM
- Giacani L
- Mayans MV
- Ubals M
- Nieto C
- Pérez-Mañá C
- Quintó L
- Romeis E
- Mitjà O
journal: EBioMedicine
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2021.103281
keywords:
- Animals
- Area Under Curve
- "Clofazimine/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Drug Evaluation, Preclinical"
- "Linezolid/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Male
- Microbial Sensitivity Tests
- "Moxifloxacin/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- "Penicillin G Benzathine/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- ROC Curve
- Rabbits
- "Syphilis/drug therapy, pathology"
- Treponema pallidum/drug effects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of linezolid on Treponema pallidum, the syphilis agent: A preclinical study.
**Authors:** Haynes AM, Giacani L, Mayans MV, Ubals M, Nieto C, Pérez-Mañá C, Quintó L, Romeis E, Mitjà O
**Journal:** EBioMedicine (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ebiom.2021.103281](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2021.103281)

## Content

1. EBioMedicine. 2021 Mar;65:103281. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2021.103281. Epub 2021
Mar 12.

Efficacy of linezolid on Treponema pallidum, the syphilis agent: A preclinical
study.

Haynes AM(1), Giacani L(2), Mayans MV(3), Ubals M(4), Nieto C(5), Pérez-Mañá
C(6), Quintó L(7), Romeis E(1), Mitjà O(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy and Infectious Diseases,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA; Department of Global Health,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. Electronic address: giacal@uw.edu.
(3)Fight Aids and Infectious Diseases Foundation, Hospital Universitari Germans
Trias i Pujol, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Fight Aids and Infectious Diseases Foundation, Hospital Universitari Germans
Trias i Pujol, Barcelona, Spain; Facultat de Medicina, Universitat de Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain.
(5)Laboratorio Reig Jofre, Barcelona, Spain.
(6)Clinical Pharmacology Unit, Hospital, Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol,
Institut de Recerca Germans Trias i Pujol (HUGTiP-IGTP), Badalona, Spain;
Department of Pharmacology, Therapeutics and Toxicology, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Barcelona Institute for Global Health, Hospital Clínic-Universitat de
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Manhiça Health Research Institute (CISM), Maputo,
Mozambique.
(8)Fight Aids and Infectious Diseases Foundation, Hospital Universitari Germans
Trias i Pujol, Barcelona, Spain; Lihir Medical Centre-International SOS, Lihir
Island, Papua New Guinea. Electronic address: omitja@flsida.org.

Comment in
    EBioMedicine. 2021 Apr;66:103320. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2021.103320.

BACKGROUND: Penicillin G, the current standard treatment for syphilis, has
important drawbacks, but virtually no preclinical or clinical studies have been
performed to identify viable alternatives. We tested, both in vitro and in vivo,
three marketed antibiotics with adequate pharmacological properties to treat
syphilis.
METHODS: We used an in vitro culturing system of T. pallidum to perform drug
susceptibility testing and applied quantitative PCR targeting the tp0574 gene to
measure bacterial growth. To confirm in vivo efficacy, fifteen rabbits were
infected intradermally with T. pallidum at eight sites each and randomly
allocated to an experimental treatment (linezolid, moxifloxacin, clofazimine) or
a control arm (benzathine penicillin G [BPG], untreated). The primary outcome
was treatment efficacy defined as the time to lesion healing measured from the
date of treatment start. Secondary outcomes were absence of treponemes or
treponemal mRNA in injection sites, absence of seroconversion, and cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) abnormalities and negative rabbit infectivity tests (RIT).
FINDINGS: Linezolid showed in vitro bactericidal activity at concentrations of
0.5 µg/mL or higher. When administered orally to experimentally infected
rabbits, it induced healing of early lesions at a time similar to BPG (hazard
ratio 3.84; 95% CI 2.05-7.17; p < 0.0001 compared to untreated controls). In
linezolid-treated animals, dark-field microscopy and qPCR assessment showed no
presence of treponemes after day 3 post-treatment start, serologic test did not
convert to positive, CSF had no abnormalities, and RIT was negative.
Moxifloxacin and clofazimine failed to inhibit bacterial growth in vitro and
could not cure the infection in the rabbit model.
INTERPRETATION: Linezolid, a low-cost oxazolidinone, has in vitro and in vivo
activity against T. pallidum, with efficacy similar to BPG in treating
treponemal lesions in the animal model. Our findings warrant further research to
assess the efficacy of linezolid as an alternative to penicillin G to treat
syphilis in human clinical trials.
FUNDING: European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020
research and innovation program (Grant agreement No. 850450).

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2021.103281
PMCID: PMC7973135
PMID: 33721817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
