---
reference_id: "PMID:32101828"
title: A 29-year-old patient with adrenoleukodystrophy presenting with Addison's disease.
authors:
- Tanaka H
- Amano N
- Tanaka K
- Katsuki T
- Adachi T
- Shimozawa N
- Kawai T
journal: Endocr J
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1507/endocrj.EJ19-0576
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A 29-year-old patient with adrenoleukodystrophy presenting with Addison's disease.
**Authors:** Tanaka H, Amano N, Tanaka K, Katsuki T, Adachi T, Shimozawa N, Kawai T
**Journal:** Endocr J (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1507/endocrj.EJ19-0576](https://doi.org/10.1507/endocrj.EJ19-0576)

## Content

1. Endocr J. 2020 Jun 29;67(6):655-658. doi: 10.1507/endocrj.EJ19-0576. Epub 2020
 Feb 26.

A 29-year-old patient with adrenoleukodystrophy presenting with Addison's 
disease.

Tanaka H(1), Amano N(2), Tanaka K(1), Katsuki T(1), Adachi T(1), Shimozawa N(3), 
Kawai T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Saiseikai Central Hospital, Minato-ku, 
Tokyo 108-0073, Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Tokyo Saiseikai Central Hospital, Tokyo 108-0073, 
Japan.
(3)Division of Genomics Research, Life Science Research Center, Gifu University, 
Gifu 501-1193, Japan.

Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) is an X-linked disorder caused by a hemizygous 
mutation of the ABCD1 gene. Patients with ALD show progressive central nervous 
system demyelination and primary adrenal insufficiency. In Japan, most reported 
ALD cases were childhood-onset, and only one case of an adult patient with 
Addison's disease form of ALD has ever been reported. Herein, we present a case 
of a 29-year-old man with Addison's disease form of ALD. The patient had 
anorexia, weight loss, and skin pigmentation from 18 years of age. At first 
visit, his weight had decreased by 12 kg from 57 kg when he was 15 years old. 
Endocrinological examination showed low serum cortisol (1.2 μg/dL) with high 
plasma ACTH (4,750 pg/mL), and abdominal computed tomography showed normal 
adrenal glands. Very-long-chain fatty acid (VLCFA) levels were elevated, and the 
ABCD1 mutation, p.Gly116Arg, was identified in hemizygous state. He had no 
significant neurological findings on physical examination and no white matter 
lesions on brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). He was diagnosed with ALD 
presenting as Addison's disease, and glucocorticoid replacement therapy was 
initiated. Four years after the diagnosis, he still did not show any 
neurological findings and any white matter lesions on brain MRI. Evaluating 
VLCFA levels for ALD diagnosis is important in young adult men with idiopathic 
primary adrenal insufficiency as well as in children. Early diagnosis enables 
more rational approaches including the early detection of neurological 
complications and might improve the prognosis of patients.

DOI: 10.1507/endocrj.EJ19-0576
PMID: 32101828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]