---
reference_id: "PMID:20301424"
title: "Polycystic Kidney Disease, Autosomal Dominant."
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Harris PC
- Torres VE
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Polycystic Kidney Disease, Autosomal Dominant.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Harris PC, Torres VE

## Content

1. Polycystic Kidney Disease, Autosomal Dominant.

Harris PC(1), Torres VE(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2002 Jan 10 [updated 2022 Sep 29].

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) 
is generally a late-onset multisystem disorder characterized by bilateral kidney 
cysts, liver cysts, and an increased risk of intracranial aneurysms. Other 
manifestations include: cysts in the pancreas, seminal vesicles, and arachnoid 
membrane; dilatation of the aortic root and dissection of the thoracic aorta; 
mitral valve prolapse; and abdominal wall hernias. Kidney manifestations include 
early-onset hypertension, kidney pain, and kidney insufficiency. Approximately 
50% of individuals with ADPKD have end-stage kidney disease (ESKD) by age 60 
years. The prevalence of liver cysts increases with age and occasionally results 
in clinically significant severe polycystic liver disease (PLD), most often in 
females. Overall, the prevalence of intracranial aneurysms is fivefold higher 
than in the general population and further increased in those with a positive 
family history of aneurysms or subarachnoid hemorrhage. There is substantial 
variability in the severity of kidney disease and other extra-kidney 
manifestations.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of ADPKD is established in a proband with 
age-specific kidney imaging criteria and either an affected first-degree 
relative with ADPKD or a heterozygous pathogenic variant in PKD1, PKD2, or one 
of the less common associated genes (ALG5, ALG9, DNAJB11, GANAB, IFT140) 
identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment with vasopressin V2 receptor 
antagonists (e.g., tolvaptan) to slow disease progression is approved for 
individuals with rapidly progressive disease. Treatment for hypertension may 
include ACE inhibitors or angiotensin II receptor blockers and diet 
modification. Delayed onset of ESKD has been suggested with lipid control; low 
osmolar intake (e.g., moderate sodium and protein); increased hydration by 
moderate water intake; maintenance of sodium bicarbonate ≥22 mEq/L; moderation 
of dietary phosphorus intake; moderation of caloric intake; and low-impact 
exercise to maintain normal body mass index. Conservative treatment of flank 
pain includes nonopioid agents, tricyclic antidepressants, narcotic analgesics, 
and splanchnic nerve blockade. More aggressive treatments include cyst 
decompression with cyst aspiration and sclerosis, laparoscopic or surgical cyst 
fenestration, kidney denervation, and nephrectomy. Cyst hemorrhage and/or gross 
hematuria usually responds to bed rest, analgesics, and adequate hydration. 
Severe bleeding may require transfusion, segmental arterial embolization, or 
surgery. Treatment of nephrolithiasis is standard. Treatment of cyst infections 
is difficult, with a high failure rate. Therapeutic agents of choice include 
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, fluoroquinolones, clindamycin, vancomycin, and 
metronidazole. ESKD is treated with dialysis and transplantation. Symptomatic 
liver cysts may improve with avoidance of estrogens and the use of H2 blockers 
or proton pump inhibitors. Severe symptoms may require percutaneous aspiration 
and sclerosis, laparoscopic fenestration, combined hepatic resection and cyst 
fenestration, liver transplantation, or selective hepatic artery embolization. 
The mainstay of therapy for ruptured or symptomatic intracranial aneurysm is 
surgical clipping of the ruptured aneurysm at its neck; however, for some 
individuals, endovascular treatment with detachable platinum coils may be 
indicated. Thoracic aortic replacement is indicated when the aortic root 
diameter reaches 55-60 mm. Surveillance: CT or MRI examination of the abdomen 
with and without contrast enhancement every one to five years in adults 
depending on disease stage; blood pressure monitoring every three years 
beginning at age five years in those with normal blood pressure; urine studies 
for microalbuminuria or proteinuria every one to five years in adults depending 
on disease stage; echocardiography or chest MRI every two to three years in 
adults with a first-degree relative with thoracic aortic dissection; MRA 
examination for intracranial aneurysms in adults determined to be at high risk. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Long-term administration of nephrotoxic agents, 
high levels of caffeine, high-salt diet, smoking, and obesity, and in 
individuals with severe PLD, use of estrogens and possibly progestogens. 
Evaluation of relatives at risk: Testing of adult relatives at risk permits 
early diagnosis, initiation of treatment, and treatment of associated 
complications. Pregnancy management: Pregnant women with ADPKD should be 
monitored for the development of hypertension, urinary tract infections, 
oligohydramnios, and preeclampsia; the fetus should be monitored for 
intrauterine fetal growth restriction, oligohydramnios, and fetal kidney 
anomalies including cysts, enlarged size, and atypical echogenicity.
GENETIC COUNSELING: In most affected families, ADPKD is caused by a heterozygous 
PKD1 or PKD2 pathogenic variant and inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. 
More rarely, ADPKD is caused by a heterozygous pathogenic variant in ALG5, ALG9, 
DNAJB11, GANAB, or IFT140. Complex inheritance (biallelic PKD1- or PKD2-related 
ADPKD or digenic ADPKD) may play a role in a minority of families and is 
important when considering the risk to other family members. Most individuals 
diagnosed with ADPKD have an affected parent; 10%-20% of affected individuals 
have the disorder as the result of a de novo pathogenic variant. Each child of 
an individual who is heterozygous for an ADPKD-causing pathogenic variant has a 
50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant. Once the ADPKD-causing 
pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, prenatal 
and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301424