---
reference_id: "PMID:24027271"
title: Abnormal striatal dopaminergic neurotransmission during rest and task production in spasmodic dysphonia.
authors:
- Simonyan K
- Berman BD
- Herscovitch P
- Hallett M
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0407-13.2013
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Brain Mapping
- Case-Control Studies
- "Corpus Striatum/diagnostic imaging, metabolism"
- Dopamine/metabolism
- Dopamine Antagonists
- "Dysphonia/complications, diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- "Laryngeal Diseases/complications, diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Psychomotor Performance
- Raclopride
- Radionuclide Imaging
- Rest
- Speech Production Measurement
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abnormal striatal dopaminergic neurotransmission during rest and task production in spasmodic dysphonia.
**Authors:** Simonyan K, Berman BD, Herscovitch P, Hallett M
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0407-13.2013](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0407-13.2013)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2013 Sep 11;33(37):14705-14. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0407-13.2013.

Abnormal striatal dopaminergic neurotransmission during rest and task production 
in spasmodic dysphonia.

Simonyan K(1), Berman BD, Herscovitch P, Hallett M.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Neurology and Otolaryngology, Icahn School of Medicine at 
Mount Sinai, New York, New York 10029, Human Motor Control Section, Medical 
Neurology Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, Department of 
Neurology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Denver, Colorado 
80045, and PET Department, Clinical Center, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

Spasmodic dysphonia is a primary focal dystonia characterized by involuntary 
spasms in the laryngeal muscles during speech production. The pathophysiology of 
spasmodic dysphonia is thought to involve structural and functional 
abnormalities in the basal ganglia-thalamo-cortical circuitry; however, 
neurochemical correlates underpinning these abnormalities as well as their 
relations to spasmodic dysphonia symptoms remain unknown. We used positron 
emission tomography with the radioligand [(11)C]raclopride (RAC) to study 
striatal dopaminergic neurotransmission at the resting state and during 
production of symptomatic sentences and asymptomatic finger tapping in spasmodic 
dysphonia patients. We found that patients, compared to healthy controls, had 
bilaterally decreased RAC binding potential (BP) to striatal dopamine D2/D3 
receptors on average by 29.2%, which was associated with decreased RAC 
displacement (RAC ΔBP) in the left striatum during symptomatic speaking (group 
average difference 10.2%), but increased RAC ΔBP in the bilateral striatum 
during asymptomatic tapping (group average difference 10.1%). Patients with more 
severe voice symptoms and subclinically longer reaction time to initiate the 
tapping sequence had greater RAC ΔBP measures, while longer duration of 
spasmodic dysphonia was associated with a decrease in task-induced RAC ΔBP. 
Decreased dopaminergic transmission during symptomatic speech production may 
represent a disorder-specific pathophysiological trait involved in symptom 
generation, whereas increased dopaminergic function during unaffected task 
performance may be explained by a compensatory adaptation of the nigrostriatal 
dopaminergic system possibly due to decreased striatal D2/D3 receptor 
availability. These changes can be linked to the clinical and subclinical 
features of spasmodic dysphonia and may represent the neurochemical basis of 
basal ganglia alterations in this disorder.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0407-13.2013
PMCID: PMC3771037
PMID: 24027271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]