---
reference_id: "PMID:29391254"
title: Abnormal differentiation of B cells and megakaryocytes in patients with Roifman syndrome.
authors:
- Heremans J
- Garcia-Perez JE
- Turro E
- Schlenner SM
- Casteels I
- Collin R
- de Zegher F
- Greene D
- Humblet-Baron S
- Lesage S
- Matthys P
- Penkett CJ
- Put K
- Stirrups K
- National Institute for Health Research BioResource
- Thys C
- Van Geet C
- Van Nieuwenhove E
- Wouters C
- Meyts I
- Freson K
- Liston A
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2017.11.061
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abnormal differentiation of B cells and megakaryocytes in patients with Roifman syndrome.
**Authors:** Heremans J, Garcia-Perez JE, Turro E, Schlenner SM, Casteels I, Collin R, de Zegher F, Greene D, Humblet-Baron S, Lesage S, Matthys P, Penkett CJ, Put K, Stirrups K, National Institute for Health Research BioResource, Thys C, Van Geet C, Van Nieuwenhove E, Wouters C, Meyts I, Freson K, Liston A
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2017.11.061](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2017.11.061)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2018 Aug;142(2):630-646. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaci.2017.11.061. Epub 2018 Jan 31.

Abnormal differentiation of B cells and megakaryocytes in patients with Roifman 
syndrome.

Heremans J(1), Garcia-Perez JE(2), Turro E(3), Schlenner SM(2), Casteels I(4), 
Collin R(5), de Zegher F(6), Greene D(7), Humblet-Baron S(2), Lesage S(5), 
Matthys P(8), Penkett CJ(9), Put K(8), Stirrups K(9); National Institute for 
Health Research BioResource; Thys C(1), Van Geet C(10), Van Nieuwenhove E(11), 
Wouters C(12), Meyts I(12), Freson K(13), Liston A(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, Center for Molecular and Vascular 
Biology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)VIB Centre for Brain and Disease Research, Leuven, Belgium; Department of 
Microbiology and Immunology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(3)Department of Hematology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge Biomedical 
Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom; National Health Service Blood and Transplant, 
Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom; Medical Research Council 
Biostatistics Unit, Cambridge Institute of Public Health, Cambridge Biomedical 
Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom; National Institute for Health Research 
BioResource-Rare Diseases, Cambridge University Hospitals, Cambridge Biomedical 
Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(4)Division of Ophthalmology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(5)Department of Immunology-Oncology, Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada; Département de microbiologie, infectiologie et immunologie, 
Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(7)Department of Hematology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge Biomedical 
Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom; National Institute for Health Research 
BioResource-Rare Diseases, Cambridge University Hospitals, Cambridge Biomedical 
Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(8)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(9)Department of Hematology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge Biomedical 
Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom; National Health Service Blood and Transplant, 
Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom; National Institute for 
Health Research BioResource-Rare Diseases, Cambridge University Hospitals, 
Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
(10)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, Center for Molecular and Vascular 
Biology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; Department of Pediatrics, University 
Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(11)VIB Centre for Brain and Disease Research, Leuven, Belgium; Department of 
Microbiology and Immunology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; Department of 
Pediatrics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(12)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 
Department of Pediatrics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(13)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, Center for Molecular and Vascular 
Biology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Electronic address: 
kathleen.freson@med.kuleuven.be.
(14)VIB Centre for Brain and Disease Research, Leuven, Belgium; Department of 
Microbiology and Immunology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Electronic address: 
adrian.liston@vib.be.

BACKGROUND: Roifman syndrome is a rare inherited disorder characterized by 
spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia, growth retardation, cognitive delay, 
hypogammaglobulinemia, and, in some patients, thrombocytopenia. Compound 
heterozygous variants in the small nuclear RNA gene RNU4ATAC, which is necessary 
for U12-type intron splicing, were identified recently as driving Roifman 
syndrome.
OBJECTIVE: We studied 3 patients from 2 unrelated kindreds harboring compound 
heterozygous or homozygous stem II variants in RNU4ATAC to gain insight into the 
mechanisms behind this disorder.
METHODS: We systematically profiled the immunologic and hematologic compartments 
of the 3 patients with Roifman syndrome and performed RNA sequencing to unravel 
important splicing defects in both cell lineages.
RESULTS: The patients exhibited a dramatic reduction in B-cell numbers, with 
differentiation halted at the transitional B-cell stage. Despite abundant B-cell 
activating factor availability, development past this B-cell activating 
factor-dependent stage was crippled, with disturbed minor splicing of the 
critical mitogen-activated protein kinase 1 signaling component. In the 
hematologic compartment patients with Roifman syndrome demonstrated defects in 
megakaryocyte differentiation, with inadequate generation of proplatelets. 
Platelets from patients with Roifman syndrome were rounder, with increased 
tubulin and actin levels, and contained increased α-granule and dense granule 
markers. Significant minor intron retention in 354 megakaryocyte genes was 
observed, including DIAPH1 and HPS1, genes known to regulate platelet and dense 
granule formation, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Together, our results provide novel molecular and cellular data 
toward understanding the immunologic and hematologic features of Roifman 
syndrome.

Copyright © 2018 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2017.11.061
PMID: 29391254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]