---
reference_id: "PMID:33053334"
title: Interaction between KDELR2 and HSP47 as a Key Determinant in Osteogenesis Imperfecta Caused by Bi-allelic Variants in KDELR2.
authors:
- van Dijk FS
- Semler O
- Etich J
- Köhler A
- Jimenez-Estrada JA
- Bravenboer N
- Claeys L
- Riesebos E
- Gegic S
- Piersma SR
- Jimenez CR
- Waisfisz Q
- Flores CL
- Nevado J
- Harsevoort AJ
- Janus GJM
- Franken AAM
- van der Sar AM
- Meijers-Heijboer H
- Heath KE
- Lapunzina P
- Nikkels PGJ
- Santen GWE
- Nüchel J
- Plomann M
- Wagener R
- Rehberg M
- Hoyer-Kuhn H
- Eekhoff EMW
- Pals G
- Mörgelin M
- Newstead S
- Wilson BT
- Ruiz-Perez VL
- Maugeri A
- Netzer C
- Zaucke F
- Micha D
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.09.009
keywords:
- Adult
- Alleles
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Binding Sites
- "Bone and Bones/metabolism, pathology"
- Chickens
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Collagen Type I/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- "Endoplasmic Reticulum/metabolism, pathology"
- Female
- "Fibroblasts/metabolism, pathology"
- Gene Expression
- "Golgi Apparatus/metabolism, pathology"
- "HSP47 Heat-Shock Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Pedigree
- Primary Cell Culture
- Protein Binding
- Protein Interaction Domains and Motifs
- "Protein Structure, Secondary"
- Protein Transport
- Sequence Alignment
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- "Vesicular Transport Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interaction between KDELR2 and HSP47 as a Key Determinant in Osteogenesis Imperfecta Caused by Bi-allelic Variants in KDELR2.
**Authors:** van Dijk FS, Semler O, Etich J, Köhler A, Jimenez-Estrada JA, Bravenboer N, Claeys L, Riesebos E, Gegic S, Piersma SR, Jimenez CR, Waisfisz Q, Flores CL, Nevado J, Harsevoort AJ, Janus GJM, Franken AAM, van der Sar AM, Meijers-Heijboer H, Heath KE, Lapunzina P, Nikkels PGJ, Santen GWE, Nüchel J, Plomann M, Wagener R, Rehberg M, Hoyer-Kuhn H, Eekhoff EMW, Pals G, Mörgelin M, Newstead S, Wilson BT, Ruiz-Perez VL, Maugeri A, Netzer C, Zaucke F, Micha D
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.09.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.09.009)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2020 Nov 5;107(5):989-999. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.09.009.
Epub  2020 Oct 13.

Interaction between KDELR2 and HSP47 as a Key Determinant in Osteogenesis 
Imperfecta Caused by Bi-allelic Variants in KDELR2.

van Dijk FS(1), Semler O(2), Etich J(3), Köhler A(4), Jimenez-Estrada JA(5), 
Bravenboer N(6), Claeys L(7), Riesebos E(7), Gegic S(7), Piersma SR(8), Jimenez 
CR(8), Waisfisz Q(7), Flores CL(5), Nevado J(9), Harsevoort AJ(10), Janus 
GJM(10), Franken AAM(10), van der Sar AM(11), Meijers-Heijboer H(7), Heath 
KE(12), Lapunzina P(9), Nikkels PGJ(13), Santen GWE(14), Nüchel J(4), Plomann 
M(4), Wagener R(15), Rehberg M(16), Hoyer-Kuhn H(16), Eekhoff EMW(17), Pals 
G(7), Mörgelin M(18), Newstead S(19), Wilson BT(20), Ruiz-Perez VL(21), Maugeri 
A(7), Netzer C(22), Zaucke F(3), Micha D(23).

Author information:
(1)Expert Center for Adults with Osteogenesis Imperfecta, Isala Hospital, 10400 
Zwolle, the Netherlands; Department of Clinical Genetics, University Medical 
Center Groningen, 30001 Groningen, the Netherlands; North West Thames Regional 
Genetics Service, London North West Health Care University NHS Trust, Harrow HA1 
3UJ, UK; Department of Metabolism, Digestion and Reproduction, Section of 
Genetics and Genomics, Imperial College London, London, UK. Electronic address: 
fleur.dijk@nhs.net.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital 
Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne 50931, Germany; Center for Rare 
Diseases, University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne 50931, 
Germany.
(3)Dr. Rolf M. Schwiete Research Unit for Osteoarthritis, Orthopaedic University 
Hospital Friedrichsheim gGmbH, Frankfurt/Main 60528, Germany.
(4)Center for Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, 
University of Cologne, Cologne 50931, Germany.
(5)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas "Alberto Sols" (IIBM), CSIC-UAM, 
Madrid 28029, Spain.
(6)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Amsterdam Movement Sciences, Amsterdam UMC, 
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(7)Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam 1081BT, the Netherlands.
(8)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer center Amsterdam, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije 
Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(9)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), 
ISCIII, Madrid 28029, Spain; Institute of Medical & Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), 
Hospital Universitario La Paz-IdiPaz-Universidad Autonóma de Madrid, Madrid 
28046, Spain.
(10)Expert Center for Adults with Osteogenesis Imperfecta, Isala Hospital, 10400 
Zwolle, the Netherlands.
(11)Department of Medical Microbiology and Infection Control, Amsterdam UMC, 
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(12)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), 
ISCIII, Madrid 28029, Spain; Institute of Medical & Molecular Genetics (INGEMM), 
Hospital Universitario La Paz-IdiPaz-Universidad Autonóma de Madrid, Madrid 
28046, Spain; Skeletal Dysplasia Multidisciplinary Unit (UMDE), Hospital 
Universitario La Paz, Universidad Autonóma de Madrid, Madrid 28046, Spain.
(13)Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the 
Netherlands.
(14)Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, 
the Netherlands.
(15)Center for Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital 
Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne 50931, Germany; Center for Molecular 
Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne 50931, Germany.
(16)Department of Paediatrics, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital 
Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne 50931, Germany.
(17)Department of Internal Medicine Section Endocrinology, Amsterdam Movement 
Sciences, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands.
(18)Colzyx AB, Medicon Village, Lund 22381, Sweden.
(19)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford 
OX1 3QU, UK.
(20)North West Thames Regional Genetics Service, London North West Health Care 
University NHS Trust, Harrow HA1 3UJ, UK; Biosciences Institute, Newcastle 
University, International Centre for Life, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 3BZ, UK.
(21)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas "Alberto Sols" (IIBM), CSIC-UAM, 
Madrid 28029, Spain; Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red Enfermedades Raras 
(CIBERER), ISCIII, Madrid 28029, Spain; Institute of Medical & Molecular 
Genetics (INGEMM), Hospital Universitario La Paz-IdiPaz-Universidad Autonóma de 
Madrid, Madrid 28046, Spain.
(22)Center for Rare Diseases, University Hospital Cologne, University of 
Cologne, Cologne 50931, Germany; Institute of Human Genetics, Faculty of 
Medicine and University Hospital Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne 50931, 
Germany.
(23)Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam 1081BT, the Netherlands. Electronic address: 
d.micha@amsterdamumc.nl.

Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is characterized primarily by susceptibility to 
fractures with or without bone deformation. OI is genetically heterogeneous: 
over 20 genetic causes are recognized. We identified bi-allelic pathogenic 
KDELR2 variants as a cause of OI in four families. KDELR2 encodes KDEL 
endoplasmic reticulum protein retention receptor 2, which recycles ER-resident 
proteins with a KDEL-like peptide from the cis-Golgi to the ER through COPI 
retrograde transport. Analysis of patient primary fibroblasts showed 
intracellular decrease of HSP47 and FKBP65 along with reduced procollagen type I 
in culture media. Electron microscopy identified an abnormal quality of secreted 
collagen fibrils with increased amount of HSP47 bound to monomeric and 
multimeric collagen molecules. Mapping the identified KDELR2 variants onto the 
crystal structure of G. gallus KDELR2 indicated that these lead to an inactive 
receptor resulting in impaired KDELR2-mediated Golgi-ER transport. Therefore, in 
KDELR2-deficient individuals, OI most likely occurs because of the inability of 
HSP47 to bind KDELR2 and dissociate from collagen type I. Instead, HSP47 remains 
bound to collagen molecules extracellularly, disrupting fiber formation. This 
highlights the importance of intracellular recycling of ER-resident molecular 
chaperones for collagen type I and bone metabolism and a crucial role of HSP47 
in the KDELR2-associated pathogenic mechanism leading to OI.

Copyright © 2020. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.09.009
PMCID: PMC7675035
PMID: 33053334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.