---
reference_id: "PMID:26769764"
title: eGFR and Outcomes in Patients with Acute Decompensated Heart Failure with or without Elevated BUN.
authors:
- Kajimoto K
- Sato N
- Takano T
- ATTEND investigators
journal: Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.2215/CJN.08210815
content_type: abstract_only
---

# eGFR and Outcomes in Patients with Acute Decompensated Heart Failure with or without Elevated BUN.
**Authors:** Kajimoto K, Sato N, Takano T, ATTEND investigators
**Journal:** Clin J Am Soc Nephrol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.2215/CJN.08210815](https://doi.org/10.2215/CJN.08210815)

## Content

1. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2016 Mar 7;11(3):405-12. doi: 10.2215/CJN.08210815.
Epub  2016 Jan 14.

eGFR and Outcomes in Patients with Acute Decompensated Heart Failure with or 
without Elevated BUN.

Kajimoto K(1), Sato N(2), Takano T(3); ATTEND investigators.

Collaborators: Sato N, Asai K, Munakata R, Aokage T, Yoshida A, Minami Y, Yumino 
D, Mizuno M, Kawada E, Yoshida K, Ozaki Y, Kogure T, Haruki S, Mizuno M, 
Kajimoto K, Nakao K, Sawamura T, Nuki T, Ishiki R, Yokota S, Fujinaga H, 
Yamamoto T, Harada K, Saito A, Kageyama N, Okumura T, Murai K, Nozaki A, 
Kawanaka H, Tanabe J, Sato Y, Ishii K, Oiwa H, Matsumoto T, Yoshida D, Kato N, 
Suzuki H, Shimizu N, Keida T, Fujita M, Nakamura K, Chinen T, Meguro K, Kikuchi 
T, Nishikido T, Nakata M, Yamashita T, Nakata M, Hirono A, Mitsudo K, Kadota K, 
Makita N, Watanabe N, Kawabata M, Fujii K, Okuda S, Kobayashi S, Moriuchi I, 
Mizuno KO, Osato K, Murakami T, Shimada Y, Misawa K, Kokado H, Fujita T, Fukuoka 
Y, Takata Y, Miyagi M, Tanaka N, Yamashina A, Sudo S, Shimamura K, Nagashima M, 
Kaneda T, Ueda K, Kato H, Higashikata T, Fujimori K, Kobayashi H, Fujii S, Yagi 
M, Ozaki Y, Takaki J, Yamashita E, Toyama T, Hirata T, Kamisihima K, Oka T, 
Komatsu R, Itoh A, Naruko T, Abe Y, Nakagawa E, Furukawa A, Kinou N, Uematsu S, 
Tabuchi I, Imai T, Sakamoto T, Todaka K, Koide Y, Maemura K, Yoshioka K, 
Yoshihisa A, Sato T, Takeishi Y, Ebina T, Kimura K, Konishi M, Kato M, Kinugasa 
Y, Ishida K, Sugihara S, Yanagihara K, Takeuchi T, Okada M, Hasebe N, Sakai T, 
Asano T, Minoura Y, Toshida T, Sato T, Yokota Y, Kondo S, Sakata Y, Komuro I, 
Otsu K, Yamashita S, Asano Y, Yoshida A, Kajimoto K, Kashiwase K, Ueda Y, Kondo 
T, Kawaguchi K, Sawamura A, Saito T, Higa T, Noguchi H, Yanagita Y, Nakamura K, 
Komaki T, Muramatsu T, Koizumi T, Nakajima Y, Kikutani T, Ikeda Y, Tamaki T, 
Funada S, Ogawa H, Sakuragawa K, Kohsaka S, Ando S, Kadokami T, Ishida E, Ide K, 
Sotomi Y, Higuchi Y, Uehara M, Goto T, Ohte N, Miura M, Shiba N, Nochioka K, 
Shimokawa H, Ishihara S, Koga T, Fujishima S, Kaseda S, Haga Y, Kida K, 
Kamisihima K, Nakamura M, Sunagawa O, Miyara T, Touma T, Shinjo O, Nishimura Y, 
Kario K, Shimizu H, Uchida T, Amitani K, Sato N, Shimada K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiology, Sekikawa Hospital, Tokyo, Japan; kkajimoto@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Cardiology, and Intensive Care Unit, Nippon 
Medical School Musashi-Kosugi Hospital, Kanagawa, Japan; and.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: In patients with heart failure, the association of 
renal dysfunction and BUN levels with outcomes is unclear. The aim of our study 
was to investigate the association between the eGFR at discharge and outcomes in 
patients with heart failure with or without an elevated BUN level at discharge.
DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, & MEASUREMENTS: Of 4842 patients enrolled in the 
Acute Decompensated Heart Failure Syndromes Registry, 4449 patients discharged 
alive after hospitalization for acute decompensated heart failure were 
investigated to assess the association of eGFR in the context of serum BUN level 
at discharge with all-cause mortality. The enrolled patients were divided into 
four groups on the basis of the discharge levels of eGFR (<45 or ≥45 ml/min per 
1.73 m(2)) and BUN (≥25 or <25 mg/dl). The median follow-up period after 
discharge was 517 (381-776) days.
RESULTS: The all-cause mortality rate after discharge was 19.1%. After 
adjustment for multiple comorbidities, an eGFR<45 ml/min per 1.73 m(2) was 
associated with a significantly higher risk of all-cause mortality in patients 
with a BUN≥25 mg/dl (hazard ratio, 1.58; 95% confidence interval, 1.33 to 1.88; 
P<0.001) but not in patients with a BUN<25 mg/dl (hazard ratio, 0.97; 95% 
confidence interval, 0.76 to 1.26; P=0.84) relative to those with an eGFR≥45 
ml/min per 1.73 m(2) and a BUN<25 mg/dl. Among patients with an eGFR≥45 ml/min 
per 1.73 m(2), a BUN≥25 mg/dl was associated with a significantly higher risk of 
all-cause mortality than a BUN<25 mg/dl (hazard ratio, 1.34; 95% confidence 
interval, 1.04 to 1.73; P=0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: We showed that elevation of BUN at discharge significantly modified 
the relation between eGFR at discharge and the risk of all-cause mortality after 
discharge, suggesting that the association between eGFR and outcomes may be 
largely dependent on concomitant elevation of BUN.

Copyright © 2016 by the American Society of Nephrology.

DOI: 10.2215/CJN.08210815
PMCID: PMC4791821
PMID: 26769764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]