---
reference_id: "PMID:25344219"
title: "Holt Oram syndrome: a registry-based study in Europe."
authors:
- Barisic I
- Boban L
- Greenlees R
- Garne E
- Wellesley D
- Calzolari E
- Addor MC
- Arriola L
- Bergman JE
- Braz P
- Budd JL
- Gatt M
- Haeusler M
- Khoshnood B
- Klungsoyr K
- McDonnell B
- Nelen V
- Pierini A
- Queisser-Wahrendorf A
- Rankin J
- Rissmann A
- Rounding C
- Tucker D
- Verellen-Dumoulin C
- Dolk H
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-014-0156-y
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Europe/epidemiology
- Female
- "Heart Defects, Congenital/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Heart Septal Defects, Atrial/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Lower Extremity Deformities, Congenital/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Population Surveillance/methods
- Pregnancy
- Registries
- "Upper Extremity Deformities, Congenital/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Holt Oram syndrome: a registry-based study in Europe.
**Authors:** Barisic I, Boban L, Greenlees R, Garne E, Wellesley D, Calzolari E, Addor MC, Arriola L, Bergman JE, Braz P, Budd JL, Gatt M, Haeusler M, Khoshnood B, Klungsoyr K, McDonnell B, Nelen V, Pierini A, Queisser-Wahrendorf A, Rankin J, Rissmann A, Rounding C, Tucker D, Verellen-Dumoulin C, Dolk H
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-014-0156-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-014-0156-y)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2014 Oct 25;9:156. doi: 10.1186/s13023-014-0156-y.

Holt Oram syndrome: a registry-based study in Europe.

Barisic I, Boban L, Greenlees R, Garne E, Wellesley D, Calzolari E, Addor MC, 
Arriola L, Bergman JE, Braz P, Budd JL, Gatt M, Haeusler M, Khoshnood B, 
Klungsoyr K, McDonnell B, Nelen V, Pierini A, Queisser-Wahrendorf A, Rankin J, 
Rissmann A, Rounding C, Tucker D, Verellen-Dumoulin C, Dolk H.

BACKGROUND: Holt-Oram syndrome (HOS) is an autosomal dominant disorder 
characterised by upper limb anomalies and congenital heart defects. We present 
epidemiological and clinical aspects of HOS patients using data from EUROCAT 
(European Surveillance of Congenital Anomalies) registries.
METHODS: The study was based on data collected during 1990-2011 by 34 
registries. The registries are population-based and use multiple sources of 
information to collect data on all types of birth using standardized 
definitions, methodology and coding. Diagnostic criteria for inclusion in the 
study were the presence of radial ray abnormalities and congenital heart disease 
(CHD), or the presence of either radial ray anomaly or CHD, with family history 
of HOS.
RESULTS: A total of 73 cases of HOS were identified, including 11 (15.1%) TOPFA 
and 62 (84.9%) LB. Out of 73 HOS cases, 30.8% (20/65) were suspected prenatally, 
55.4% (36/65) at birth, 10.7% (7/65) in the first week of life, and 3.1% (2/65) 
in the first year of life. The prenatal detection rate was 39.2% (20/51), with 
no significant change over the study period. In 55% (11/20) of prenatally 
detected cases, parents decided to terminate pregnancy. Thumb anomalies were 
reported in all cases. Agenesis/hypoplasia of radius was present in 49.2% 
(30/61), ulnar aplasia/hypoplasia in 24.6% (15/61) and humerus 
hypoplasia/phocomelia in 42.6% (26/61) of patients. Congenital heart defects 
(CHD) were recorded in 78.7% (48/61) of patients. Isolated septal defects were 
present in 54.2 (26/48), while 25% (12/48) of patients had complex/severe CHD. 
The mean prevalence of HOS diagnosed prenatally or in the early years of life in 
European registries was 0.7 per 100,000 births or 1:135,615 births.
CONCLUSIONS: HOS is a rare genetic condition showing regional variation in its 
prevalence. It is often missed prenatally, in spite of the existence of major 
structural anomalies. When discovered, parents in 45% (9/20) of cases opt for 
the continuation of pregnancy. Although a quarter of patients have severe CHD, 
the overall first week survival is very good, which is important information for 
counselling purposes.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-014-0156-y
PMCID: PMC4245183
PMID: 25344219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]