---
reference_id: PMID:38756937
title: "Diagnosing and Treating Systemic Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis and Adult-Onset Still's Disease as Part of the Still's Disease Continuum."
authors:
- Kontzias A
- Petryna O
- Nakasato P
- Efthimiou P
journal: Mediterr J Rheumatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.31138/mjr.290323.dat
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnosing and Treating Systemic Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis and Adult-Onset Still's Disease as Part of the Still's Disease Continuum.
**Authors:** Kontzias A, Petryna O, Nakasato P, Efthimiou P
**Journal:** Mediterr J Rheumatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.31138/mjr.290323.dat](https://doi.org/10.31138/mjr.290323.dat)

## Content

1. Mediterr J Rheumatol. 2024 Mar 30;35(Suppl 1):45-57. doi: 
10.31138/mjr.290323.dat. eCollection 2024 Mar.

Diagnosing and Treating Systemic Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis and Adult-Onset 
Still's Disease as Part of the Still's Disease Continuum.

Kontzias A(1), Petryna O(2), Nakasato P(3), Efthimiou P(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and 
Immunology, Stony Brook University Hospital, Stony Brook, NY, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, White Plains Hospital, White Plains, NY, USA.
(3)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA.

AIM: We have summarised the existing evidence supporting the concept that 
systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (sJIA) and adult-onset Still's disease 
(AOSD) are part of the same Still's disease spectrum.
METHODS: A PubMed/Embase database search was conducted using specific search 
strings and free text words to screen for relevant articles. The search was 
limited to studies in humans, published up to June 2023, in English-language.
SUMMARY: sJIA and AOSD are rare autoinflammatory disorders that have similar 
pathophysiological and clinical features. The clinical presentations of sJIA and 
AOSD are highly variable, with differential diagnoses that include a broad range 
of malignancies, infectious diseases, and autoimmune disorders, which contribute 
to delays in diagnosis. Several sets of classification exist to help diagnose 
patients in clinical practice; the International League of Associations for 
Rheumatology criteria for sJIA and the Yamaguchi and Fautrel criteria for AOSD 
are the most-used criteria. The therapeutic strategy for Still's disease aims to 
relieve signs and symptoms, prevent irreversible joint damage and potentially 
life-threatening complications, and avoid deleterious side effects of treatment. 
Recently, targeted therapies such as interleukin (IL)-1 and IL-6 inhibitors have 
become available for the treatment of sJIA and AOSD. While these biologics were 
originally largely reserved for patients in whom non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs, corticosteroids and conventional synthetic disease-modifying 
anti-rheumatic drugs had failed, they are increasingly used earlier in the 
treatment paradigm. Among IL-1 inhibitors, canakinumab is the only biologic 
approved in the US for the treatment of both sJIA and AOSD.

© 2024 The Mediterranean Journal of Rheumatology (MJR).

DOI: 10.31138/mjr.290323.dat
PMCID: PMC11094444
PMID: 38756937

Conflict of interest statement: Apostolos Kontzias: consultant for Kiniksa, Sobi 
and Novartis; Olga Petryna: consultant for Novartis and Pfizer; Priscila 
Nakasato: None; Petros Efthimiou: Consultant for Novartis, Kiniksa, Sanofi, and 
Pfizer.