---
reference_id: "PMID:26898552"
title: The Utility of Cerebral Blood Flow as a Biomarker of Preclinical Alzheimer's Disease.
authors:
- Hays CC
- Zlatar ZZ
- Wierenga CE
journal: Cell Mol Neurobiol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1007/s10571-015-0261-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Utility of Cerebral Blood Flow as a Biomarker of Preclinical Alzheimer's Disease.
**Authors:** Hays CC, Zlatar ZZ, Wierenga CE
**Journal:** Cell Mol Neurobiol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10571-015-0261-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10571-015-0261-z)

## Content

1. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2016 Mar;36(2):167-79. doi: 10.1007/s10571-015-0261-z.
Epub  2016 Feb 22.

The Utility of Cerebral Blood Flow as a Biomarker of Preclinical Alzheimer's 
Disease.

Hays CC(1)(2), Zlatar ZZ(1)(3), Wierenga CE(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)VA San Diego Healthcare System, 3350 La Jolla Village Dr., MC 151B, San 
Diego, CA, 92161, USA.
(2)SDSU/UC San Diego Joint Doctoral Program in Clinical Psychology, 6363 
Alvarado Court, Suite 103, San Diego, CA, 92120, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman 
Dr., La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA.
(4)VA San Diego Healthcare System, 3350 La Jolla Village Dr., MC 151B, San 
Diego, CA, 92161, USA. cwierenga@ucsd.edu.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman 
Dr., La Jolla, CA, 92093, USA. cwierenga@ucsd.edu.

There is accumulating evidence suggesting that changes in brain perfusion are 
present long before the clinical symptoms of Alzheimer's disease (AD), perhaps 
even before amyloid-β accumulation or brain atrophy. This evidence, consistent 
with the vascular hypothesis of AD, implicates cerebral blood flow (CBF) in the 
pathogenesis of AD and suggests its utility as a biomarker of preclinical AD. 
The extended preclinical phase of AD holds particular significance for disease 
modification, as treatment would likely be most effective in this early 
asymptomatic stage of disease. This highlights the importance of identifying 
reliable and accurate biomarkers of AD that can differentiate normal aging from 
preclinical AD prior to clinical symptom manifestation. Cerebral perfusion, as 
measured by arterial spin labeling magnetic resonance imaging (ASL-MRI), has 
been shown to distinguish between normal controls and adults with AD. In 
addition to demonstrating diagnostic utility, CBF has shown usefulness as a tool 
for identifying those who are at risk for AD and for predicting subtle cognitive 
decline and conversion to mild cognitive impairment and AD. Taken together, this 
evidence not only implicates CBF as a useful biomarker for tracking disease 
severity and progression, but also suggests that ASL-measured CBF may be useful 
for identifying candidates for future AD treatment trials, especially in the 
preclinical, asymptomatic phases of the disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s10571-015-0261-z
PMCID: PMC5278904
PMID: 26898552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]