---
reference_id: "PMID:7756792"
title: "Parvovirus: the expanding spectrum of disease."
authors:
- Heegaard ED
- Hornsleth A
journal: Acta Paediatr
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1111/j.1651-2227.1995.tb13591.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Parvovirus: the expanding spectrum of disease.
**Authors:** Heegaard ED, Hornsleth A
**Journal:** Acta Paediatr (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1651-2227.1995.tb13591.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1651-2227.1995.tb13591.x)

## Content

1. Acta Paediatr. 1995 Feb;84(2):109-17. doi: 10.1111/j.1651-2227.1995.tb13591.x.

Parvovirus: the expanding spectrum of disease.

Heegaard ED(1), Hornsleth A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

Treatment of parvovirus infections among immunocompromised hosts using 
immunoglobulin has provided the clinician with a useful therapeutic tool but has 
also highlighted the problems concerning chronic disease states. The discovery 
of the human parvovirus B19 in 1975 and subsequent studies of its effects in 
humans have identified this virus as the causative agent of a broad spectrum of 
diseases. Recent improvements regarding the development of sensitive PCR 
techniques and methods for cultivation have provided new insight into its 
pathogenic role, its virology and immunology, and the varied clinical 
manifestations. The current state of knowledge concerning parvovirus enabled us 
to divide the long list of diseases caused by this virus into three main 
categories: (1) disease found among normal hosts (asymptomatic disease, erythema 
infectiosum, arthropathy, hydrops fetalis), (2) hematologic diseases (aplastic 
crisis, chronic anemia, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, transient 
erythroblastopenia of childhood, Diamond-Blackfan anemia) and, finally, (3) a 
heterogeneous group of diseases, in which the etiologic role of parvovirus is 
less clear and sometimes putative (neurologic disease, rheumatologic disease, 
vasculitic and myocarditic syndromes). In particular, arthropathy, hydrops 
fetalis and the hematologic disorders may be of pediatric concern. Consequently, 
it is of paramount importance that in all of these cases the clinician includes 
parvovirus as a differential diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1651-2227.1995.tb13591.x
PMID: 7756792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]