---
reference_id: "PMID:24256811"
title: Mutations in the lipoyltransferase LIPT1 gene cause a fatal disease associated with a specific lipoylation defect of the 2-ketoacid dehydrogenase complexes.
authors:
- Tort F
- Ferrer-Cortès X
- Thió M
- Navarro-Sastre A
- Matalonga L
- Quintana E
- Bujan N
- Arias A
- García-Villoria J
- Acquaviva C
- Vianey-Saban C
- Artuch R
- García-Cazorla À
- Briones P
- Ribes A
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt585
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the lipoyltransferase LIPT1 gene cause a fatal disease associated with a specific lipoylation defect of the 2-ketoacid dehydrogenase complexes.
**Authors:** Tort F, Ferrer-Cortès X, Thió M, Navarro-Sastre A, Matalonga L, Quintana E, Bujan N, Arias A, García-Villoria J, Acquaviva C, Vianey-Saban C, Artuch R, García-Cazorla À, Briones P, Ribes A
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddt585](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddt585)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Apr 1;23(7):1907-15. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt585. Epub 2013
Nov  20.

Mutations in the lipoyltransferase LIPT1 gene cause a fatal disease associated 
with a specific lipoylation defect of the 2-ketoacid dehydrogenase complexes.

Tort F(1), Ferrer-Cortès X, Thió M, Navarro-Sastre A, Matalonga L, Quintana E, 
Bujan N, Arias A, García-Villoria J, Acquaviva C, Vianey-Saban C, Artuch R, 
García-Cazorla À, Briones P, Ribes A.

Author information:
(1)Secció d'Errors Congènits del Metabolisme, Servei de Bioquímica i Genètica 
Molecular, Hospital Clinic, IDIBAPS, C/Mejía Lequerica s/n, Barcelona 08028, 
Spain.

Cofactor disorders of mitochondrial energy metabolism are a heterogeneous group 
of diseases with a wide variety of clinical symptoms, particular metabolic 
profiles and variable enzymatic defects. Mutations in NFU1, BOLA3, LIAS and 
IBA57 have been identified in patients with deficient lipoic acid-dependent 
enzymatic activities and defects in the assembly and activity of the 
mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes. Here, we report a patient with an 
early onset fatal lactic acidosis presenting a biochemical phenotype compatible 
with a combined defect of pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDHC) and 2-ketoglutarate 
dehydrogenase (2-KGDH) activities, which suggested a deficiency in lipoic acid 
metabolism. Immunostaining analysis showed that lipoylated E2-PDH and E2-KGDH 
were extremely reduced in this patient. However, the absence of glycine 
elevation, the normal activity of the glycine cleavage system and the normal 
lipoylation of the H protein suggested a defect of lipoic acid transfer to 
particular proteins rather than a general impairment of lipoic acid biosynthesis 
as the potential cause of the disease. By analogy with yeast metabolism, we 
postulated LIPT1 as the altered candidate gene causing the disease. Sequence 
analysis of the human LIPT1 identified two heterozygous missense mutations 
(c.212C>T and c.292C>G), segregating in different alleles. Functional 
complementation experiments in patient's fibroblasts demonstrated that these 
mutations are disease-causing and that LIPT1 protein is required for lipoylation 
and activation of 2-ketoacid dehydrogenases in humans. These findings expand the 
spectrum of genetic defects associated with lipoic acid metabolism and provide 
the first evidence of a lipoic acid transfer defect in humans.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddt585
PMID: 24256811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]