---
reference_id: "PMID:24220273"
title: The Ten-Eleven Translocation-2 (TET2) gene in hematopoiesis and hematopoietic diseases.
authors:
- Solary E
- Bernard OA
- Tefferi A
- Fuks F
- Vainchenker W
journal: Leukemia
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.337
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Ten-Eleven Translocation-2 (TET2) gene in hematopoiesis and hematopoietic diseases.
**Authors:** Solary E, Bernard OA, Tefferi A, Fuks F, Vainchenker W
**Journal:** Leukemia (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/leu.2013.337](https://doi.org/10.1038/leu.2013.337)

## Content

1. Leukemia. 2014 Mar;28(3):485-96. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.337. Epub 2013 Nov 13.

The Ten-Eleven Translocation-2 (TET2) gene in hematopoiesis and hematopoietic 
diseases.

Solary E(1), Bernard OA(2), Tefferi A(3), Fuks F(4), Vainchenker W(1).

Author information:
(1)1] Hematology Department, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France [2] Inserm 
UMR1009, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif cedex, France [3] Faculty of Medicine, 
University Paris-Sud, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(2)1] Hematology Department, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France [2] Faculty of 
Medicine, University Paris-Sud, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France [3] Inserm UMR985, 
Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.
(3)Division of Hematology, Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
USA.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, Laboratory of Cancer Epigenetics, Université Libre de 
Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.

Ten-Eleven Translocation-2 (TET2) inactivation through loss-of-function 
mutation, deletion and IDH1/2 (Isocitrate Dehydrogenase 1 and 2) gene mutation 
is a common event in myeloid and lymphoid malignancies. TET2 gene mutations 
similar to those observed in myeloid and lymphoid malignancies also accumulate 
with age in otherwise healthy subjects with clonal hematopoiesis. TET2 is one of 
the three proteins of the TET (Ten-Eleven Translocation) family, which are 
evolutionarily conserved dioxygenases that catalyze the conversion of 
5-methyl-cytosine (5-mC) to 5-hydroxymethyl-cytosine (5-hmC) and promote DNA 
demethylation. TET dioxygenases require 2-oxoglutarate, oxygen and Fe(II) for 
their activity, which is enhanced in the presence of ascorbic acid. TET2 is the 
most expressed TET gene in the hematopoietic tissue, especially in hematopoietic 
stem cells. In addition to their hydroxylase activity, TET proteins recruit the 
O-linked β-D-N-acetylglucosamine (O-GlcNAc) transferase (OGT) enzyme to 
chromatin, which promotes post-transcriptional modifications of histones and 
facilitates gene expression. The TET2 level is regulated by interaction with 
IDAX, originating from TET2 gene fission during evolution, and by the microRNA 
miR-22. TET2 has pleiotropic roles during hematopoiesis, including stem-cell 
self-renewal, lineage commitment and terminal differentiation of monocytes. 
Analysis of Tet2 knockout mice, which are viable and fertile, demonstrated that 
Tet2 functions as a tumor suppressor whose haploinsufficiency initiates myeloid 
and lymphoid transformations. This review summarizes the recently identified 
TET2 physiological and pathological functions and discusses how this knowledge 
influences our therapeutic approaches in hematological malignancies and possibly 
other tumor types.

DOI: 10.1038/leu.2013.337
PMID: 24220273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]