---
reference_id: "PMID:16301867"
title: The molecular basis of UDP-galactose-4-epimerase (GALE) deficiency galactosemia in Korean patients.
authors:
- Park HD
- Park KU
- Kim JQ
- Shin CH
- Yang SW
- Lee DH
- Song YH
- Song J
journal: Genet Med
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1097/01.gim.0000194023.27802.2d
keywords:
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- DNA Primers
- DNA Restriction Enzymes
- Galactosemias/genetics
- "Genes, Recessive/genetics"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Korea
- Mutation/genetics
- Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases/blood
- "Polymorphism, Restriction Fragment Length"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- UDPglucose 4-Epimerase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The molecular basis of UDP-galactose-4-epimerase (GALE) deficiency galactosemia in Korean patients.
**Authors:** Park HD, Park KU, Kim JQ, Shin CH, Yang SW, Lee DH, Song YH, Song J
**Journal:** Genet Med (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.gim.0000194023.27802.2d](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.gim.0000194023.27802.2d)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2005 Nov-Dec;7(9):646-9. doi: 10.1097/01.gim.0000194023.27802.2d.

The molecular basis of UDP-galactose-4-epimerase (GALE) deficiency galactosemia 
in Korean patients.

Park HD(1), Park KU, Kim JQ, Shin CH, Yang SW, Lee DH, Song YH, Song J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Seoul National University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

PURPOSE: UDP-galactose-4-epimerase (GALE) deficiency galactosemia is an 
autosomal recessive disorder and the prevalence of the disease varies among 
ethnic groups. We aimed to investigate molecular characteristics of the Korean 
patients with attenuated GALE activity and elevated galactose-1-phosphate levels 
in blood.
METHODS: In order to characterize the molecular defects underlying GALE 
deficiency, the GALE gene of 7 patients showing severe activity decreases was 
sequenced. PCR-RFLP was performed to confirm the presence of the mutations 
identified by sequencing.
RESULTS: Nine mutations were identified: 8 missense mutations (p.A25V, p.R40C, 
p.D69E, p.E165K, p.R169W, p.R239W, p.G302D, and p.R335H) and one nonsense 
mutation (p.W336X). Except for p.R335H, all of these mutations are novel. Six 
patients were compound heterozygotes (p.D69E/p.G302D, p.R40C/p.R169W, 
p.D69E/p.E165K, p.R239W/p.R335H, p.A25V/p.R169W, and p.G302D/p.R335H) and the 
remaining patient had only one mutation (p.W336X/not detected). Thirty patients 
with moderately reduced GALE activity were also tested by PCR-RFLP for the 
presence of the above mutation, and mutations were detected in 17 of these 30 
patients. The frequency of p.G302D (9/30), p.R239W (6/30) and p.R169W (5/30) in 
our Korean patients with GALE deficiency galactosemia was relatively high.
CONCLUSIONS: We detected 9 mutations of the GALE gene in Korean galactosemia 
patients, and confirmed allelic heterogeneity in this disease.

DOI: 10.1097/01.gim.0000194023.27802.2d
PMID: 16301867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]