---
reference_id: "PMID:25602794"
title: "Epithelioid malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor: clinicopathologic analysis of 63 cases."
authors:
- Jo VY
- Fletcher CD
journal: Am J Surg Pathol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000379
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/analysis"
- Child
- Epithelioid Cells/pathology
- Female
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Neurilemmoma/pathology
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epithelioid malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor: clinicopathologic analysis of 63 cases.
**Authors:** Jo VY, Fletcher CD
**Journal:** Am J Surg Pathol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PAS.0000000000000379](https://doi.org/10.1097/PAS.0000000000000379)

## Content

1. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 May;39(5):673-82. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000379.

Epithelioid malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor: clinicopathologic analysis
of 63 cases.

Jo VY(1), Fletcher CD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA.

Epithelioid malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (EMPNST) is rare and differs
from conventional malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor by showing diffuse
S-100 protein positivity, infrequent association with NF1, and occasional origin
in a schwannoma. Loss of INI1 expression is seen in a subset of tumors. The
purpose of this study was to further define clinicopathologic features and
outcome data in a large series of EMPNST. Sixty-three cases were identified in
consultation files. The patient group consisted of 33 men and 30 women; the
median age was 44 years (range, 6 to 80 y). One patient was reported to have
NF1. One patient had 3 seemingly separate primary EMPNSTs during his 12-year
clinical course. The median tumor size was 3.0 cm (range, 0.4 to 20 cm), and
tumors were located most frequently on the lower extremity (30/63; 48%) and
trunk (16/63; 25%). Most tumors were superficial (5 dermal, 38 subcutaneous); 15
were subfascial, and 5 were visceral. Microscopically, tumors comprised a
relatively uniform but clearly atypical population of epithelioid cells. The
majority of tumors demonstrated a multilobular growth pattern, with lobules and
nests surrounded by myxoid and/or fibrous stroma. Tumor cells were round,
polygonal, or ovoid and had round vesicular nuclei and abundant amphophilic to
palely eosinophilic cytoplasm. Focal spindled morphology was seen in one third
of cases. Most tumors (55/63; 87%) showed marked cytologic atypia with irregular
vesicular nuclei and prominent nucleoli. Mitotic rate ranged from 1 to 46/10 HPF
(median, 5/10 HPF); atypical mitotic figures were seen in 7 cases. Necrosis was
present in 17 tumors. Twelve tumors were associated with a nerve. Nine tumors
arose in a schwannoma (6 conventional type, 3 epithelioid) and 1 in a
neurofibroma (in the NF1 patient). All tumors expressed S-100 protein, and the
majority showed strong and diffuse staining (87%; 55/63). There was no
expression of the melanocytic markers Mart-1/Melan-A (0/58), HMB-45 (0/57), and
MiTF (0/9). Other immunohistochemical results included variable staining for
GFAP (24/40; 60%) and EMA (4/29; 14%), whereas keratin was consistently negative
(0/33). INI1 expression was lost in 67% of tumors examined (35/52). Most tumors
were treated by surgical resection; 13 also received chemotherapy and/or
radiation. Follow-up data were available for 31 cases and ranged in duration
from 3 months to 20 years (median, 36 mo). Twenty-two patients have no evidence
of disease at the time of follow-up. Nine patients developed local recurrence, 3
of whom were reported to be disease-free at the time of latest follow-up (44 mo,
19 y, and 20 y). Five patients developed distant metastases, and 4 patients died
of disease (including 2 with unresectable recurrent tumors). Recurrence,
metastasis, and disease-related death were observed independent of anatomic site
or depth. In summary, EMPNST is a morphologically distinct variant that most
commonly affects adults on the lower extremity or trunk, although a wide age
range and site distribution are seen. Most tumors arise in superficial soft
tissue, are diffusely S-100 positive, and two thirds show INI1 loss. On the
basis of available follow-up information there is a comparatively low risk for
recurrence and metastasis, irrespective of tumor depth.

DOI: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000379
PMID: 25602794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
