---
reference_id: "PMID:24677735"
title: "Unravelling offending in schizophrenia: factors characterising subgroups of offenders."
authors:
- van Dongen J
- Buck N
- Van Marle H
journal: Crim Behav Ment Health
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/cbm.1910
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Unravelling offending in schizophrenia: factors characterising subgroups of offenders.
**Authors:** van Dongen J, Buck N, Van Marle H
**Journal:** Crim Behav Ment Health (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cbm.1910](https://doi.org/10.1002/cbm.1910)

## Content

1. Crim Behav Ment Health. 2015 Apr;25(2):88-98. doi: 10.1002/cbm.1910. Epub 2014
 Mar 27.

Unravelling offending in schizophrenia: factors characterising subgroups of 
offenders.

van Dongen J(1), Buck N, Van Marle H.

Author information:
(1)Erasmus University Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have led to suggestions that there are at least 
three sub-types of offenders with schizophrenia, but these have not previously 
been examined simultaneously in one sample.
AIMS: The aims of this study were to investigate categorisation of offenders 
with psychosis as early or late starters or late first offenders, and test the 
hypotheses that, compared with non-offenders with psychosis, early starters 
would be characterised by low educational or occupational achievement, negative 
childhood experiences and early substance use, whereas positive psychotic 
symptoms would characterise late starters or late first offenders.
METHODS: A retrospective file study was conducted, yielding 97 early starters, 
100 late starters and 26 late first offenders identified from a specialist 
inpatient forensic mental health assessment service and 129 non-offenders 
identified from general psychiatric services in the same geographic region, all 
with schizophreniform psychoses.
RESULTS: We found little difference between early and later starters in terms of 
measured antecedents, but substance misuse was up to 20 times less likely among 
late first offenders. Persecutory and/or grandiose delusions were more strongly 
associated with each offender group compared with non-offenders, most so with 
late first offenders.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings underscore the importance of treating delusions--for 
safety as well as health. Childhood antecedents may be less important indicators 
of offender sub-types among people with psychosis than previously thought. When 
patients present with grandiose or persecutory delusions over the age of 
35 years without co-morbid substance misuse disorders, but with a history of 
childhood neglect and low educational achievement, particular care should be 
taken to assess risk of violence.

Copyright © 2014 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/cbm.1910
PMID: 24677735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]