---
reference_id: "PMID:34325210"
title: Relationship between clinical features and gene mutations in non-small cell lung cancer with osteoblastic bone metastasis.
authors:
- Takahara Y
- Nakase K
- Nojiri M
- Kato R
- Shinomiya S
- Oikawa T
- Mizuno S
journal: Cancer Treat Res Commun
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ctarc.2021.100440
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Relationship between clinical features and gene mutations in non-small cell lung cancer with osteoblastic bone metastasis.
**Authors:** Takahara Y, Nakase K, Nojiri M, Kato R, Shinomiya S, Oikawa T, Mizuno S
**Journal:** Cancer Treat Res Commun (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ctarc.2021.100440](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ctarc.2021.100440)

## Content

1. Cancer Treat Res Commun. 2021;28:100440. doi: 10.1016/j.ctarc.2021.100440.
Epub  2021 Jul 24.

Relationship between clinical features and gene mutations in non-small cell lung 
cancer with osteoblastic bone metastasis.

Takahara Y(1), Nakase K(2), Nojiri M(2), Kato R(2), Shinomiya S(2), Oikawa T(2), 
Mizuno S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kanazawa Medical University, 1-1 Daigaku, 
Uchinada-machi, Kahoku-gun, Ishikawa 920-0293, Japan. Electronic address: 
takahara@kanazawa-med.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Kanazawa Medical University, 1-1 Daigaku, 
Uchinada-machi, Kahoku-gun, Ishikawa 920-0293, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Lung cancer patients presenting with osteoblastic bone metastases at 
the first visit is rare. We investigated the clinical characteristics and gene 
mutation rate of non-small cell lung cancer patients with osteoblastic bone 
metastases at the time of the initial diagnosis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We retrospectively screened newly diagnosed non-small 
cell lung cancer patients with osteoblastic bone metastases who presented from 
June 2015 to March 2021, and analyzed their clinical characteristics and status 
of EGFR gene mutations, EML4-ALK translocation and ROS1 rearrangements. For 
comparison, we collected data from patients with non-small cell lung cancer who 
had osteolytic bone metastases at their first visit between June 2015 and March 
2021.
RESULTS: Fifty patients had bone metastases at the initial diagnosis. Among 
them, eight patients (8/50 = 16%) had osteoblastic bone metastases, and the lung 
tumors in all of them were histopathologically adenocarcinomas. Among the eight 
cases, two were EGFR mutation-positive, none were EML4-ALK 
translocation-positive, two were ROS1 rearrangement-positive, and the remaining 
four cases were negative for all three gene mutations/rearrangements. Compared 
with the osteolytic bone metastasis group, the percentage of non-smokers was 
higher (p = 0.020) and the ROS1 rearrangement positivity rate was higher 
(p = 0.05) in the osteoblastic bone metastasis group.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that osteoblastic bone metastases in NSCLC are 
suggestive of adenocarcinoma, and that a high proportion of these patients might 
be positive for ROS1 rearrangements, and hence, indicated for more aggressive 
diagnostic biopsies.

Copyright © 2021 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ctarc.2021.100440
PMID: 34325210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]