---
reference_id: "PMID:23340080"
title: "Childhood disintegrative disorder: distinction from autistic disorder and predictors of outcome."
authors:
- Rosman NP
- Bergia BM
journal: J Child Neurol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1177/0883073812472391
keywords:
- Age of Onset
- Autistic Disorder/diagnosis
- Child
- "Child Development Disorders, Pervasive/diagnosis, epidemiology"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Longitudinal Studies
- Male
- Psychiatric Status Rating Scales
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Childhood disintegrative disorder: distinction from autistic disorder and predictors of outcome.
**Authors:** Rosman NP, Bergia BM
**Journal:** J Child Neurol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0883073812472391](https://doi.org/10.1177/0883073812472391)

## Content

1. J Child Neurol. 2013 Dec;28(12):1587-98. doi: 10.1177/0883073812472391. Epub 
2013 Jan 22.

Childhood disintegrative disorder: distinction from autistic disorder and 
predictors of outcome.

Rosman NP(1), Bergia BM.

Author information:
(1)1Departments of Pediatrics and Neurology, Division of Pediatric Neurology, 
Boston University School of Medicine, Boston Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA.

Childhood disintegrative disorder, a rare, relentlessly progressive neurologic 
disorder, first described by Heller in 1908, remains a condition of great 
interest. It has long been debated whether it is a discrete disorder or simply a 
late-onset variant of childhood autism. We have studied 6 cases of childhood 
disintegrative disorder, collected over 8 years, and followed for 2.5 to 22 
years (mean 8.6 years). Childhood disintegrative disorder begins later in life 
than autism, and following a period of entirely normal development; the 
regression is more global and more severe than in autism; seizures are more 
frequent than in autism, yet demonstrable organicity in childhood disintegrative 
disorder is decidedly rare. Lastly, the prognosis is usually much worse than in 
autism, but in those cases with neither seizures nor epileptiform activity on 
electroencephalography (EEG), the outcome may be more favorable. Childhood 
disintegrative disorder should be viewed as a condition distinct from childhood 
autism.

DOI: 10.1177/0883073812472391
PMID: 23340080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]