---
reference_id: "PMID:36546624"
title: Dupilumab in Adults and Adolescents with Eosinophilic Esophagitis.
authors:
- Dellon ES
- Rothenberg ME
- Collins MH
- Hirano I
- Chehade M
- Bredenoord AJ
- Lucendo AJ
- Spergel JM
- Aceves S
- Sun X
- Kosloski MP
- Kamal MA
- Hamilton JD
- Beazley B
- McCann E
- Patel K
- Mannent LP
- Laws E
- Akinlade B
- Amin N
- Lim WK
- Wipperman MF
- Ruddy M
- Patel N
- Weinreich DR
- Yancopoulos GD
- Shumel B
- Maloney J
- Giannelou A
- Shabbir A
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2205982
keywords:
- Adult
- Young Adult
- "Eosinophilic Esophagitis/complications, drug therapy, pathology"
- Adolescent
- Gastritis
- Child
- "Injections, Subcutaneous"
- Humans
- "Deglutition Disorders/drug therapy, etiology, pathology"
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Enteritis
- Treatment Outcome
- Eosinophilia
- Double-Blind Method
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dupilumab in Adults and Adolescents with Eosinophilic Esophagitis.
**Authors:** Dellon ES, Rothenberg ME, Collins MH, Hirano I, Chehade M, Bredenoord AJ, Lucendo AJ, Spergel JM, Aceves S, Sun X, Kosloski MP, Kamal MA, Hamilton JD, Beazley B, McCann E, Patel K, Mannent LP, Laws E, Akinlade B, Amin N, Lim WK, Wipperman MF, Ruddy M, Patel N, Weinreich DR, Yancopoulos GD, Shumel B, Maloney J, Giannelou A, Shabbir A
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2205982](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2205982)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2022 Dec 22;387(25):2317-2330. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2205982.

Dupilumab in Adults and Adolescents with Eosinophilic Esophagitis.

Dellon ES(1), Rothenberg ME(1), Collins MH(1), Hirano I(1), Chehade M(1), 
Bredenoord AJ(1), Lucendo AJ(1), Spergel JM(1), Aceves S(1), Sun X(1), Kosloski 
MP(1), Kamal MA(1), Hamilton JD(1), Beazley B(1), McCann E(1), Patel K(1), 
Mannent LP(1), Laws E(1), Akinlade B(1), Amin N(1), Lim WK(1), Wipperman MF(1), 
Ruddy M(1), Patel N(1), Weinreich DR(1), Yancopoulos GD(1), Shumel B(1), Maloney 
J(1), Giannelou A(1), Shabbir A(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Center for Esophageal Diseases and Swallowing, University of North 
Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill (E.S.D.); Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center and University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati (M.E.R., M.H.C.); Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago (I.H.); Mount Sinai Center for Eosinophilic Disorders, Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York (M.C.), and Regeneron 
Pharmaceuticals, Tarrytown (X.S., M.P.K., M.A.K., J.D.H., B.B., E.M., B.A., 
N.A., W.K.L., M.F.W., M.R., D.R.W., G.D.Y., B.S., J.M., A.G., A.S.) - both in 
New York; Amsterdam University Medical Center, Amsterdam (A.J.B.); Hospital 
General de Tomelloso, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red en Enfermedades 
Hepáticas y Digestivas, Madrid, and Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de 
Castilla-La Mancha, Toledo - both in Spain (A.J.L.); Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia (J.M.S.); University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, and Rady Children's Hospital, San Diego - both in California (S.A.); 
Sanofi, Bridgewater, NJ (K.P., E.L.); Sanofi, Chilly-Mazarin, France (L.P.M.); 
and Sanofi, Cambridge, MA (N.P.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2022 Dec 22;387(25):2379-2380. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe2213030.
    Gastroenterology. 2023 Jul;165(1):302-303. doi: 
10.1053/j.gastro.2023.02.015.
    N Engl J Med. 2023 Mar 9;388(10):955-956. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2300703.
    N Engl J Med. 2023 Mar 9;388(10):956-957. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2300703.
    J Allergy Clin Immunol Pract. 2023 Aug;11(8):2618-2619. doi: 
10.1016/j.jaip.2023.04.053.

BACKGROUND: Dupilumab, a fully human monoclonal antibody, blocks interleukin-4 
and interleukin-13 signaling, which have key roles in eosinophilic esophagitis.
METHODS: We conducted a three-part, phase 3 trial in which patients 12 years of 
age or older underwent randomization in a 1:1 ratio to receive subcutaneous 
dupilumab at a weekly dose of 300 mg or placebo (Part A) or in a 1:1:1 ratio to 
receive 300 mg of dupilumab either weekly or every 2 weeks or weekly placebo 
(Part B) up to week 24. Eligible patients who completed Part A or Part B 
continued the trial in Part C, in which those who completed Part A received 
dupilumab at a weekly dose of 300 mg up to week 52 (the Part A-C group); Part C 
that included the eligible patients from Part B is ongoing. The two primary end 
points at week 24 were histologic remission (≤6 eosinophils per high-power 
field) and the change from baseline in the Dysphagia Symptom Questionnaire (DSQ) 
score (range, 0 to 84, with higher values indicating more frequent or more 
severe dysphagia).
RESULTS: In Part A, histologic remission occurred in 25 of 42 patients (60%) who 
received weekly dupilumab and in 2 of 39 patients (5%) who received placebo 
(difference, 55 percentage points; 95% confidence interval [CI], 40 to 71; 
P<0.001). In Part B, histologic remission occurred in 47 of 80 patients (59%) 
with weekly dupilumab, in 49 of 81 patients (60%) with dupilumab every 2 weeks, 
and in 5 of 79 patients (6%) with placebo (difference between weekly dupilumab 
and placebo, 54 percentage points; 95% CI, 41 to 66 [P<0.001]; difference 
between dupilumab every 2 weeks and placebo, 56 percentage points; 95% CI, 43 to 
69 [not significant per hierarchical testing]). The mean (±SD) DSQ scores at 
baseline were 33.6±12.41 in Part A and 36.7±11.22 in Part B; the scores improved 
with weekly dupilumab as compared with placebo, with differences of -12.32 (95% 
CI, -19.11 to -5.54) in Part A and -9.92 (95% CI, -14.81 to -5.02) in Part B 
(both P<0.001) but not with dupilumab every 2 weeks (difference in Part B, 
-0.51; 95% CI, -5.42 to 4.41). Serious adverse events occurred in 9 patients 
during the Part A or B treatment period (in 7 who received weekly dupilumab, 1 
who received dupilumab every 2 weeks, and 1 who received placebo) and in 1 
patient in the Part A-C group during the Part C treatment period who received 
placebo in Part A and weekly dupilumab in Part C.
CONCLUSIONS: Among patients with eosinophilic esophagitis, subcutaneous 
dupilumab administered weekly improved histologic outcomes and alleviated 
symptoms of the disease. (Funded by Sanofi and Regeneron Pharmaceuticals; 
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03633617.).

Copyright © 2022 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2205982
PMID: 36546624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]