---
reference_id: "PMID:32853197"
title: "A greener vision for vector control: The example of the Singapore dengue control programme."
authors:
- Sim S
- Ng LC
- Lindsay SW
- Wilson AL
journal: PLoS Negl Trop Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0008428
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A greener vision for vector control: The example of the Singapore dengue control programme.
**Authors:** Sim S, Ng LC, Lindsay SW, Wilson AL
**Journal:** PLoS Negl Trop Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pntd.0008428](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pntd.0008428)

## Content

1. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2020 Aug 27;14(8):e0008428. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pntd.0008428. eCollection 2020 Aug.

A greener vision for vector control: The example of the Singapore dengue control 
programme.

Sim S(1), Ng LC(1), Lindsay SW(2), Wilson AL(3).

Author information:
(1)Environmental Health Institute, National Environment Agency, Singapore.
(2)Department of Biosciences, Durham University, Durham, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Vector Biology, Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, 
Liverpool, United Kingdom.

Vector-borne diseases are a major cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide. 
Aedes-borne diseases, in particular, including dengue, chikungunya, yellow 
fever, and Zika, are increasing at an alarming rate due to urbanisation, 
population movement, weak vector control programmes, and climate change. The 
World Health Organization calls for strengthening of vector control programmes 
in line with the Global Vector Control Response (GVCR) strategy, and many vector 
control programmes are transitioning to this new approach. The Singapore dengue 
control programme, situated within the country's larger vision of a clean, 
green, and sustainable environment for the health and well-being of its 
citizens, provides an excellent example of the GVCR approach in action. Since 
establishing vector control operations in the 1960s, the Singapore dengue 
control programme succeeded in reducing the dengue force of infection 10-fold by 
the 1990s and has maintained it at low levels ever since. Key to this success is 
consideration of dengue as an environmental disease, with a strong focus on 
source reduction and other environmental management methods as the dominant 
vector control strategy. The programme collaborates closely with other 
government ministries, as well as town councils, communities, the private 
sector, and academic and research institutions. Community engagement programmes 
encourage source reduction, and house-to-house inspections accompanied by a 
strong legislative framework with monetary penalties help to support compliance. 
Strong vector and epidemiological surveillance means that routine control 
activities can be heightened to specifically target dengue clusters. Despite its 
success, the programme continues to innovate to tackle challenges such as 
climate change, low herd immunity, and manpower constraints. Initiatives include 
development of novel vector controls such as Wolbachia-infected males and 
spatiotemporal models for dengue risk assessment. Lessons learnt from the 
Singapore programme can be applied to other settings, even those less 
well-resourced than Singapore, for more effective vector control.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0008428
PMCID: PMC7451545
PMID: 32853197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: I have read the journal's policy and the authors 
of this manuscript have the following competing interests: LCN and SS are 
employees of the National Environment Agency, Government of Singapore. SWL and 
ALW have declared that no competing interests exist.