---
reference_id: "PMID:11402147"
title: "Transgenic mouse models of tauopathies: prospects for animal models of Pick's disease."
authors:
- Lee VM
- Trojanowski JQ
journal: Neurology
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1212/wnl.56.suppl_4.s26
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Transgenic mouse models of tauopathies: prospects for animal models of Pick's disease.
**Authors:** Lee VM, Trojanowski JQ
**Journal:** Neurology (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1212/wnl.56.suppl_4.s26](https://doi.org/10.1212/wnl.56.suppl_4.s26)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2001 Jun;56(11 Suppl 4):S26-30. doi: 10.1212/wnl.56.suppl_4.s26.

Transgenic mouse models of tauopathies: prospects for animal models of Pick's 
disease.

Lee VM(1), Trojanowski JQ.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, The University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, USA.

Because filamentous neuronal tau inclusions are neuropathologic hallmarks of 
Pick's disease and a number of other neurodegenerative disorders known as 
tauopathies, the authors generated lines of transgenic (Tg) mice that 
overexpress the shortest human tau isoform in the CNS. These Tg mice accumulated 
argyrophilic and filamentous tau immunoreactive neuronal inclusions with age in 
cortex and brainstem as well as in spinal cord, where these inclusions were most 
abundant and associated with gliosis. The ventral roots of affected spinal cord 
segments showed axonal degeneration, whereas residual axons exhibited reduced 
microtubules and reduced fast axonal transport. The inclusions were composed of 
10 to 20 nm tau immunopositive straight filaments. In addition, the Tg mice 
developed age-related motor weakness as well as progressive hyperphosphorylation 
and decreased solubility of brain and spinal cord tau proteins. Thus, these Tg 
mice recapitulate phenotypic features of human tauopathies. In this article the 
authors review the phenotype of these Tg mice and discuss how the availability 
of relevant animal model of tauopathies will facilitate discovery of more 
effective therapies to treat Pick's disease and related disorders characterized 
by filamentous tau pathology in selectively vulnerable regions of the CNS.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.56.suppl_4.s26
PMID: 11402147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]