---
reference_id: "PMID:22422541"
title: "Systemic sclerosis disease modification clinical trials design: quo vadis?"
authors:
- Mendoza FA
- Keyes-Elstein LL
- Jimenez SA
journal: Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken)
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1002/acr.21667
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systemic sclerosis disease modification clinical trials design: quo vadis?
**Authors:** Mendoza FA, Keyes-Elstein LL, Jimenez SA
**Journal:** Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1002/acr.21667](https://doi.org/10.1002/acr.21667)

## Content

1. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2012 Jul;64(7):945-54. doi: 10.1002/acr.21667.

Systemic sclerosis disease modification clinical trials design: quo vadis?

Mendoza FA(1), Keyes-Elstein LL, Jimenez SA.

Author information:
(1)Jefferson Institute of Molecular Medicine and Scleroderma Center, Thomas 
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19107, USA.

Comment in
    Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2012 Jul;64(7):955-9. doi: 10.1002/acr.21673.

The purpose of this manuscript is to discuss relevant aspects of clinical trials 
for Systemic Sclerosis (SSc) and to identify important considerations for the 
design of SSc disease modification clinical trials. Placebo randomized 
controlled trials with appropriate identification of SSc patients with diffuse 
progressive SSc skin involvement of recent onset, along with a rescue strategy 
for patients with worsening lung and skin involvement are suggested. If change 
in skin thickening is a major outcome of the study, the selection of patients 
with recent onset of disease and a predetermined degree of skin involvement are 
crucial requirements. The trial duration should be of at least 12 months. Sample 
size calculations should consider differences that exceed the Minimal Important 
Difference. Other relevant trial designs and potential threats to study validity 
are also discussed. Previous SSc-disease modifying trials have been beset by 
high dropout rates. Analyses on the subset of subjects completing the trial or 
applying the last-observation-carried-forward approach can potentially lead to 
biased estimates and false conclusions. Strategies for retention of subjects 
should be included at the design stage and analyses to account for missing data 
should be performed.

DOI: 10.1002/acr.21667
PMCID: PMC3386473
PMID: 22422541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]