---
reference_id: "PMID:36342963"
title: "Laterality Defects in Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia: Relationship to Ultrastructural Defect or Genotype."
authors:
- Barber AT
- Shapiro AJ
- Davis SD
- Ferkol TW
- Atkinson JJ
- Sagel SD
- Dell SD
- Olivier KN
- Milla CE
- Rosenfeld M
- Li L
- Lin FC
- Sullivan KM
- Capps NA
- Zariwala MA
- Knowles MR
- Leigh MW
journal: Ann Am Thorac Soc
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.202206-487OC
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Laterality Defects in Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia: Relationship to Ultrastructural Defect or Genotype.
**Authors:** Barber AT, Shapiro AJ, Davis SD, Ferkol TW, Atkinson JJ, Sagel SD, Dell SD, Olivier KN, Milla CE, Rosenfeld M, Li L, Lin FC, Sullivan KM, Capps NA, Zariwala MA, Knowles MR, Leigh MW
**Journal:** Ann Am Thorac Soc (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1513/AnnalsATS.202206-487OC](https://doi.org/10.1513/AnnalsATS.202206-487OC)

## Content

1. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2023 Mar;20(3):397-405. doi:
10.1513/AnnalsATS.202206-487OC.

Laterality Defects in Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia: Relationship to 
Ultrastructural Defect or Genotype.

Barber AT(1), Shapiro AJ(2), Davis SD(1), Ferkol TW(3), Atkinson JJ(4), Sagel 
SD(5), Dell SD(6), Olivier KN(7), Milla CE(8), Rosenfeld M(9), Li L(10), Lin 
FC(10), Sullivan KM(11)(12), Capps NA(11)(12), Zariwala MA(12)(13), Knowles 
MR(11)(12), Leigh MW(12)(14).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, UNC Children's, and.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, McGill University Health Centre Research Institute, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Department of Pediatrics and.
(4)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
Missouri.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital Colorado, University of 
Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, BC Children's Hospital, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada.
(7)Pulmonary Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Bethesda, 
Maryland.
(8)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University, Palo Alto, California.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Seattle Children's Hospital, University of 
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington; and.
(10)Department of Biostatistics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
(11)Department of Medicine.
(12)Marsico Lung Institute.
(13)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, and.
(14)Department of Pediatrics, University of North Carolina School of Medicine, 
Chapel Hill, North Carolina.

Rationale: The association between organ laterality abnormalities and ciliary 
ultrastructural defect or genotype in primary ciliary dyskinesia is poorly 
understood. Objectives: To determine if there is an association between presence 
and/or type of laterality abnormality and ciliary ultrastructural defect or 
genotype. Methods: Participants with primary ciliary dyskinesia in a 
multicenter, prospective study were grouped based on ciliary ultrastructural 
defect or genotype. In a retrospective analysis of these data, the association 
of ciliary ultrastructural defect or genotype and likelihood of a laterality 
abnormality was evaluated by logistic regression adjusted for presence of two 
loss-of-function versus one or more not-loss-of-function variants. Results: Of 
559 participants, 286 (51.2%), 215 (38.5%), and 58 (10.4%) were identified as 
having situs solitus, situs inversustotalis, and situs ambiguus, respectively; 
heterotaxy, defined as situs ambiguus with complex cardiovascular defects, was 
present in 14 (2.5%). Compared with the group with inner dynein arm defects with 
microtubular disorganization, laterality defects were more likely in the outer 
dynein arm defects group (odds ratio [OR], 2.07; 95% confidence interval [CI], 
1.21-3.54; P < 0.01) and less likely in the normal/near normal ultrastructure 
group (OR, 0.04; 95% CI, 0.013-0.151; P < 0.01). Heterotaxy was present in 11 of 
242 (4.5%) in the outer dynein arm defects group but 0 of 96 in the inner dynein 
arm defects with microtubular disorganization group (P = 0.038). Conclusion: In 
primary ciliary dyskinesia, risk of a laterality abnormality differs by ciliary 
ultrastructural defect. Pathophysiologic mechanisms underlying these differences 
require further exploration.

DOI: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.202206-487OC
PMCID: PMC9993158
PMID: 36342963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]