---
reference_id: "PMID:27367319"
title: "Listeria monocytogenes meningitis in the elderly: epidemiological, clinical and therapeutic findings."
authors:
- Pagliano P
- Ascione T
- Boccia G
- De Caro F
- Esposito S
journal: Infez Med
year: '2016'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Listeria monocytogenes meningitis in the elderly: epidemiological, clinical and therapeutic findings.
**Authors:** Pagliano P, Ascione T, Boccia G, De Caro F, Esposito S
**Journal:** Infez Med (2016)

## Content

1. Infez Med. 2016 Jun 1;24(2):105-11.

Listeria monocytogenes meningitis in the elderly: epidemiological, clinical and 
therapeutic findings.

Pagliano P(1), Ascione T(1), Boccia G(2), De Caro F(2), Esposito S(3).

Author information:
(1)AORN dei Colli, D. Cotugno Hospital, Department of Infectious Diseases, 
Naples, Italy.
(2)Institute of Hygiene, University of Salerno, Italy.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, University of Salerno, Italy.

Listeria monocytogenes is a Gram-positive bacillus and facultative intracellular 
bacterium whose transmission occurs mainly through the consumption of 
contaminated food, L. monocytogenes invades the host cells using various protein 
and can escape to the human T-cell immune system by cell-to-cell spreading. If 
the infection is not controlled at the stage in which the bacterium is in the 
liver, for instance, due to a severe immunodepression, a secondary bacteraemia 
can be developed and L. monocytogenes reaches the preferred sites transgressing 
the blood-brain barrier or the placental barrier. Individuals with T-cell 
dysfunction, such as pregnant women, the elderly, and those receiving 
immunosuppressive therapy are at the highest risk of contracting the disease. 
Average life expectancy throughout developed countries has rapidly increased 
during the latter half of the 20th century and geriatric infectious diseases 
have become an increasingly important issue. L. monocytogenes meningitis in 
young previously healthy adults has been reported only in anecdotal 
observations. Differently, L. monocytogenes is the third most common cause of 
bacterial meningitis in the elderly population, after Streptococcus pneumoniae 
and Neisseria meningitidis. Patients with L. monocytogenes meningitis presented 
with signs and symptoms that were similar to those of the general population 
with community-acquired bacterial meningitis, but reported a longer prodromal 
phase. According to literature data, the prevalence of the classic triad of 
fever, neck stiffness, and altered mental status is 43%, and almost all patients 
present with at least 2 of the 4 classic symptoms of headache, fever, neck 
stiffness, and altered mental status. On the basis of our published data, in 
patients aged over 50 years, diagnosing L. monocytogenes meningitis was more 
challenging than pneumococcal meningitis, as demonstrated by the lower 
percentage of cases receiving a correct diagnosis within 48 hours from the onset 
of symptoms. No significant difference was observed in respect to the presenting 
symptoms, but progression to respiratory failure was not as rapid as 
pneumococcal meningitis.

PMID: 27367319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]