---
reference_id: "PMID:33124556"
title: Erysipelas-like erythema in children with familial Mediterranean fever.
authors:
- Gezgin Yildirim D
- Seven MB
- Gönen S
- Söylemezoğlu O
journal: Clin Exp Rheumatol
year: '2020'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Erysipelas-like erythema in children with familial Mediterranean fever.
**Authors:** Gezgin Yildirim D, Seven MB, Gönen S, Söylemezoğlu O
**Journal:** Clin Exp Rheumatol (2020)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2020 Sep-Oct;38 Suppl 127(5):101-104. Epub 2020 Oct 28.

Erysipelas-like erythema in children with familial Mediterranean fever.

Gezgin Yildirim D(1), Seven MB(2), Gönen S(2), Söylemezoğlu O(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Rheumatology, Faculty of Medicine, Gazi University, 
Ankara, Turkey. gezgindeniz@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Gazi University, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(3)Department of Paediatric Rheumatology, Faculty of Medicine, Gazi University, 
Ankara, Turkey.

OBJECTIVES: Erysipelas-like erythema (ELE) is a well-known pathognomonic skin 
lesion associated with familial Mediterranean fever (FMF). The aim of this study 
was to describe the clinical and demographic features and phenotypic differences 
between paediatric FMF patients with and without ELE.
METHODS: We retrospectively collected the medical charts of paediatric patients 
who had been diagnosed with FMF and followed by the Paediatric Rheumatology 
Department of Gazi University, Turkey, from 2006 to 2016.
RESULTS: Among 782 FMF patients, 59 (33 males and 26 females; median age, 
11.1±5.1) were found to have ELE. More patients had arthritis in the ELE group 
than in the other group (p=0.011). Arthritis occurred in the ankle (77.4%), knee 
(19.3%) and hip (3.2%) joints. The coexistence of arthritis and ELE was seen in 
12 (20.3%) patients. All ELE plaques were located on the lower legs and dorsum 
of the feet. Eleven patients (18.6%) presented with ELE as the initial symptom 
and were diagnosed with FMF, and 48 (81.4%) patients experienced ELE attacks 
while receiving colchicine therapy. The median dose of colchicine at last visit, 
PRAS activity score and M694V homozygous mutation status were significantly 
higher in the ELE group than in the other group (p=0.041, p=0.001 and p=0.023, 
respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: ELE is an uncommon but important feature of FMF. In patients with 
ELE, arthritis is more frequently encountered, and M694V homozygous mutation is 
more frequently found. FMF patients with ELE have more severe disease activity, 
and they use higher doses of colchicine in relation to this severe disease 
course.

PMID: 33124556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]