---
reference_id: "PMID:31323181"
title: Antifibrotic Potential of MiR-335-3p in Hereditary Gingival Fibromatosis.
authors:
- Gao Q
- Yang K
- Chen D
- Song Y
- Qiao W
- Sun X
- Meng L
- Bian Z
journal: J Dent Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1177/0022034519863300
keywords:
- Algorithms
- Fibroblasts/cytology
- "Fibromatosis, Gingival/genetics"
- Gene Knockdown Techniques
- Gingiva
- Humans
- MicroRNAs/genetics
- Transforming Growth Factor beta
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antifibrotic Potential of MiR-335-3p in Hereditary Gingival Fibromatosis.
**Authors:** Gao Q, Yang K, Chen D, Song Y, Qiao W, Sun X, Meng L, Bian Z
**Journal:** J Dent Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0022034519863300](https://doi.org/10.1177/0022034519863300)

## Content

1. J Dent Res. 2019 Sep;98(10):1140-1149. doi: 10.1177/0022034519863300. Epub
2019  Jul 19.

Antifibrotic Potential of MiR-335-3p in Hereditary Gingival Fibromatosis.

Gao Q(1), Yang K(1), Chen D(1), Song Y(1), Qiao W(1), Sun X(1), Meng L(1), Bian 
Z(1).

Author information:
(1)1 The State Key Laboratory Breeding Base of Basic Science of Stomatology 
(Hubei-MOST) and Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine Ministry of Education, 
School and Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei, China.

Hereditary gingival fibromatosis (HGF) is a highly genetically heterogeneous 
disease, and current therapeutic method is limited to surgical resection with a 
high recurrence rate. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are able to fine-tune large-scale 
target genes. Here we established a simple but effective computational strategy 
based on available miRNA target prediction algorithms to pinpoint the most 
potent miRNA that could negatively regulate a group of functional genes. Based 
on this rationale, miR-335-3p was top ranked by putatively targeting 85 verified 
profibrotic genes and 79 upregulated genes in HGF patients. Experimentally, 
downregulation of miR-355-3p was demonstrated in HGF-derived gingival 
fibroblasts as well as in transforming growth factor β-stimulated normal human 
gingival fibroblasts (NHGFs) compared to normal control. Ectopic miR-335-3p 
attenuated, whereas knockdown of miR-335-3p promoted, the fibrogenic activity of 
human gingival fibroblasts. Mechanically, miR-335-3p directly targeted SOS1, 
SMAD2/3, and CTNNB1 by canonical and noncanonical base paring. In particular, 
different portfolios of fibrotic markers were suppressed by silencing SOS1, 
SMAD2/3, or CTNNB1, respectively. Thus, our study first proposes a novel miRNA 
screening approach targeting a functionally related gene set and identifies 
miR-335-3p as a novel target for HGF treatment. Mechanically, miR-335-3p 
suppresses the fibrogenic activity of human gingival fibroblasts by repressing 
multiple core molecules in profibrotic networks. Our strategy provides a new 
paradigm in the treatment for HGF as well as other diseases.

DOI: 10.1177/0022034519863300
PMID: 31323181 [Indexed for MEDLINE]