---
reference_id: "PMID:25694091"
title: The determinants of spread of Ebola virus disease - an evidence from the past outbreak experiences.
authors:
- Gałas A
journal: Folia Med Cracov
year: '2014'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The determinants of spread of Ebola virus disease - an evidence from the past outbreak experiences.
**Authors:** Gałas A
**Journal:** Folia Med Cracov (2014)

## Content

1. Folia Med Cracov. 2014;54(3):17-25.

The determinants of spread of Ebola virus disease - an evidence from the past 
outbreak experiences.

Gałas A(1).

Author information:
(1)Chair of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, Department of Epidemiology, 
Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow, Poland. 
aleksander.galas@uj.edu.pl or mygalas@cyf-kr.edu.pl.

The paper summarizes available evidence regarding the determinants of spread of 
Ebola virus disease, including health care and community related risk factors. 
It was observed that the level of uncertainty for the estimations is relatively 
high which may hinder to make some predictions for the future evolution of EVD 
outbreak. The natural history of EVD has shown that the disease may pose a 
problem to developed countries and may present a thread to individuals. Although 
observed modes of transmission mainly include direct contact and contaminated 
staff, high case fatality ratio and frequent contacts among individuals in 
developed countries are among determinants which may lead to the development of 
the EVD outbreak.

PMID: 25694091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]