---
reference_id: "PMID:33247512"
title: "Mandibulofacial dysostosis with microcephaly: An expansion of the phenotype via parental survey."
authors:
- Abell K
- Hopkin RJ
- Bender PL
- Jackson F
- Smallwood K
- Sullivan B
- Stottmann RW
- Saal HM
- Weaver KN
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61977
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics, pathology"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- GTP Phosphohydrolases/genetics
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Haploinsufficiency/genetics
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Mandibulofacial Dysostosis/complications, genetics, pathology"
- "Microcephaly/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Middle Aged
- Mutation/genetics
- Peptide Elongation Factors/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Ribonucleoprotein, U5 Small Nuclear/genetics"
- "Spliceosomes/genetics, pathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mandibulofacial dysostosis with microcephaly: An expansion of the phenotype via parental survey.
**Authors:** Abell K, Hopkin RJ, Bender PL, Jackson F, Smallwood K, Sullivan B, Stottmann RW, Saal HM, Weaver KN
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.61977](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.61977)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2021 Feb;185(2):413-423. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61977. Epub
2020  Nov 27.

Mandibulofacial dysostosis with microcephaly: An expansion of the phenotype via 
parental survey.

Abell K(1)(2)(3), Hopkin RJ(1)(2), Bender PL(1)(2)(4), Jackson F(2), Smallwood 
K(2), Sullivan B(1)(2)(5)(6), Stottmann RW(1)(2)(7), Saal HM(1)(2), Weaver 
KN(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(2)Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(3)Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, 
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(4)Division of Patient Services, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Missouri - Kansas City, Kansas City, 
Missouri, USA.
(6)Division of Clinical Genetics, Children's Mercy Kansas City, Kansas City, 
Missouri, USA.
(7)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

Mandibulofacial dysostosis with microcephaly (MFDM) is due to haploinsufficiency 
of spliceosomal GTPase EFTUD2. Features include microcephaly, craniofacial 
dysmorphology, developmental disability, and other anomalies. We surveyed 
parents of individuals with MFDM to expand knowledge about health, development, 
and parental concerns. Participants included attendees of the inaugural MFDM 
family conference in June 2019 and members of the MFDM online group. To explore 
MFDM variable expressivity, we offered targeted Sanger sequencing for untested 
parents. Forty-seven parents participated in the survey. 59% of individuals with 
MFDM were male, with mean age 6.4 years (range 8 months to 49 years). Similar to 
the literature (n = 123), common features include microcephaly, cleft palate, 
choanal stenosis, tracheoesophageal fistula, heart problems, and seizures. New 
information includes airway intervention details, age-based developmental 
outcomes, rate of vision refractive errors, and lower incidences of prematurity 
and IUGR. Family concerns focused on development, communication, and increased 
support. Targeted Sanger sequencing for families of seven individuals 
demonstrated de novo variants, for a total of 91.9% de novo EFTUD2 variants (n = 
34/37). This study reports the largest single cohort of individuals with MFDM, 
expands phenotypic spectrum and inheritance patterns, improves understanding of 
developmental outcomes and care needs, and identifies development as the biggest 
concern for parents.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61977
PMCID: PMC8379904
PMID: 33247512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure statement: There are no relevant 
conflicts of interest to disclose. An abstract for this manuscript was presented 
virtually at the 2020 David W. Smith Workshop.