---
reference_id: "PMID:10431241"
title: Mutations in the human homologue of mouse dl cause autosomal recessive and dominant hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia.
authors:
- Monreal AW
- Ferguson BM
- Headon DJ
- Street SL
- Overbeek PA
- Zonana J
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1038/11937
keywords:
- Alleles
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Ectodermal Dysplasia/genetics
- Edar Receptor
- Female
- "Genes, Dominant"
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Genetic Markers
- Humans
- Male
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Physical Chromosome Mapping
- "Receptors, Ectodysplasin"
- "Receptors, Tumor Necrosis Factor"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Tissue Distribution
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the human homologue of mouse dl cause autosomal recessive and dominant hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia.
**Authors:** Monreal AW, Ferguson BM, Headon DJ, Street SL, Overbeek PA, Zonana J
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1038/11937](https://doi.org/10.1038/11937)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1999 Aug;22(4):366-9. doi: 10.1038/11937.

Mutations in the human homologue of mouse dl cause autosomal recessive and 
dominant hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia.

Monreal AW(1), Ferguson BM, Headon DJ, Street SL, Overbeek PA, Zonana J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health Sciences 
University, Portland 97201, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1999 Aug;22(4):315-6. doi: 10.1038/11876.

X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia results in abnormal morphogenesis of 
teeth, hair and eccrine sweat glands. The gene (ED1) responsible for the 
disorder has been identified, as well as the analogous X-linked gene (Ta) in the 
mouse. Autosomal recessive disorders, phenotypically indistinguishable from the 
X-linked forms, exist in humans and at two separate loci (crinkled, cr, and 
downless, dl) in mice. Dominant disorders, possibly allelic to the recessive 
loci, are seen in both species (ED3, Dlslk). A candidate gene has recently been 
identified at the dl locus that is mutated in both dl and Dlslk mutant alleles. 
We isolated and characterized its human DL homologue, and identified mutations 
in three families displaying recessive inheritance and two with dominant 
inheritance. The disorder does not map to the candidate gene locus in all 
autosomal recessive families, implying the existence of at least one additional 
human locus. The putative protein is predicted to have a single transmembrane 
domain, and shows similarity to two separate domains of the tumour necrosis 
factor receptor (TNFR) family.

DOI: 10.1038/11937
PMID: 10431241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]