---
reference_id: "PMID:24075024"
title: The impact of documentation of severe acute kidney injury on mortality.
authors:
- Wilson FP
- Bansal AD
- Jasti SK
- Lin JJ
- Shashaty MG
- Berns JS
- Feldman HI
- Fuchs BD
journal: Clin Nephrol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.5414/CN108072
keywords:
- "Acute Kidney Injury/blood, drug therapy, mortality"
- Adult
- Aged
- Cohort Studies
- Creatinine/blood
- Documentation
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The impact of documentation of severe acute kidney injury on mortality.
**Authors:** Wilson FP, Bansal AD, Jasti SK, Lin JJ, Shashaty MG, Berns JS, Feldman HI, Fuchs BD
**Journal:** Clin Nephrol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.5414/CN108072](https://doi.org/10.5414/CN108072)

## Content

1. Clin Nephrol. 2013 Dec;80(6):417-25. doi: 10.5414/CN108072.

The impact of documentation of severe acute kidney injury on mortality.

Wilson FP, Bansal AD, Jasti SK, Lin JJ, Shashaty MG, Berns JS, Feldman HI, Fuchs 
BD.

AIMS: Modification of the mortality risk associated with acute kidney injury 
(AKI) necessitates recognition of AKI when it occurs. We sought to determine 
whether formal documentation of AKI in the medical record, assessed by billing 
codes for AKI, would be associated with improved clinical outcomes.
METHODS: Retrospective cohort study conducted at three hospitals within a single 
university health system. Adults without severe underlying kidney disease who 
suffered in-hospital AKI as defined by a doubling of baseline creatinine (n = 
5,438) were included. Those whose AKI was formally documented according to 
discharge billing codes were compared to those without such documentation in 
terms of 30-day mortality.
RESULTS: Formal documentation of AKI occurred in 2,325 patients (43%). Higher 
baseline creatinine, higher peak creatinine, medical admission status, and 
higher Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score were strongly associated 
with documentation of AKI. After adjustment for severity of disease, formal AKI 
documentation was associated with reduced 30-day mortality - OR 0.81 (0.68 - 
0.96, p = 0.02). Patients with formal documentation were more likely to receive 
a nephrology consultation (31% vs. 6%, p < 0.001) and fluid boluses (64% vs. 
45%, p < 0.001), and had a more rapid discontinuation of angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitor and angiotensin-receptor blocker medications (HR 2.04, CI 1.69 
- 2.46, p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Formal documentation of AKI is associated with improved survival 
after adjustment for illness severity among patients with creatinine-defined 
AKI.

DOI: 10.5414/CN108072
PMCID: PMC4018223
PMID: 24075024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]