---
reference_id: "PMID:37885478"
title: "Spontaneous cervical artery dissection: is it really a connective tissue disease? A comprehensive review."
authors:
- Gunduz ME
- Kadirvel R
- Kallmes DF
- Pezzini A
- Keser Z
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1241084
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spontaneous cervical artery dissection: is it really a connective tissue disease? A comprehensive review.
**Authors:** Gunduz ME, Kadirvel R, Kallmes DF, Pezzini A, Keser Z
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2023.1241084](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2023.1241084)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2023 Oct 11;14:1241084. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1241084.
eCollection 2023.

Spontaneous cervical artery dissection: is it really a connective tissue
disease? A comprehensive review.

Gunduz ME(1), Kadirvel R(2), Kallmes DF(3), Pezzini A(4), Keser Z(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Massachusetts Chan Medical School,
Worcester, MA, United States.
(2)Department of Neurosurgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States.
(3)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States.
(4)Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, Neurology Clinic,
University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(5)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States.

BACKGROUND: Spontaneous cervical artery dissection (sCeAD) is an important cause
of stroke in young adults. The underlying pathophysiology remains unclear,
without validated biomarkers to identify subjects at risk. Previous studies
suggested the role of abnormalities in the connective component of the arterial
wall.
PURPOSE: To assess dermal ultrastructural aberrations of connective tissue by
skin biopsy and genetic variations in sCeAD patients.
METHOD: We searched the PubMed and Scopus databases until August 2023 with
PRISMA guidelines. Original articles assessing skin biopsy in sCeAD patients
were included. Two reviewers independently conducted the screening.
FINDINGS: We included 16 studies compromising 459 patients. Thirteen studies
assessed ultrastructural changes and found aberrations of collagen and elastic
fibers, described as irregular contours and calibers of collagen fibrils,
composite flower-like fibrils, fragmented moth-eaten elastin, and
microcalcifications, cumulatively in 50.5% of patients. Seven studies showed no
causative mutations in collagen type I, III, V, or elastin genes. One study
showed linkage between connective tissue alterations and mutation on chromosomes
15q2 and 10q26 using genome-wide linkage analysis, while another study found
significant copy number variant enrichments in genes involved in extracellular
matrix (COL5A2/COL3A1/SNTA1) and collagen fibril organizations (COL5A2/COL3A1).
Finally, differential expression of extracellular proteins was linked to
connective tissue disorder in patients with recurrent sCeAD using a quantitative
proteomics approach.
CONCLUSION: Current literature supports the hypothesis that an underlying,
subclinical connective tissue disorder, likely genetically determined, may
predispose to arterial wall weakness and sCeAD. Further studies with larger
sample sizes and robust methodology are needed to better define the role of
connective tissue in sCeAD pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2023 Gunduz, Kadirvel, Kallmes, Pezzini and Keser.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1241084
PMCID: PMC10598645
PMID: 37885478

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
