---
reference_id: "PMID:20301511"
title: Choroideremia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- MacDonald IM
- Hume S
- Zhai Y
- Xu M
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Choroideremia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, MacDonald IM, Hume S, Zhai Y, Xu M

## Content

1. Choroideremia.

MacDonald IM(1), Hume S(2), Zhai Y(3), Xu M(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2003 Feb 21 [updated 2021 Mar 4].

Author information:
(1)Professor, Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences University of 
Alberta Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
(2)Joint Laboratory Head and Associate Professor, Molecular Diagnostics 
Laboratory Department of Medical Genetics University of Alberta Edmonton, 
Alberta, Canada
(3)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences University of Alberta 
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Choroideremia (CHM) is characterized by progressive 
chorioretinal degeneration in affected males and milder signs in heterozygous 
(carrier) females. Typically, symptoms in affected males evolve from night 
blindness to peripheral visual field loss, with central vision preserved until 
late in life. Although carrier females are generally asymptomatic, signs of 
chorioretinal degeneration can be reliably observed with fundus autofluorescence 
imaging, and – after age 25 years – with careful fundus examination.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of choroideremia is established in a male 
proband with suggestive findings and a hemizygous pathogenic variant in CHM 
identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Surgical correction of retinal 
detachment and cataract as needed; UV-blocking sunglasses for outdoors; 
appropriate dietary intake of fresh fruit, leafy green vegetables; antioxidant 
vitamin supplement as needed; regular intake of dietary omega-3 very-long-chain 
fatty acids, including docosahexaenoic acid; low vision services as needed; 
counseling as needed to help cope with depression, loss of independence, fitness 
for driving, and anxiety over employment issues. Surveillance: Periodic 
ophthalmologic examination, kinetic visual field examination, and spectral 
domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT), especially when central vision is 
affected and cystoid macular edema is suspected. Agents/circumstances to avoid: 
UV exposure from sunlight reflected from water and snow; smoking (a major risk 
factor for macular degeneration).
GENETIC COUNSELING: CHM is inherited in an X-linked manner. Affected males 
transmit the pathogenic variant to all of their daughters and none of their 
sons. Heterozygous females have a 50% chance of transmitting the variant in each 
pregnancy: males who inherit the pathogenic variant will be affected; females 
who inherit the pathogenic variant will be carriers and will usually not be 
symptomatic. Once the CHM pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected 
family member, carrier testing for at-risk female relatives, prenatal testing 
for a pregnancy at increased risk, and preimplantation genetic testing for 
choroideremia are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301511