---
reference_id: "PMID:40191403"
title: "Management of IgG4-related cholangitis: diagnosis, therapy, and long-term surveillance."
authors:
- Herta T
- Schröder M
- Geisel D
- Engelmann C
- Tacke F
journal: Gastroenterol Rep (Oxf)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/gastro/goaf032
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of IgG4-related cholangitis: diagnosis, therapy, and long-term surveillance.
**Authors:** Herta T, Schröder M, Geisel D, Engelmann C, Tacke F
**Journal:** Gastroenterol Rep (Oxf) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/gastro/goaf032](https://doi.org/10.1093/gastro/goaf032)

## Content

1. Gastroenterol Rep (Oxf). 2025 Apr 4;13:goaf032. doi: 10.1093/gastro/goaf032. 
eCollection 2025.

Management of IgG4-related cholangitis: diagnosis, therapy, and long-term 
surveillance.

Herta T(1)(2), Schröder M(1), Geisel D(3), Engelmann C(1), Tacke F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hepatology and Gastroenterology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, Campus Virchow-Klinikum (CVK) and Campus Charité Mitte (CCM), Berlin, 
Germany.
(2)Berlin Institute of Health at Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, BIH 
Biomedical Innovation Academy, BIH Charité Clinician Scientist Program, Berlin, 
Germany.
(3)Department of Radiology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

IgG4-related cholangitis (IRC) is a chronic cholestatic liver disease that often 
occurs concomitantly with autoimmune pancreatitis type 1. Both conditions are 
manifestations of IgG4-related disease, a systemic autoimmune-mediated 
fibroinflammatory disorder. Patients often present with jaundice and weight 
loss, mimicking hepatobiliary malignancies, such as cholangiocarcinoma, primary 
sclerosing cholangitis, and pancreatic cancer. Accurate diagnosis is challenging 
due to the absence of pathognomonic findings but can be achieved using the 
HISORt criteria (histology, imaging, serology, other organ involvement, and 
response to immunosuppressive therapy). Early diagnosis is critical to avoid 
unnecessary surgery and prevent progression to liver fibrosis or cirrhosis. IRC 
responds well to corticosteroid therapy, though relapses are common, 
necessitating long-term immunosuppressive treatment in many cases. 
Steroid-sparing agents for remission induction and maintenance therapy comprise 
immunomodulators, such as azathioprine, as well as B-cell depletion therapies, 
such as rituximab. This review provides a structured clinical overview of the 
diagnosis, differential diagnosis, and therapy, including novel therapeutic 
options, such as inebilizumab, for this rare yet severe condition. A key focus 
is on long-term surveillance strategies, which include laboratory tests, imaging 
(contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging/magnetic resonance 
cholangiopancreatography, ultrasound, endosonography), and, particularly in 
patients with fibrotic bile duct strictures, endoscopy (endoscopic retrograde 
cholangiopancreatography, cholangioscopy).

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press and Sixth Affiliated 
Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University.

DOI: 10.1093/gastro/goaf032
PMCID: PMC11972112
PMID: 40191403

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there is no conflict of 
interests in this work.