---
reference_id: "PMID:17952091"
title: Nucleotide-sugar transporter SLC35D1 is critical to chondroitin sulfate synthesis in cartilage and skeletal development in mouse and human.
authors:
- Hiraoka S
- Furuichi T
- Nishimura G
- Shibata S
- Yanagishita M
- Rimoin DL
- Superti-Furga A
- Nikkels PG
- Ogawa M
- Katsuyama K
- Toyoda H
- Kinoshita-Toyoda A
- Ishida N
- Isono K
- Sanai Y
- Cohn DH
- Koseki H
- Ikegawa S
journal: Nat Med
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1038/nm1655
keywords:
- Animals
- "Bone and Bones/embryology, metabolism, pathology"
- "Cartilage/embryology, metabolism, pathology"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Chondrocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- Chondroitin Sulfates/biosynthesis
- "Epiphyses/embryology, metabolism, pathology"
- "Facial Bones/abnormalities, embryology, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/embryology, genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Monosaccharide Transport Proteins/deficiency, genetics, physiology"
- "Nucleotide Transport Proteins/genetics, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nucleotide-sugar transporter SLC35D1 is critical to chondroitin sulfate synthesis in cartilage and skeletal development in mouse and human.
**Authors:** Hiraoka S, Furuichi T, Nishimura G, Shibata S, Yanagishita M, Rimoin DL, Superti-Furga A, Nikkels PG, Ogawa M, Katsuyama K, Toyoda H, Kinoshita-Toyoda A, Ishida N, Isono K, Sanai Y, Cohn DH, Koseki H, Ikegawa S
**Journal:** Nat Med (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nm1655](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm1655)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2007 Nov;13(11):1363-7. doi: 10.1038/nm1655. Epub 2007 Oct 21.

Nucleotide-sugar transporter SLC35D1 is critical to chondroitin sulfate 
synthesis in cartilage and skeletal development in mouse and human.

Hiraoka S(1), Furuichi T, Nishimura G, Shibata S, Yanagishita M, Rimoin DL, 
Superti-Furga A, Nikkels PG, Ogawa M, Katsuyama K, Toyoda H, Kinoshita-Toyoda A, 
Ishida N, Isono K, Sanai Y, Cohn DH, Koseki H, Ikegawa S.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Developmental Genetics, RIKEN Research Center for Allergy and 
Immunology, 1-7-22 Suehirocho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

Proteoglycans are a family of extracellular macromolecules comprised of 
glycosaminoglycan chains of a repeated disaccharide linked to a central core 
protein. Proteoglycans have critical roles in chondrogenesis and skeletal 
development. The glycosaminoglycan chains found in cartilage proteoglycans are 
primarily composed of chondroitin sulfate. The integrity of chondroitin sulfate 
chains is important to cartilage proteoglycan function; however, chondroitin 
sulfate metabolism in mammals remains poorly understood. The solute carrier-35 
D1 (SLC35D1) gene (SLC35D1) encodes an endoplasmic reticulum nucleotide-sugar 
transporter (NST) that might transport substrates needed for chondroitin sulfate 
biosynthesis. Here we created Slc35d1-deficient mice that develop a lethal form 
of skeletal dysplasia with severe shortening of limbs and facial structures. 
Epiphyseal cartilage in homozygous mutant mice showed a decreased proliferating 
zone with round chondrocytes, scarce matrices and reduced proteoglycan 
aggregates. These mice had short, sparse chondroitin sulfate chains caused by a 
defect in chondroitin sulfate biosynthesis. We also identified that 
loss-of-function mutations in human SLC35D1 cause Schneckenbecken dysplasia, a 
severe skeletal dysplasia. Our findings highlight the crucial role of NSTs in 
proteoglycan function and cartilage metabolism, thus revealing a new paradigm 
for skeletal disease and glycobiology.

DOI: 10.1038/nm1655
PMID: 17952091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]