---
reference_id: "PMID:19839974"
title: Effector and regulatory mechanisms in allergic contact dermatitis.
authors:
- Vocanson M
- Hennino A
- Rozières A
- Poyet G
- Nicolas JF
journal: Allergy
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1111/j.1398-9995.2009.02082.x
keywords:
- "Dermatitis, Allergic Contact/immunology, pathology"
- Haptens/immunology
- Humans
- "Immune System/cytology, immunology"
- Immune Tolerance
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effector and regulatory mechanisms in allergic contact dermatitis.
**Authors:** Vocanson M, Hennino A, Rozières A, Poyet G, Nicolas JF
**Journal:** Allergy (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1398-9995.2009.02082.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1398-9995.2009.02082.x)

## Content

1. Allergy. 2009 Dec;64(12):1699-714. doi: 10.1111/j.1398-9995.2009.02082.x. Epub
 2009 Oct 12.

Effector and regulatory mechanisms in allergic contact dermatitis.

Vocanson M(1), Hennino A, Rozières A, Poyet G, Nicolas JF.

Author information:
(1)Faculté de Médecine Lyon Sud, Université Lyon1, Lyon, France.

Allergic contact dermatitis (ACD), one of the commonest occupational diseases, 
is a T-cell-mediated skin inflammation caused by repeated skin exposure to 
contact allergens, i.e. nonprotein chemicals called haptens. Allergic contact 
dermatitis, also referred to as contact hypersensitivity, is mediated by CD8+ T 
cells, which are primed in lymphoid organs during the sensitization phase and 
are recruited in the skin upon re-exposure to the hapten. Subsets of CD4+ T 
cells endowed with suppressive activity are responsible for both the 
down-regulation of eczema in allergic patients and the prevention of priming to 
haptens in nonallergic individuals. Therefore, ACD should be considered as a 
breakdown of the skin immune tolerance to haptens. Recent advances in the 
pathophysiology of ACD have demonstrated the important role of skin innate 
immunity in the sensitization process and have revisited the dogma that 
Langerhans cells are mandatory for CD8+ T-cell priming. They have also 
introduced mast cells as a pivotal actor in the magnitude of the inflammatory 
reaction. Finally, the most recent studies address the nature, the mode and the 
site of action of the regulatory T cells that control the skin inflammation with 
the aim of developing new strategies of tolerance induction in allergic 
patients.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1398-9995.2009.02082.x
PMID: 19839974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]