---
reference_id: "PMID:28760971"
title: Cytokine signature associated with disease severity in chronic fatigue syndrome patients.
authors:
- Montoya JG
- Holmes TH
- Anderson JN
- Maecker HT
- Rosenberg-Hasson Y
- Valencia IJ
- Chu L
- Younger JW
- Tato CM
- Davis MM
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1710519114
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cytokine signature associated with disease severity in chronic fatigue syndrome patients.
**Authors:** Montoya JG, Holmes TH, Anderson JN, Maecker HT, Rosenberg-Hasson Y, Valencia IJ, Chu L, Younger JW, Tato CM, Davis MM
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1710519114](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1710519114)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 Aug 22;114(34):E7150-E7158. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1710519114. Epub 2017 Jul 31.

Cytokine signature associated with disease severity in chronic fatigue syndrome 
patients.

Montoya JG(1)(2)(3), Holmes TH(2)(3)(4), Anderson JN(1)(2), Maecker HT(3)(4)(5), 
Rosenberg-Hasson Y(3)(4), Valencia IJ(2), Chu L(2), Younger JW(6), Tato 
CM(3)(4), Davis MM(7)(4)(5)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305.
(2)Division of Infectious Diseases and Geographic Medicine; Stanford University 
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305.
(3)Institute for Immunity, Transplantation and Infection, Stanford University 
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305.
(4)Stanford Human Immune Monitoring Center, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305.
(5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305.
(6)Department of Anesthesiology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA 94305.
(7)Institute for Immunity, Transplantation and Infection, Stanford University 
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305; mmdavis@stanford.edu.
(8)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA 94305.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 Aug 22;114(34):8914-8916. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1712475114.
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 Nov 7;114(45):E9435. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1714011114.
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2017 Nov 7;114(45):E9436. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1714692114.

Although some signs of inflammation have been reported previously in patients 
with myalgic encephalomyelitis or chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS), the data 
are limited and contradictory. High-throughput methods now allow us to 
interrogate the human immune system for multiple markers of inflammation at a 
scale that was not previously possible. To determine whether a signature of 
serum cytokines could be associated with ME/CFS and correlated with disease 
severity and fatigue duration, cytokines of 192 ME/CFS patients and 392 healthy 
controls were measured using a 51-multiplex array on a Luminex system. Each 
cytokine's preprocessed data were regressed on ME/CFS severity plus covariates 
for age, sex, race, and an assay property of newly discovered importance: 
nonspecific binding. On average, TGF-β was elevated (P = 0.0052) and resistin 
was lower (P = 0.0052) in patients compared with controls. Seventeen cytokines 
had a statistically significant upward linear trend that correlated with ME/CFS 
severity: CCL11 (Eotaxin-1), CXCL1 (GROα), CXCL10 (IP-10), IFN-γ, IL-4, IL-5, 
IL-7, IL-12p70, IL-13, IL-17F, leptin, G-CSF, GM-CSF, LIF, NGF, SCF, and TGF-α. 
Of the 17 cytokines that correlated with severity, 13 are proinflammatory, 
likely contributing to many of the symptoms experienced by patients and 
establishing a strong immune system component of the disease. Only CXCL9 (MIG) 
inversely correlated with fatigue duration.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1710519114
PMCID: PMC5576836
PMID: 28760971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: M.M.D. is a 
member of the Scientific Advisory Board of the Open Medicine Foundation. A.L.K. 
and J.G.M. have published together, most recently in 2017.