---
reference_id: PMID:29030294
title: Type I interferon pathway activation in COPA syndrome.
authors:
- Volpi S
- Tsui J
- Mariani M
- Pastorino C
- Caorsi R
- Sacco O
- Ravelli A
- Shum AK
- Gattorno M
- Picco P
journal: Clin Immunol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2017.10.001
keywords:
- "Antibodies, Antinuclear/immunology"
- "Arthritis/complications, diagnostic imaging, genetics, immunology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Coatomer Protein/genetics, immunology"
- Female
- "Hemorrhage/complications, genetics, immunology"
- Humans
- Interferon Type I/immunology
- "Lung Diseases/complications, genetics, immunology"
- "Lung Diseases, Interstitial/complications, diagnostic imaging, genetics, immunology"
- Mutation
- Radiography
- Rheumatoid Factor/immunology
- Syndrome
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type I interferon pathway activation in COPA syndrome.
**Authors:** Volpi S, Tsui J, Mariani M, Pastorino C, Caorsi R, Sacco O, Ravelli A, Shum AK, Gattorno M, Picco P
**Journal:** Clin Immunol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.clim.2017.10.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clim.2017.10.001)

## Content

1. Clin Immunol. 2018 Feb;187:33-36. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2017.10.001. Epub 2017
Oct  10.

Type I interferon pathway activation in COPA syndrome.

Volpi S(1), Tsui J(2), Mariani M(3), Pastorino C(1), Caorsi R(3), Sacco O(4), 
Ravelli A(3), Shum AK(2), Gattorno M(1), Picco P(5).

Author information:
(1)Clinica Pediatrica e Reumatologia, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy; 
Laboratorio di immunologia delle malattie reumatiche, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, 
Genova, Italy.
(2)Department of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, University 
of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Clinica Pediatrica e Reumatologia, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Pulmonology and Allergy Unit and Cystic 
Fibrosis Center, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy.
(5)Clinica Pediatrica e Reumatologia, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy. 
Electronic address: paolopicco@gaslini.org.

Mutations of the COPA gene cause an immune dysregulatory disease characterised 
by polyarticular arthritis and progressive interstitial lung disease with 
pulmonary haemorrhages. We report the case of a young girl that presented at age 
3 with polyarticular arthritis, chronic cough and high titer rheumatoid factor. 
Radiologic imaging showed interstitial lung disease with tree-in-a-bud nodules 
and air-filled cysts. Targeted genetic analysis of COPA gene showed the reported 
c.698G>A mutation. The patient was lost to follow up for 3years during which 
therapy was discontinued with the development of joint damage and deformities. 
Analysis of peripheral blood showed activation of type 1 interferon pathway, 
which was also confirmed in 4 previously reported COPA patients. Our 
observations underline the importance of early treatment in COPA disease to 
avoid loss of joint function. Furthermore, our results suggest a role for type 1 
interferon in disease pathogenesis opening the possibility for targeted 
therapeutic approaches.

Copyright © 2017. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clim.2017.10.001
PMID: 29030294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]