---
reference_id: "PMID:36860862"
title: "Immune checkpoint inhibitors and Chimeric Antigen Receptor (CAR)-T cell therapy: Potential treatment options against Testicular Germ Cell Tumors."
authors:
- Schepisi G
- Gianni C
- Cursano MC
- Gallà V
- Menna C
- Casadei C
- Bleve S
- Lolli C
- Martinelli G
- Rosti G
- De Giorgi U
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1118610
keywords:
- Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors
- Testicular Neoplasms
- "Receptors, Chimeric Antigen/genetics"
- Humans
- Cell- and Tissue-Based Therapy
- Platinum
- "Neoplasms, Germ Cell and Embryonal/therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immune checkpoint inhibitors and Chimeric Antigen Receptor (CAR)-T cell therapy: Potential treatment options against Testicular Germ Cell Tumors.
**Authors:** Schepisi G, Gianni C, Cursano MC, Gallà V, Menna C, Casadei C, Bleve S, Lolli C, Martinelli G, Rosti G, De Giorgi U
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2023.1118610](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2023.1118610)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2023 Feb 13;14:1118610. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1118610. 
eCollection 2023.

Immune checkpoint inhibitors and Chimeric Antigen Receptor (CAR)-T cell therapy: 
Potential treatment options against Testicular Germ Cell Tumors.

Schepisi G(1), Gianni C(1), Cursano MC(1), Gallà V(2), Menna C(1), Casadei C(1), 
Bleve S(1), Lolli C(1), Martinelli G(1), Rosti G(1), De Giorgi U(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, IRCCS Istituto Romagnolo per lo Studio dei 
Tumori (IRST) "Dino Amadori", Meldola, Italy.
(2)Unit of Biostatistics and Clinical Trials, IRCCS Istituto Romagnolo per lo 
Studio dei Tumori (IRST) "Dino Amadori", Meldola, Italy.

Germ cell tumors (GCTs) represent a heterogeneous neoplasm family affecting 
gonads and rarely occurring in extragonadal areas. Most of patients have a good 
prognosis, often even in the presence of metastatic disease; however, in almost 
15% of cases, tumor relapse and platinum resistance are the main challenges. 
Thus, novel treatment strategies with both improved antineoplastic activity and 
minor treatment-related adverse events compared with platinum are really 
expected. In this context, the development and the high activity demonstrated by 
immune checkpoint inhibitors in solid tumors and, subsequently, the interesting 
results obtained from the use of chimeric antigen receptor (CAR-) T cell therapy 
in hematological tumors, have stimulated research in this direction also in 
GCTs. In this article, we will analyze the molecular mechanisms underlying the 
immune action in the development of GCTs, and we will report the data from the 
studies that tested the new immunotherapeutic approaches in these neoplasms.

Copyright © 2023 Schepisi, Gianni, Cursano, Gallà, Menna, Casadei, Bleve, Lolli, 
Martinelli, Rosti and De Giorgi.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2023.1118610
PMCID: PMC9968831
PMID: 36860862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.