---
reference_id: "PMID:32295321"
title: Detection of SHOX Gene Variations in Patients with Skeletal Abnormalities with or without Short Stature.
authors:
- Gürsoy S
- Hazan F
- Aykut A
- Nalbantoğlu Ö
- Korkmaz HA
- Demir K
- Özkan B
- Çoğulu Ö
journal: J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.4274/jcrpe.galenos.2020.2019.0001
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Dwarfism/physiopathology
- Family
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Growth Disorders/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Prognosis
- Short Stature Homeobox Protein/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Detection of SHOX Gene Variations in Patients with Skeletal Abnormalities with or without Short Stature.
**Authors:** Gürsoy S, Hazan F, Aykut A, Nalbantoğlu Ö, Korkmaz HA, Demir K, Özkan B, Çoğulu Ö
**Journal:** J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.4274/jcrpe.galenos.2020.2019.0001](https://doi.org/10.4274/jcrpe.galenos.2020.2019.0001)

## Content

1. J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol. 2020 Nov 25;12(4):358-365. doi:
10.4274/jcrpe.galenos.2020.2019.0001. Epub 2020 Apr 16.

Detection of SHOX Gene Variations in Patients with Skeletal Abnormalities with
or without Short Stature.

Gürsoy S(1), Hazan F(2), Aykut A(3), Nalbantoğlu Ö(4), Korkmaz HA(5), Demir
K(6), Özkan B(4), Çoğulu Ö(7).

Author information:
(1)University of Health Sciences Turkey, Dr. Behçet Uz Child Disease and
Pediatric Surgery Training and Research Hospital, Clinic of Pediatric Genetics,
İzmir, Turkey
(2)University of Health Sciences Turkey, Dr. Behçet Uz Child Disease and
Pediatric Surgery Training and Research Hospital, Clinic of Medical Genetics,
İzmir, Turkey
(3)Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, İzmir,
Turkey
(4)University of Health Sciences Turkey, Dr. Behçet Uz Child Disease and
Pediatric Surgery Training and Research Hospital, Clinic of Pediatric
Endocrinology, İzmir, Turkey
(5)Manisa City Hospital, Clinic of Pediatric Endocrinology, Manisa, Turkey
(6)Dokuz Eylül University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric
Endocrinology, İzmir, Turkey
(7)Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Genetics, İzmir,
Turkey

OBJECTIVE: SHOX gene mutations constitute one of the genetic causes of short
stature. The clinical phenotype includes variable degrees of growth impairment,
such as Langer mesomelic dysplasia (LMD), Léri-Weill dyschondrosteosis (LWD) or
idiopathic short stature (ISS). The aim of this study was to describe the
clinical features and molecular results of SHOX deficiency in a group of Turkish
patients who had skeletal findings with and without short stature.
METHODS: Forty-six patients with ISS, disproportionate short stature or skeletal
findings without short stature from 35 different families were included. SHOX
gene analysis was performed using Sanger sequencing and multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis.
RESULTS: Three different point mutations (two nonsense, one frameshift) and one
whole SHOX gene deletion were detected in 15 patients from four different
families. While 4/15 patients had LMD, the remaining patients had clinical
features compatible with LWD. Madelung’s deformity, cubitus valgus, muscular
hypertrophy and short forearm were the most common phenotypic features, as well
as short stature. Additionally, hearing loss was detected in two patients with
LMD.
CONCLUSION: This study has presented the clinical spectrum and molecular
findings of 15 patients with SHOX gene mutations or deletions. SHOX deficiency
should be especially considered in patients who have disproportionate short
stature or forearm anomalies with or without short stature. Although most of the
patients had partial or whole gene deletions, SHOX gene sequencing should be
performed in suspected cases. Furthermore, conductive hearing loss may rarely
accompany these clinical manifestations.

DOI: 10.4274/jcrpe.galenos.2020.2019.0001
PMCID: PMC7711637
PMID: 32295321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
