---
reference_id: "PMID:36070637"
title: "Generation of human induced pluripotential stem cells from individuals with complex heterozygous, isogenic corrected, and homozygous Bloc1s1 mutations."
authors:
- Wu K
- Takanohashi A
- Woidill S
- Seylani A
- Helman G
- Dias P
- Beers J
- Lin Y
- Simons C
- Wolvetang E
- Zou J
- Vanderver A
- Sack MN
journal: Stem Cell Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2022.102905
keywords:
- Humans
- Homozygote
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/metabolism
- Heterozygote
- Mutation/genetics
- Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Generation of human induced pluripotential stem cells from individuals with complex heterozygous, isogenic corrected, and homozygous Bloc1s1 mutations.
**Authors:** Wu K, Takanohashi A, Woidill S, Seylani A, Helman G, Dias P, Beers J, Lin Y, Simons C, Wolvetang E, Zou J, Vanderver A, Sack MN
**Journal:** Stem Cell Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.scr.2022.102905](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scr.2022.102905)

## Content

1. Stem Cell Res. 2022 Oct;64:102905. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2022.102905. Epub 2022
Aug  30.

Generation of human induced pluripotential stem cells from individuals with 
complex heterozygous, isogenic corrected, and homozygous Bloc1s1 mutations.

Wu K(1), Takanohashi A(2), Woidill S(2), Seylani A(1), Helman G(2), Dias P(3), 
Beers J(4), Lin Y(4), Simons C(5), Wolvetang E(6), Zou J(4), Vanderver A(7), 
Sack MN(8).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Mitochondrial Biology and Metabolism, National Heart Lung and 
Blood Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(2)Division of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA.
(3)Centro Hospitalar Universitario Lisboa Norte, E.P.E, Portugal.
(4)iPSC Core, National Heart Lung and Blood Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(5)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia.
(6)Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, University of 
Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.
(7)Division of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA; Department of Neurology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(8)Laboratory of Mitochondrial Biology and Metabolism, National Heart Lung and 
Blood Institute, Bethesda, MD, USA. Electronic address: sackm@nhlbi.nih.gov.

Genetic studies show that BLOC1S1 modulates mitochondrial and endosome-lysosome 
function (Wu et al., 2021a). Furthermore, Bloc1s1 mutations are linked to 
leukodystrophy (Bertoli-Avella et al., 2021). The Vanderver laboratory 
identified additional individuals with leukodystrophy that harbored either 
complex heterozygous (Bloc1s1 c.206A > C and c.359G > A), or homozygous (Bloc1s1 
c.185 T > C) point mutations. We generated induced pluripotential stem cell 
(iPSC) lines from these subjects, from parents of the complex heterozygous 
mutations patient, and from CRISPR isogenic (c.206A > C and c.359G > A) 
corrected iPSC-line. These complex heterozygous, homozygous, and 
isogenic-corrected Bloc1s1 lines were phenotypically normal and were capable of 
differentiation towards the three germ layers.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.scr.2022.102905
PMID: 36070637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be 
considered as potential competing interests: Adeline Vanderver reports financial 
support was provided by Eli Lilly and Company. Adeline Vanderver reports 
financial support was provided by Biogen. Adeline Vanderver reports financial 
support was provided by Takeda Pharmaceuticals America Inc. Adeline Vanderver 
reports financial support was provided by Homology Medicines Inc. Adeline 
Vanderver reports financial support was provided by Passage Bio, Inc. Adeline 
Vanderver reports financial support was provided by Illumina Inc. Adeline 
Vanderver reports financial support was provided by PMD FOundation.