---
reference_id: "PMID:17308163"
title: Bone remodeling.
authors:
- Hadjidakis DJ
- Androulakis II
journal: Ann N Y Acad Sci
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1196/annals.1365.035
keywords:
- Bone Remodeling/physiology
- Bone and Bones/physiology
- Female
- Humans
- Osteoblasts/physiology
- Osteoclasts/physiology
- Osteocytes/physiology
- "Osteoporosis, Postmenopausal/physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bone remodeling.
**Authors:** Hadjidakis DJ, Androulakis II
**Journal:** Ann N Y Acad Sci (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1196/annals.1365.035](https://doi.org/10.1196/annals.1365.035)

## Content

1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006 Dec;1092:385-96. doi: 10.1196/annals.1365.035.

Bone remodeling.

Hadjidakis DJ(1), Androulakis II.

Author information:
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Propaedeutic and Research Institute, 
Athens University, Attikon University Hospital, Rimini 1, Haidari 124 62, 
Greece. dhadjida@med.uoa.gr

The skeleton is a metabolically active organ that undergoes continuous 
remodeling throughout life. Bone remodeling involves the removal of mineralized 
bone by osteoclasts followed by the formation of bone matrix through the 
osteoblasts that subsequently become mineralized. The remodeling cycle consists 
of three consecutive phases: resorption, during which osteoclasts digest old 
bone; reversal, when mononuclear cells appear on the bone surface; and 
formation, when osteoblasts lay down new bone until the resorbed bone is 
completely replaced. Bone remodeling serves to adjust bone architecture to meet 
changing mechanical needs and it helps to repair microdamages in bone matrix 
preventing the accumulation of old bone. It also plays an important role in 
maintaining plasma calcium homeostasis. The regulation of bone remodeling is 
both systemic and local. The major systemic regulators include parathyroid 
hormone (PTH), calcitriol, and other hormones such as growth hormone, 
glucocorticoids, thyroid hormones, and sex hormones. Factors such as 
insulin-like growth factors (IGFs), prostaglandins, tumor growth factor-beta 
(TGF-beta), bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP), and cytokines are involved as 
well. As far as local regulation of bone remodeling is concerned, a large number 
of cytokines and growth factors that affect bone cell functions have been 
recently identified. Furthermore, through the RANK/receptor activator of 
NF-kappa B ligand (RANKL)/osteoprotegerin (OPG) system the processes of bone 
resorption and formation are tightly coupled allowing a wave of bone formation 
to follow each cycle of bone resorption, thus maintaining skeletal integrity.

DOI: 10.1196/annals.1365.035
PMID: 17308163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]