---
reference_id: "PMID:36701017"
title: "PSEN2 and ABCA7 variants causing early-onset preclinical pathological changes in Alzheimer's disease: a case report and literature review."
authors:
- Gan J
- Zhou H
- Liu C
- Fang L
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10072-023-06602-5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# PSEN2 and ABCA7 variants causing early-onset preclinical pathological changes in Alzheimer's disease: a case report and literature review.
**Authors:** Gan J, Zhou H, Liu C, Fang L
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10072-023-06602-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-023-06602-5)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2023 Jun;44(6):1987-2001. doi: 10.1007/s10072-023-06602-5. Epub
2023  Jan 26.

PSEN2 and ABCA7 variants causing early-onset preclinical pathological changes in 
Alzheimer's disease: a case report and literature review.

Gan J(#)(1)(2), Zhou H(#)(1), Liu C(2), Fang L(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 87 
Xiangya Road, Changsha, 410000, China.
(2)Ningxia Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Ningxia, China.
(3)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 87 
Xiangya Road, Changsha, 410000, China. fangliangjuan@csu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a debilitating and highly heritable 
neurodegenerative disease. Early-onset AD (EOAD) was defined as AD occurring 
before age 65. Although it has a high genetic risk, EOAD due to PSEN2 variation 
is very rare. ABCA7 is an important risk gene for AD. Previously reported cases 
mainly carried variations in a single pathogenic or risk gene. METHODS 
AND RESULTS: In this study, we report a 35-year-old female carrying variants in 
both the PSEN2 gene (c.640G > T p.V214L) and ABCA7 gene (c.2848G > A p.V950M). 
Four previously reported cases carried PSEN2 V214L, and no reported cases 
carried ABCA7 V950M. She had a history of migraine, patent foramen ovale, 
spontaneous subarachnoid hemorrhage without aneurysm, and multiple cerebral 
microhemorrhages. Her MMSE score was 24/30, and her MoCA score was 22/30. The 
concentration of Aβ42 and the ratio of Aβ42 to Aβ40 in cerebral spinal fluid 
were obviously decreased. Published variants of PSEN2 and ABCA7 in PubMed were 
reviewed, and the patients' characteristics were summarized and compared to 
provide information for the clinical diagnosis of AD.
CONCLUSIONS: It is necessary to conduct genetic screening in cases with atypical 
manifestations.

© 2023. Fondazione Società Italiana di Neurologia.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-023-06602-5
PMID: 36701017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]