---
reference_id: "PMID:38801568"
title: "Monkeypox: Past, Present, and Future."
authors:
- Khan G
- Perveen N
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-57165-7_1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Monkeypox: Past, Present, and Future.
**Authors:** Khan G, Perveen N
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-031-57165-7_1](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-57165-7_1)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2024;1451:1-20. doi: 10.1007/978-3-031-57165-7_1.

Monkeypox: Past, Present, and Future.

Khan G(1), Perveen N(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, United Arab Emirates University, P.O. Box 15551, Al-Ain, United Arab 
Emirates. g_khan@uaeu.ac.ae.
(2)Department of Biology, College of Science, United Arab Emirates University, 
P.O. Box 15551, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates.

Monkeypox (Mpox) is a zoonotic disease caused by a virus (monkeypox virus-MPV) 
belonging to the Poxviridae family. In humans, the disease has an incubation 
period of 5-21 days and then progresses in two phases, the prodromal phase and 
the rash phase. The prodromal phase is characterized by non-specific symptoms 
such as fever, muscle pain, malaise, lymphadenopathy, headache, and chills. Skin 
lesions appear in the rash phase of the disease. These lesions progress through 
different stages (macules, papules, vesicles, and pustules). In May 2022, WHO 
reported an outbreak of human Mpox in several countries which were previously 
Mpox-free. As per the CDC report of March 01, 2023, a total of 86,231 confirmed 
cases of Mpox and 105 deaths have been reported from 110 countries and 
territories across the globe. Notably, more than 90% of these countries were 
reporting Mpox for the first time. The phylogenetic analysis revealed that this 
outbreak was associated with the virus from the West African clade. However, 
most of the cases in this outbreak had no evidence of travel histories to 
MPV-endemic countries in Central or West Africa. This outbreak was primarily 
driven by the transmission of the virus via intimate contact in men who have sex 
with men (MSM). The changing epidemiology of Mpox raised concerns about the 
increasing spread of the disease in non-endemic countries and the urgent need to 
control and prevent it. In this chapter, we present all the documented cases of 
Mpox from 1970 to 2023 and discuss the past, present, and future of MPV.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-57165-7_1
PMID: 38801568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]