---
reference_id: "PMID:16523510"
title: "LEOPARD syndrome: clinical diagnosis in the first year of life."
authors:
- Digilio MC
- Sarkozy A
- de Zorzi A
- Pacileo G
- Limongelli G
- Mingarelli R
- Calabrò R
- Marino B
- Dallapiccola B
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31156
content_type: abstract_only
---

# LEOPARD syndrome: clinical diagnosis in the first year of life.
**Authors:** Digilio MC, Sarkozy A, de Zorzi A, Pacileo G, Limongelli G, Mingarelli R, Calabrò R, Marino B, Dallapiccola B
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.31156](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.31156)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Apr 1;140(7):740-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31156.

LEOPARD syndrome: clinical diagnosis in the first year of life.

Digilio MC(1), Sarkozy A, de Zorzi A, Pacileo G, Limongelli G, Mingarelli R, 
Calabrò R, Marino B, Dallapiccola B.

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics and Pediatric Cardiology, Bambino Gesù Hospital, Rome, 
Italy. digilio@opbg.net

LEOPARD syndrome (LS) is an autosomal dominant syndrome characterized by 
multiple lentigines and café-au-lait spots, electrocardiographic-conduction 
abnormalities, ocular hypertelorism/obstructive cardiomyopathy, pulmonary 
stenosis, abnormalities of the genitalia in males, retardation of growth, and 
deafness. LS shares many features with Noonan syndrome (NS), in which lentigines 
and deafness are usually not present. Molecular studies have shown that LS and 
NS are allelic disorders, caused by different missense mutations in PTPN11, a 
gene encoding the protein tyrosine phosphatase SHP-2 located at chromosome 
12q22-qter. The clinical diagnosis of LS is generally difficult in the first 
months of life because the distinctive lentigines are generally not present at 
birth and develop during childhood. From January 2002 to December 2004, we 
suspected LS clinically in 10 patients admitted to our genetic counseling 
services in the first 12 months of life. A PTPN11 gene mutation was detected in 
8/10 (80%) patients. In one patient without a PTPN11 mutation a subsequent 
clinical diagnosis of neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) was made, following the 
evaluation of the mother, who had previously undiagnosed classic NF1. The age of 
LS patients with PTPN11 mutation ranged between 1 and 11 months (mean age +/- SD 
7.5 +/- 3.96 months). Review of the clinical characteristics of patients with LS 
confirmed by molecular study during the first year of life demonstrates that the 
diagnosis of LS in the first months of age can be clinically suspected in 
patients presenting with three main features, that is, characteristic facial 
features (100%), hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) (87%), and cafe-au-lait spots 
(75%). Characteristic facial features can be mild or severe, and consist of 
hypertelorism, downslanting palpebral fissures, ptosis, and dysmorphic ears. The 
clinical suspicion of LS may be confirmed by molecular screening for PTPN11 
mutations. An early diagnosis of the disease is useful for the prospective care 
of associated medical problems and for precise genetic counseling.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.31156
PMID: 16523510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]