---
reference_id: "PMID:29907980"
title: "DMD genotype correlations from the Duchenne Registry: Endogenous exon skipping is a factor in prolonged ambulation for individuals with a defined mutation subtype."
authors:
- Wang RT
- Barthelemy F
- Martin AS
- Douine ED
- Eskin A
- Lucas A
- Lavigne J
- Peay H
- Khanlou N
- Sweeney L
- Cantor RM
- Miceli MC
- Nelson SF
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1002/humu.23561
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Biopsy
- "Codon, Nonsense/genetics"
- "Dystrophin/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics"
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- Fibroblasts/pathology
- Genotype
- Humans
- Kaplan-Meier Estimate
- Length of Stay
- Male
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism, pathology"
- "Muscular Dystrophy, Duchenne/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- Myoblasts/pathology
- "Oligodeoxyribonucleotides, Antisense/genetics, therapeutic use"
- Primary Cell Culture
- Registries
- Sequence Deletion/genetics
- Sex Characteristics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DMD genotype correlations from the Duchenne Registry: Endogenous exon skipping is a factor in prolonged ambulation for individuals with a defined mutation subtype.
**Authors:** Wang RT, Barthelemy F, Martin AS, Douine ED, Eskin A, Lucas A, Lavigne J, Peay H, Khanlou N, Sweeney L, Cantor RM, Miceli MC, Nelson SF
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.23561](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.23561)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2018 Sep;39(9):1193-1202. doi: 10.1002/humu.23561. Epub 2018 Jul
12.

DMD genotype correlations from the Duchenne Registry: Endogenous exon skipping 
is a factor in prolonged ambulation for individuals with a defined mutation 
subtype.

Wang RT(1)(2), Barthelemy F(2)(3), Martin AS(4), Douine ED(1)(2), Eskin A(1)(2), 
Lucas A(4), Lavigne J(4), Peay H(4)(5), Khanlou N(6), Sweeney L(7), Cantor 
RM(1), Miceli MC(2)(3)(8), Nelson SF(1)(2)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California ,Los Angeles, California.
(2)Center for Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy, University of California, Los 
Angeles,Los Angeles, California.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, David Geffen 
School of Medicine and College of Letters and Sciences, University of 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California.
(4)Parent Project Muscular Dystrophy, Hackensack, New Jersey.
(5)RTI International, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina.
(6)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, California.
(7)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, Florida.
(8)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, 
California, Los Angeles.

Antisense oligonucleotide (AON)-mediated exon skipping is an emerging 
therapeutic for individuals with Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD). Skipping of 
exons adjacent to common exon deletions in DMD using AONs can produce in-frame 
transcripts and functional protein. Targeted skipping of DMD exons 8, 44, 45, 
50, 51, 52, 53, and 55 is predicted to benefit 47% of affected individuals. We 
observed a correlation between mutation subgroups and age at loss of ambulation 
in the Duchenne Registry, a large database of phenotypic and genetic data for 
DMD (N = 765). Males amenable to exon 44 (N = 74) and exon 8 skipping (N = 18) 
showed prolonged ambulation compared to other exon skip groups and nonsense 
mutations (P = 0.035 and P < 0.01, respectively). In particular, exon 45 
deletions were associated with prolonged age at loss of ambulation relative to 
the rest of the exon 44 skip amenable cohort and other DMD mutations. Exon 3-7 
deletions also showed prolonged ambulation relative to all other exon 8 
skippable mutations. Cultured myotubes from DMD patients with deletions of exons 
3-7 or exon 45 showed higher endogenous skipping than other mutations, providing 
a potential biological rationale for our observations. These results highlight 
the utility of aggregating phenotypic and genotypic data for rare pediatric 
diseases to reveal progression differences, identify potentially confounding 
factors, and probe molecular mechanisms that may affect disease severity.

© 2018 The Authors. Human Mutation published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.23561
PMCID: PMC6175390
PMID: 29907980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]