---
reference_id: "PMID:41767175"
title: "Donidalorsen for Long-Term Prophylaxis of Hereditary Angioedema Attacks: Results from the OASISplus Open-Label Extension Cohort at Year 1."
authors:
- Lumry WR
- Tachdjian R
- Craig T
- Karakaya G
- Gelincik A
- Stobiecki M
- Jacobs JS
- Gokmen NM
- Reshef A
- Manning ME
- Grammatikos A
- Giardino F
- Guilarte M
- Baptist AP
- Bordone L
- Newman KB
- Treadwell S
- Lin T
- Yarlas A
- Riedl MA
- Cohn DM
journal: J Asthma Allergy
year: '2026'
doi: 10.2147/JAA.S592079
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Donidalorsen for Long-Term Prophylaxis of Hereditary Angioedema Attacks: Results from the OASISplus Open-Label Extension Cohort at Year 1.
**Authors:** Lumry WR, Tachdjian R, Craig T, Karakaya G, Gelincik A, Stobiecki M, Jacobs JS, Gokmen NM, Reshef A, Manning ME, Grammatikos A, Giardino F, Guilarte M, Baptist AP, Bordone L, Newman KB, Treadwell S, Lin T, Yarlas A, Riedl MA, Cohn DM
**Journal:** J Asthma Allergy (2026)
**DOI:** [10.2147/JAA.S592079](https://doi.org/10.2147/JAA.S592079)

## Content

1. J Asthma Allergy. 2026 Feb 23;19:592079. doi: 10.2147/JAA.S592079. eCollection
 2026.

Donidalorsen for Long-Term Prophylaxis of Hereditary Angioedema Attacks: Results
from the OASISplus Open-Label Extension Cohort at Year 1.

Lumry WR(1), Tachdjian R(2), Craig T(3)(4)(5), Karakaya G(6), Gelincik A(7),
Stobiecki M(8), Jacobs JS(9), Gokmen NM(10), Reshef A(11), Manning ME(12),
Grammatikos A(13), Giardino F(14), Guilarte M(15), Baptist AP(16), Bordone
L(17), Newman KB(17), Treadwell S(17), Lin T(17), Yarlas A(17), Riedl MA(18),
Cohn DM(19).

Author information:
(1)Asthma and Allergy Research Associates, Dallas, TX, USA.
(2)Division of Allergy, Immunology, and Rheumatology, University of California
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, Pediatrics, MFM, and Biomedical Sciences, Penn State
University, Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology, Hershey, PA, USA.
(4)Vinmec International Hospital, Times City, Hanoi, Vietnam.
(5)Vin University, Hanoi, Vietnam.
(6)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Chest Diseases, Hacettepe
University School of Medicine, Ankara, Türkiye.
(7)Division of Immunology and Allergic Diseases, Department of Internal
Medicine, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Türkiye.
(8)Department of Clinical and Environmental Allergology, Jagiellonian University
Medical College, Kraków, Poland.
(9)Allergy and Asthma Clinical Research, Inc., Walnut Creek, CA, USA.
(10)Division of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Ege University, Izmir, Türkiye.
(11)Angioedema Center, Barzilai University Medical Center, Ashkelon, Israel.
(12)Medical Research of Arizona, Scottsdale, AZ, USA.
(13)Department of Clinical Immunology, North Bristol NHS Trust, Bristol, UK.
(14)A.O.U. Policlinico "G.Rodolico-San Marco", Catania, Italy.
(15)Department of Allergy, Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Vall d'Hebron
Research Institute (VHIR), Barcelona, Spain.
(16)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Henry Ford Health, Detroit, MI, USA.
(17)Ionis Pharmaceuticals Inc, Carlsbad, CA, USA.
(18)Division of Allergy and Immunology, University of California San Diego
School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(19)Department of Vascular Medicine, Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences,
Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Donidalorsen, a prekallikrein-directed antisense oligonucleotide
indicated for prophylaxis of hereditary angioedema (HAE) attacks in patients
aged ≥12 years, demonstrated efficacy and acceptable safety in the phase 3,
placebo-controlled OASIS-HAE trial (NCT05139810). Here, we report 1-year results
from the corresponding open-label extension (OLE) cohort of the OASISplus study
(NCT05392114).
METHODS: OASISplus included patients who rolled over from OASIS-HAE. Patients
who received donidalorsen 80 mg or placebo subcutaneously every 4 weeks (Q4W) in
OASIS-HAE received donidalorsen Q4W in OASISplus. Patients who received
donidalorsen 80 mg or placebo every 8 weeks (Q8W) in OASIS-HAE received
donidalorsen Q8W or Q4W, if not attack-free in the final 8 weeks of OASIS-HAE.
The primary endpoint was safety (ie, incidence of treatment-emergent adverse
events [TEAEs]). Secondary endpoints included the monthly rate of HAE attacks
and Angioedema Quality of Life (AE-QoL).
RESULTS: The OLE cohort included 83 patients (Q4W, n=69 [83%]; Q8W, n=14 [17%]).
Of these, 75 (90.4%) completed Year 1, and 6 patients receiving donidalorsen Q8W
in OASIS-HAE switched to the Q4W dosing group in the OLE. Median donidalorsen
exposure was 392.3 days. From Weeks 0 to 52, reductions in mean HAE attack rate
from OASIS-HAE baseline were 94% (Q4W) and 95% (Q8W), and patients reported
clinically meaningful improvements in mean AE-QoL total score at Week 52 (Q4W,
28.1 points; Q8W, 26.7 points). Twenty-two (27%) patients reported
treatment-related TEAEs; none were serious, and injection-site reactions were
the most frequently reported.
CONCLUSION: Donidalorsen demonstrated sustained reductions in HAE attack rate,
improvements in QoL, and an acceptable safety profile after 1 year of treatment.

© 2026 Lumry et al.

DOI: 10.2147/JAA.S592079
PMCID: PMC12948764
PMID: 41767175

Conflict of interest statement: W.R.L. has received honoraria and/or research
grant support from ADARx, AstraZeneca, Astria, BioMarin Pharmaceutical,
BioCryst, CSL Behring, Eli Lilly, Grifols, GSK, Intellia, KalVista, Novartis,
Pharming, Pharvaris, Sanofi/Regeneron, Takeda/Shire, Teva, and UpStream Bio. He
is a member of the US HAEA Medical Advisory Board. R.T. has received grants or
research support from ADMA, ARS, Astria, BioCryst, CSL Behring, Intellia, Ionis,
KalVista, Pharvaris, and Takeda; is a speaker for AstraZeneca, BioCryst, CSL
Behring, Grifols, GSK, Pharming, Sanofi–Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, and Takeda;
and has served as a consultant for BioCryst, CSL Behring, KalVista, Pharming,
and Takeda. T.C. has received research grants from Argo, ADARx, Astria,
Biocryst, BioMarin Pharmaceutical, CSL Behring, Intellia, Ionis, KalVista,
Pharvaris, Sanofi and Takeda; consulted for ADARx, Astria, BioMarin
Pharmaceutical, CSL Behring, Grifols, Intellia, Ionis, KalVista, Pharvaris, and
Takeda; provided speaker presentations for Astria, CSL Behring, Grifols,
KalVista, and Takeda. In addition, he is also the director for the HAE-A Medical
Advisory Board at the ACARE Center. M.S. has served on advisory boards for
Astria Therapeutics, CSL Behring, KalVista, Pharvaris, and Takeda; provided
speaker presentations for BioCryst, CSL Behring, KalVista, Pharvaris, and
Takeda; has been a clinical trial investigator for BioCryst, Ionis, KalVista,
and Pharvaris. In additional, he also reports being the principal investigator
and receives personal compensation related to the clinical study with
donidalorsen. J.S.J. has received research funding from Astria, CSL Behring,
Pharvaris, and Takeda; received speaking fees from BioCryst and Takeda; and has
been a consultant for BioCryst, CSL Behring, Pharvaris, and Takeda. He also
reports medical writing support from Ionis. A.R. has been a consultant for
BioCryst, CSL Behring, Ionis, Pharvaris, and Takeda. M.E.M. has received
research support from Astria, BioCryst, BioMarin Pharmaceutical, Celldex,
Cogent, CSL Behring, GSK, Ionis, KalVista, Pharming, Pharvaris, Takeda, and
Teva; consultancy fees from BioCryst, Cogent, CSL Behring, Intellia, Ionis,
KalVista, Novartis, Pharming, Pharvaris, and Takeda; and speaking fees from
BioCryst, Blueprint, CSL Behring, KalVista, Novartis, Pharming, and Takeda. F.G.
has served on advisory boards and seminars funded by BioCryst, CSL Behring,
KalVista, and Takeda and has received funding from CSL Behring and Takeda to
attend conferences/educational events. M.G. has served as speaker or advisor
and/or received research funding from the following companies: BioCryst,
BioMarin Pharmaceutical, Blueprint Medicines Corporation, CSL Behring, KalVista,
Novartis, Pharvaris, and Takeda. A.B. received research support from the
American Lung Association, AstraZeneca, Novartis, and Regeneron; and was a
consultant for AstraZeneca, GlaxoSmithKline, and Teva. M.A.R. has received
research grants from Astria, BioCryst, BioMarin Pharmaceutical, CSL Behring,
Intellia, Ionis, KalVista, Pharvaris, and Takeda; consulted for Astria,
BioCryst, BioMarin Pharmaceutical, ADARx, Celldex, CSL Behring, Cycle Pharma,
Grifols, Intellia Therapeutics, Ionis, KalVista, Novartis, Pharming, Pharvaris,
Sanofi–Regeneron, and Takeda; and provided speaker presentations for BioCryst,
CSL Behring, Grifols, Pharming, and Takeda. D.M.C. has received speaker or
consultancy fees from ADARx, Astria, BioCryst, CSL Behring, Intellia, Ionis,
KalVista, Otsuka, Pharvaris, and Takeda. L.B., K.B.N., S.T., T.L., and A.Y. are
employees of Ionis and hold shares and/or options in Ionis. The authors report
no other conflicts of interest in this work.
