---
reference_id: "PMID:32801039"
title: "The role of TH17 cells in multiple sclerosis: Therapeutic implications."
authors:
- Moser T
- Akgün K
- Proschmann U
- Sellner J
- Ziemssen T
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102647
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of TH17 cells in multiple sclerosis: Therapeutic implications.
**Authors:** Moser T, Akgün K, Proschmann U, Sellner J, Ziemssen T
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102647](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102647)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2020 Oct;19(10):102647. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102647. Epub
 2020 Aug 13.

The role of TH17 cells in multiple sclerosis: Therapeutic implications.

Moser T(1), Akgün K(2), Proschmann U(2), Sellner J(3), Ziemssen T(4).

Author information:
(1)Center of Clinical Neuroscience, University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, 
Dresden University of Technical, Fetscherstrasse 74, 01307 Dresden, Germany; 
Department of Neurology, Christian Doppler Medical Center, Paracelsus Medical 
University, Ignaz-Harrer-Straße 79, 5020 Salzburg, Austria.
(2)Center of Clinical Neuroscience, University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, 
Dresden University of Technical, Fetscherstrasse 74, 01307 Dresden, Germany.
(3)Department of Neurology, Christian Doppler Medical Center, Paracelsus Medical 
University, Ignaz-Harrer-Straße 79, 5020 Salzburg, Austria; Department of 
Neurology, Landesklinikum Mistelbach-Gänserndorf, Liechtensteinstrasse 67, 3120 
Mistelbach, Austria; Department of Neurology, Klinikum rechts der Isar, 
Technische Universität München, Ismaninger Strasse 22, 81675 München, Germany.
(4)Center of Clinical Neuroscience, University Hospital Carl Gustav Carus, 
Dresden University of Technical, Fetscherstrasse 74, 01307 Dresden, Germany. 
Electronic address: Tjalf.Ziemssen@uniklinikum-dresden.de.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory demyelinating disease of the central 
nervous system (CNS) where immunopathology is thought to be mediated by 
myelin-reactive CD4+ T helper (TH) cells. The TH cells most commonly implicated 
in the pathogenesis of the disease are of TH1 and TH17 lineage, which are 
defined by the production of interferon-γ and interleukin-17, respectively. 
Moreover, there is emerging evidence for the involvement of TH17.1 cells, which 
share the hallmarks of TH1 and TH17 subsets. In this review, we summarise 
current knowledge about the potential role of TH17 subsets in the initiation and 
progression of the disease and put a focus on their response to approved 
immunomodulatory MS drugs. In this regard, TH17 cells are abundant in peripheral 
blood, cerebrospinal fluid and brain lesions of MS patients, and their counts 
and inflammatory mediators are further increased during relapses. Fingolimod and 
alemtuzumab induce a paramount decrease in central memory T cells, which harbour 
the majority of peripheral TH17 cells, while the efficacy of natalizumab, 
dimethyl fumarate and importantly hematopoietic stem cell therapy correlates 
with TH17.1 cell inhibition. Interestingly, also CD20 antibodies target highly 
inflammatory TH cells and hamper TH17 differentiation by IL-6 reductions. 
Moreover, recovery rates of TH cells best correlate with long-term efficacy 
after therapeutical immunodepletion. We conclude that central memory TH17.1 
cells play a pivotal role in MS pathogenesis and they represent a major target 
of MS therapeutics.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102647
PMID: 32801039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest TM received 
personal compensation for oral presentation and consulting service from Biogen, 
Merck, Sanofi, Roche Teva, Novartis and Celgene. KA received personal 
compensation for oral presentation and consulting service from Biogen Idec, 
Merck, Sanofi and Roche. UP received speaker fee from Merck, Biogen and Bayer. 
UP received additionally personal compensation from Biogen and Roche for 
consulting service. JS has received personal compensation for consulting and 
scientific advisory board activities, speaking, or other activities from Biogen, 
Celgene, Immunic, Merck, Novartis, Sanofi and Teva. JS has received research 
support from Biogen, Merck and Roche. TZ received personal compensation from 
Almirall Biogen, Bayer, Celgene, Novartis, Roche, Sanofi, Teva for consulting 
services. TZ received additional financial support for research activities from 
BAT, Biogen, Novartis, Roche, Teva, and Sanofi Aventis.