---
reference_id: "PMID:14871928"
title: Constitutive activation of MEK1 in chondrocytes causes Stat1-independent achondroplasia-like dwarfism and rescues the Fgfr3-deficient mouse phenotype.
authors:
- Murakami S
- Balmes G
- McKinney S
- Zhang Z
- Givol D
- de Crombrugghe B
journal: Genes Dev
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1101/gad.1179104
keywords:
- Achondroplasia/genetics
- Animals
- Cell Differentiation
- Chondrocytes/metabolism
- DNA-Binding Proteins/metabolism
- MAP Kinase Kinase 1
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase Kinases/genetics, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Osteogenesis
- Phenotype
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3"
- "Receptors, Fibroblast Growth Factor/deficiency, genetics"
- STAT1 Transcription Factor
- Signal Transduction
- Trans-Activators/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Constitutive activation of MEK1 in chondrocytes causes Stat1-independent achondroplasia-like dwarfism and rescues the Fgfr3-deficient mouse phenotype.
**Authors:** Murakami S, Balmes G, McKinney S, Zhang Z, Givol D, de Crombrugghe B
**Journal:** Genes Dev (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1101/gad.1179104](https://doi.org/10.1101/gad.1179104)

## Content

1. Genes Dev. 2004 Feb 1;18(3):290-305. doi: 10.1101/gad.1179104.

Constitutive activation of MEK1 in chondrocytes causes Stat1-independent 
achondroplasia-like dwarfism and rescues the Fgfr3-deficient mouse phenotype.

Murakami S(1), Balmes G, McKinney S, Zhang Z, Givol D, de Crombrugghe B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, The University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer 
Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. smurakam@mdanderson.org

We generated transgenic mice that express a constitutively active mutant of MEK1 
in chondrocytes. These mice showed a dwarf phenotype similar to achondroplasia, 
the most common human dwarfism, caused by activating mutations in FGFR3. These 
mice displayed incomplete hypertrophy of chondrocytes in the growth plates and a 
general delay in endochondral ossification, whereas chondrocyte proliferation 
was unaffected. Immunohistochemical analysis of the cranial base in transgenic 
embryos showed reduced staining for collagen type X and persistent expression of 
Sox9 in chondrocytes. These observations indicate that the MAPK pathway inhibits 
hypertrophic differentiation of chondrocytes and negatively regulates bone 
growth without inhibiting chondrocyte proliferation. Expression of a 
constitutively active mutant of MEK1 in chondrocytes of Fgfr3-deficient mice 
inhibited skeletal overgrowth, strongly suggesting that regulation of bone 
growth by FGFR3 is mediated at least in part by the MAPK pathway. Although loss 
of Stat1 restored the reduced chondrocyte proliferation in mice expressing an 
achondroplasia mutant of Fgfr3, it did not rescue the reduced hypertrophic zone, 
the delay in formation of secondary ossification centers, and the 
achondroplasia-like phenotype. These observations suggest a model in which Fgfr3 
signaling inhibits bone growth by inhibiting chondrocyte differentiation through 
the MAPK pathway and by inhibiting chondrocyte proliferation through Stat1.

DOI: 10.1101/gad.1179104
PMCID: PMC338282
PMID: 14871928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]