---
reference_id: "PMID:34626353"
title: Genetics and Diagnostic Approach to Lymphoblastic Leukemia/Lymphoma.
authors:
- Afkhami M
- Ally F
- Pullarkat V
- Pillai RK
journal: Cancer Treat Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-78311-2_2
keywords:
- Chromosome Aberrations
- Humans
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- Mutation
- "Precursor Cell Lymphoblastic Leukemia-Lymphoma/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetics and Diagnostic Approach to Lymphoblastic Leukemia/Lymphoma.
**Authors:** Afkhami M, Ally F, Pullarkat V, Pillai RK
**Journal:** Cancer Treat Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-030-78311-2_2](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-78311-2_2)

## Content

1. Cancer Treat Res. 2021;181:17-43. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-78311-2_2.

Genetics and Diagnostic Approach to Lymphoblastic Leukemia/Lymphoma.

Afkhami M(1), Ally F(2), Pullarkat V(2), Pillai RK(2).

Author information:
(1)City of Hope Medical Center, 1500 E Duarte Rd., Duarte, CA, 91010, USA. 
mafkhami@coh.org.
(2)City of Hope Medical Center, 1500 E Duarte Rd., Duarte, CA, 91010, USA.

Our understanding of the genetics and biology of lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma 
(acute lymphoblastic leukemia, ALL) has advanced rapidly in the past decade with 
advances in sequencing and other molecular techniques. Besides recurrent 
chromosomal abnormalities detected by karyotyping or fluorescence in situ 
hybridization, these leukemias/lymphomas are characterized by a variety of 
mutations, gene rearrangements as well as copy number alterations. This is 
particularly true in the case of Philadelphia-like (Ph-like) ALL, a major subset 
which has the same gene expression signature as Philadelphia chromosome-positive 
ALL but lacks BCR-ABL1 translocation. Ph-like ALL is associated with a worse 
prognosis and hence its detection is critical. However, techniques to detect 
this entity are complex and are not widely available. This chapter discusses 
various subsets of ALL and describes our approach to the accurate classification 
and prognostication of these cases.

© 2021. Springer Nature Switzerland AG.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-78311-2_2
PMID: 34626353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]