---
reference_id: "PMID:38814457"
title: "Ureteroscopic management in cystinuric patients: long-term results from a tertiary care referral center."
authors:
- Candela L
- Chicaud M
- Solano C
- Ventimiglia E
- Kutchukian S
- Corrales M
- Montorsi F
- Salonia A
- Panthier F
- Doizi S
- Haymann JP
- Letavernier E
- Daudon M
- Traxer O
journal: World J Urol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00345-024-05067-1
keywords:
- Humans
- Ureteroscopy
- Male
- Retrospective Studies
- Adult
- Female
- Adolescent
- Tertiary Care Centers
- Cystinuria/complications
- Young Adult
- Treatment Outcome
- Time Factors
- Kidney Calculi/surgery
- Middle Aged
- Child
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ureteroscopic management in cystinuric patients: long-term results from a tertiary care referral center.
**Authors:** Candela L, Chicaud M, Solano C, Ventimiglia E, Kutchukian S, Corrales M, Montorsi F, Salonia A, Panthier F, Doizi S, Haymann JP, Letavernier E, Daudon M, Traxer O
**Journal:** World J Urol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00345-024-05067-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00345-024-05067-1)

## Content

1. World J Urol. 2024 May 30;42(1):362. doi: 10.1007/s00345-024-05067-1.

Ureteroscopic management in cystinuric patients: long-term results from a
tertiary care referral center.

Candela L(1)(2), Chicaud M(3)(4), Solano C(3), Ventimiglia E(5), Kutchukian
S(3)(6), Corrales M(3), Montorsi F(5), Salonia A(5), Panthier F(3), Doizi S(3),
Haymann JP(7), Letavernier E(7), Daudon M(7), Traxer O(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Experimental Oncology/Unit of Urology, Università Vita-Salute San
Raffaele, URI-Urological Research Institute IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele, Via
Olgettina 60, Milan, 20132, Italy. candela.luigi91@gmail.com.
(2)GRC n°20, Groupe de Recherche Clinique sur la Lithiase Urinaire, Service
d'Urologie, Hôpital Tenon, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France.
candela.luigi91@gmail.com.
(3)GRC n°20, Groupe de Recherche Clinique sur la Lithiase Urinaire, Service
d'Urologie, Hôpital Tenon, Sorbonne Université, Paris, France.
(4)Service d'Urologie, CHU Limoges, Limoges, 87000, France.
(5)Division of Experimental Oncology/Unit of Urology, Università Vita-Salute San
Raffaele, URI-Urological Research Institute IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele, Via
Olgettina 60, Milan, 20132, Italy.
(6)Department of Urology, Poitiers University Hospital, 2 Rue de la Milétrie,
Poitiers, 86000, France.
(7)Explorations Fonctionnelles Multidisciplinaires, AP-HP, Hôpital Tenon, Paris,
France.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate long-term surgical and functional outcomes of cystinuric
patients exclusively treated with Ureteroscopy (URS).
METHODS: Data from patients treated for cystine stones at a single academic
center were retrospectively analyzed. The management protocol consisted of (i)
treating symptomatic or > 7 mm stones, (ii) multi-staged URS for voluminous
stones, (iii) referring patients to a dedicated nephrological clinic. The eGFR
was calculated according to the MDRD formula. CKD category was assessed
according to the NKF classification. Relevant CKD was defined as CKD
category ≥ 3a. Descriptive statistics were used to analyze the cohort data.
RESULTS: Data from 46 cystinuric patients treated with 332 URS were available.
Median age at diagnosis and at first URS in our center were 18 and 32 years,
respectively. Median follow-up was 101 months. Median number of URS and
recurrences per patient were 6 and 2, respectively. The median interval between
the first and the last available creatinine level was 64 months. Median first
and last eGFR were 72 and 74 mL/min, respectively. Overall, 83% of patients had
stable or improved renal function within the study period. Ureteral stricture
occurred in 3 (6.5%) patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Cystinuria requires intensive endoscopic management. Most patients
treated with URS have stable or improved renal function within a long-term
follow-up. CKD is a not neglectable event that potentially occurs at an early
stage of life. Current findings should be considered for the surgical management
of cystinuric patients.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,
part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00345-024-05067-1
PMID: 38814457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
