---
reference_id: "PMID:31869131"
title: Leiomyosarcoma.
authors:
- Menon G
- Mangla A
- Yadav U
year: '2026'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Leiomyosarcoma.
**Authors:** Menon G, Mangla A, Yadav U

## Content

1. Leiomyosarcoma.

Menon G, Mangla A(1), Yadav U(2).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2026
Jan–.
2024 Feb 28.

Author information:
(1)Case Western Reserve University
(2)Stroger Hospital of Cook County

Leiomyosarcoma, a common subtype of soft tissue sarcoma (STS), accounts for up
to 10% to 20% of all sarcomas. Originating from either smooth muscle cells or
their mesenchymal cell precursors, leiomyosarcoma primarily occurs in the
retroperitoneum, uterus, and extremities, in descending order of frequency. The
genetic abnormalities in leiomyosarcoma are complex, and our current
knowledge remains incomplete. The clinical presentation, signs, and symptoms
vary depending on the site of origin. Prognosis is related to the tumor's
location, size, and grade, with the tumor grade significantly impacting overall
survival. With higher-grade lesions, the rate of distant metastasis increases.
Treatment can be nuanced and often requires an interdisciplinary approach. The
current standard of care involves upfront surgery for resectable tumors, with
chemotherapy and radiation typically serving as adjuncts. Treatment at
high-volume sarcoma centers is preferred and improves patient outcomes. The
advent of targeted agents and immunotherapy can potentially improve patient
outcomes in the future.

Copyright © 2026, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 31869131

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Gopal Menon declares no relevant
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Ankit Mangla
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.
Disclosure: Udit Yadav declares no relevant financial relationships with
ineligible companies.
