---
reference_id: "PMID:32875945"
title: "Universal tumor screening for lynch syndrome: perspectives of patients regarding willingness and informed consent."
authors:
- Subramonian A
- Smith D
- Dicks E
- Dawson L
- Borgaonkar M
- Etchegary H
journal: Per Med
year: '2020'
doi: 10.2217/pme-2020-0026
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Universal tumor screening for lynch syndrome: perspectives of patients regarding willingness and informed consent.
**Authors:** Subramonian A, Smith D, Dicks E, Dawson L, Borgaonkar M, Etchegary H
**Journal:** Per Med (2020)
**DOI:** [10.2217/pme-2020-0026](https://doi.org/10.2217/pme-2020-0026)

## Content

1. Per Med. 2020 Sep;17(5):373-387. doi: 10.2217/pme-2020-0026. Epub 2020 Sep 2.

Universal tumor screening for lynch syndrome: perspectives of patients regarding 
willingness and informed consent.

Subramonian A(1), Smith D(2), Dicks E(1), Dawson L(3)(4), Borgaonkar M(5), 
Etchegary H(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Epidemiology, Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University, St John's, 
NL, Canada.
(2)Patient Partner, St. John's, NL, Canada.
(3)Gynecologic Oncology, Women's Health & Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, 
Memorial University, St John's, NL, Canada.
(4)Women's Health and Genetics, Eastern Health, St John's NL, Canada.
(5)Gastroenterology, Faculty of Medicine, Memorial University, St John's, NL, 
Canada.

Aim: Lynch Syndrome is associated with a significant risk of colorectal 
carcinoma (CRC) and other cancers. Universal tumor screening is a strategy to 
identify high-risk individuals by testing all CRC tumors for molecular features 
suggestive of Lynch Syndrome. Patient interest in screening and preferences for 
consent have been underexplored. Methods: A postal survey was administered to 
CRC patients in a Canadian province. Results: Most patients (81.4%) were willing 
to have tumors tested if universal tumor screening were available and were 
willing to discuss test results with family members and healthcare 
professionals. The majority (62.6%) preferred informed consent be obtained prior 
to screening. Conclusion: Patients were supportive of universal screening. They 
expected consent to be obtained, contrary to current practice across Canada and 
elsewhere.

DOI: 10.2217/pme-2020-0026
PMID: 32875945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]