---
reference_id: "PMID:29848409"
title: Serologic Evidence of Tick-Borne Encephalitis Virus Infection in a Patient with Suspected Lyme Disease in Japan.
authors:
- Yoshii K
- Sato K
- Ishizuka M
- Kobayashi S
- Kariwa H
- Kawabata H
journal: Am J Trop Med Hyg
year: '2018'
doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.18-0207
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serologic Evidence of Tick-Borne Encephalitis Virus Infection in a Patient with Suspected Lyme Disease in Japan.
**Authors:** Yoshii K, Sato K, Ishizuka M, Kobayashi S, Kariwa H, Kawabata H
**Journal:** Am J Trop Med Hyg (2018)
**DOI:** [10.4269/ajtmh.18-0207](https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.18-0207)

## Content

1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2018 Jul;99(1):180-181. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.18-0207. Epub
2018  May 24.

Serologic Evidence of Tick-Borne Encephalitis Virus Infection in a Patient with 
Suspected Lyme Disease in Japan.

Yoshii K(1), Sato K(2), Ishizuka M(1), Kobayashi S(1), Kariwa H(1), Kawabata 
H(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Public Health, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Hokkaido 
University, Sapporo, Japan.
(2)Department of Bacteriology-I, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, 
Tokyo, Japan.

Tick-borne encephalitis (TBE) is widely prevalent on the Eurasian continent, 
including Japan, but four cases of TBE have been reported in Japan. To inspect 
unconfirmed TBE cases in Japan, we conducted a retrospective seroepidemiological 
study of a total of 158 samples from 81 meningoencephalitis patients suspected 
as Lyme disease. Two serum samples from one patient showed neutralizing 
antibodies against TBE virus. The patient with severe and progressive 
encephalitis had a history of tick bite in Hokkaido in 2012. These results 
demonstrated that tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBEV) case was actually 
unconfirmed in Japan. Further seroepidemiological surveys are required to 
identify unconfirmed TBEV infections to consider the pros and cons of 
introducing specific countermeasures including vaccination in Japan.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.18-0207
PMCID: PMC6085778
PMID: 29848409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]