---
reference_id: PMID:19322914
title: "Acute pancreatitis: etiology and common pathogenesis."
authors:
- Wang GJ
- Gao CF
- Wei D
- Wang C
- Ding SQ
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.15.1427
keywords:
- "Cholangiopancreatography, Endoscopic Retrograde/adverse effects"
- Cholestasis/complications
- Gallstones/complications
- Humans
- Inflammation/physiopathology
- Pancreatic Ducts/pathology
- "Pancreatitis/epidemiology, etiology, mortality, physiopathology"
- "Pancreatitis, Acute Necrotizing/epidemiology, etiology, mortality, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute pancreatitis: etiology and common pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Wang GJ, Gao CF, Wei D, Wang C, Ding SQ
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.15.1427](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.15.1427)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2009 Mar 28;15(12):1427-30. doi: 10.3748/wjg.15.1427.

Acute pancreatitis: etiology and common pathogenesis.

Wang GJ(1), Gao CF, Wei D, Wang C, Ding SQ.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Digestive Surgery and Department of General Surgery, 150 
Hospital of Chinese PLA, Gaoxin District, Luoyang 471031, Henan Province, China.

Acute pancreatitis is an inflammatory disease of the pancreas. The etiology and 
pathogenesis of acute pancreatitis have been intensively investigated for 
centuries worldwide. Many causes of acute pancreatitis have been discovered, but 
the pathogenetic theories are controversial. The most common cause of acute 
pancreatitis is gallstone impacting the distal common bile-pancreatic duct. The 
majority of investigators accept that the main factors for acute billiary 
pancreatitis are pancreatic hyperstimulation and bile-pancreatic duct 
obstruction which increase pancreatic duct pressure and active trypsin reflux. 
Acute pancreatitis occurs when intracellular protective mechanisms to prevent 
trypsinogen activation or reduce trypsin activity are overwhelmed. However, 
little is known about the other acute pancreatitis. We hypothesize that acute 
biliary pancreatitis and other causes of acute pancreatitis possess a common 
pathogenesis. Pancreatic hyperstimulation and pancreatic duct obstruction 
increase pancreatic duct pressure, active trypsin reflux, and subsequent 
unregulated activation of trypsin within pancreatic acinar cells. Enzyme 
activation within the pancreas leads to auto-digestion of the gland and local 
inflammation. Once the hypothesis is confirmed, traditional therapeutic 
strategies against acute pancreatitis may be improved. Decompression of 
pancreatic duct pressure should be advocated in the treatment of acute 
pancreatitits which may greatly improve its outcome.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.15.1427
PMCID: PMC2665136
PMID: 19322914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]