---
reference_id: "PMID:35465846"
title: Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency screening and gene analysis in blood donors of Guangdong province.
authors:
- Liang HF
- Lin F
- Lu J
- Chen ZX
- Yang LY
journal: Hematology
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/16078454.2022.2065094
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency screening and gene analysis in blood donors of Guangdong province.
**Authors:** Liang HF, Lin F, Lu J, Chen ZX, Yang LY
**Journal:** Hematology (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/16078454.2022.2065094](https://doi.org/10.1080/16078454.2022.2065094)

## Content

1. Hematology. 2022 Dec;27(1):494-498. doi: 10.1080/16078454.2022.2065094.

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency screening and gene analysis in 
blood donors of Guangdong province.

Liang HF(1), Lin F(2), Lu J(3), Chen ZX(4), Yang LY(1).

Author information:
(1)Precision Medical Lab Center, People's Hospital of Yangjiang Affiliated to 
Guangdong Medical University, Yangjiang, People's Republic of China.
(2)Precision Medical Center, Chaozhou Central Hospital Affiliated to Southern 
Medical University, Chaozhou, People's Republic of China.
(3)Foshan Central Blood Bank, Foshan, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Transfusion, People's Hospital of Yangjiang Affiliated to 
Guangdong Medical University, Yangjiang, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVES: The characteristic of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) 
deficiency is red blood cell (RBC) destruction in response to oxidative stress. 
Patients requiring RBC transfusions may simultaneously receive oxidative 
medications or have concurrent infections, both of which can induce hemolysis in 
G6PD-deficient RBCs. We intend to investigate the incidence of G6PD deficiency 
in voluntary blood donors and to evaluate the transfusion risk associated with 
G6PD deficiency in Guangdong province.
METHODS: G6PD enzyme was analyzed in 3042 donors and gene mutations were 
genotyped in G6PD-deficient samples.
RESULTS: The G6PD-deficient prevalence of voluntary blood donors was 6.97% 
(212/3042), 55.19% blood donors with G6PD deficiency donated blood more than 
twice. Eighty-five cases of G6PD deficiency were genotyped, and the common types 
of G6PD mutations were c.1376 G > T, c.1388 G > A, c.95 A > G, c.1024 C > T, and 
c.871 G > A.
CONCLUSIONS: Due to the high prevalence of G6PD deficiency in Foshan area, we 
recommended that the screening of G6PD deficiency should be carried out for the 
regular blood donors to ensure the safety of blood users.

DOI: 10.1080/16078454.2022.2065094
PMID: 35465846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]