---
reference_id: "PMID:35717947"
title: N-Glycosylation Deficiency Reduces the Activation of Protein C and Disrupts Endothelial Barrier Integrity.
authors:
- Pascreau T
- Saller F
- Bianchini EP
- Lasne D
- Bruneel A
- Reperant C
- Foulquier F
- Denis CV
- De Lonlay P
- Borgel D
journal: Thromb Haemost
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1055/s-0042-1744378
keywords:
- Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation
- Endothelium
- Glycosylation
- Humans
- Phosphotransferases (Phosphomutases)/deficiency
- Protein C
- Thrombin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# N-Glycosylation Deficiency Reduces the Activation of Protein C and Disrupts Endothelial Barrier Integrity.
**Authors:** Pascreau T, Saller F, Bianchini EP, Lasne D, Bruneel A, Reperant C, Foulquier F, Denis CV, De Lonlay P, Borgel D
**Journal:** Thromb Haemost (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1055/s-0042-1744378](https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0042-1744378)

## Content

1. Thromb Haemost. 2022 Sep;122(9):1469-1478. doi: 10.1055/s-0042-1744378. Epub
2022 Jun 19.

N-Glycosylation Deficiency Reduces the Activation of Protein C and Disrupts
Endothelial Barrier Integrity.

Pascreau T(1)(2), Saller F(1), Bianchini EP(1), Lasne D(1)(2), Bruneel A(3)(4),
Reperant C(1), Foulquier F(5), Denis CV(1), De Lonlay P(6), Borgel D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)HITh, UMR_S 1176, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Université Paris-Saclay, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.
(2)Laboratoire d'Hématologie, AP-HP, Hôpital Necker-Enfants malades, Paris,
France.
(3)Biochimie Métabolique et Cellulaire, AP-HP, Hôpital Bichat-Claude Bernard,
Paris, France.
(4)INSERM UMR1193, Université Paris-Saclay, Châtenay-Malabry, France.
(5)Université de Lille, CNRS, UMR 8576-UGSF - Unité de Glycobiologie Structurale
et Fonctionnelle, Lille, France.
(6)Centre de référence des maladies héréditaires du métabolisme de l'enfant et
de l'adulte - MAMEA, Filière G2M, MetabERN, Imagine Institute, AP-HP, Hôpital
Necker-Enfants Maladies, University Paris-Descartes, Paris, France.

Phosphomannomutase 2 (PMM2) deficiency is the most prevalent congenital disorder
of glycosylation. It is associated with coagulopathy, including protein C
deficiency. Since all components of the anticoagulant and cytoprotective protein
C system are glycosylated, we sought to investigate the impact of an
N-glycosylation deficiency on this system as a whole. To this end, we developed
a PMM2 knockdown model in the brain endothelial cell line hCMEC/D3. The
resulting PMM2low cells were less able to generate activated protein C (APC),
due to lower surface expression of thrombomodulin and endothelial protein C
receptor. The low protein levels were due to downregulated transcription of the
corresponding genes (THBD and PROCR, respectively), which itself was related to
downregulation of transcription regulators Krüppel-like factors 2 and 4 and
forkhead box C2. PMM2 knockdown was also associated with impaired integrity of
the endothelial cell monolayer-partly due to an alteration in the structure of
VE-cadherin in adherens junctions. The expression of protease-activated receptor
1 (involved in the cytoprotective effects of APC on the endothelium) was not
affected by PMM2 knockdown. Thrombin stimulation induced hyperpermeability in
PMM2low cells. However, pretreatment of cells with APC before thrombin
simulation was still associated with a barrier-protecting effect. Taken as a
whole, our results show that the partial loss of PMM2 in hCMEC/D3 cells is
associated with impaired activation of protein C and a relative increase in
barrier permeability.

Thieme. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0042-1744378
PMID: 35717947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.
