---
reference_id: "PMID:39611771"
title: "Long-term efficacy and safety of secukinumab in patients with moderate-to-severe hidradenitis suppurativa: week 104 results from the SUNSHINE and SUNRISE extension trial."
authors:
- Kimball AB
- Bechara FG
- Badat A
- Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ
- Gottlieb AB
- Jemec GBE
- Reguiai Z
- Villani AP
- Alarcon I
- Bansal A
- Gasperoni F
- Martin R
- Paguet B
- Uhlmann L
- Zouater H
- Ravichandran S
- Alavi A
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljae469
keywords:
- Humans
- Hidradenitis Suppurativa/drug therapy
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Male
- Female
- Treatment Outcome
- Adult
- "Dermatologic Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Middle Aged
- Double-Blind Method
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Injections, Subcutaneous"
- Drug Administration Schedule
- Severity of Illness Index
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term efficacy and safety of secukinumab in patients with moderate-to-severe hidradenitis suppurativa: week 104 results from the SUNSHINE and SUNRISE extension trial.
**Authors:** Kimball AB, Bechara FG, Badat A, Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ, Gottlieb AB, Jemec GBE, Reguiai Z, Villani AP, Alarcon I, Bansal A, Gasperoni F, Martin R, Paguet B, Uhlmann L, Zouater H, Ravichandran S, Alavi A
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bjd/ljae469](https://doi.org/10.1093/bjd/ljae469)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2025 Mar 18;192(4):629-640. doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljae469.

Long-term efficacy and safety of secukinumab in patients with moderate-to-severe 
hidradenitis suppurativa: week 104 results from the SUNSHINE and SUNRISE 
extension trial.

Kimball AB(1), Bechara FG(2), Badat A(3), Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ(4), Gottlieb 
AB(5), Jemec GBE(6), Reguiai Z(7), Villani AP(8), Alarcon I(9), Bansal A(9), 
Gasperoni F(9), Martin R(10), Paguet B(9), Uhlmann L(9), Zouater H(9), 
Ravichandran S(10), Alavi A(11).

Author information:
(1)Harvard Medical School and Clinical Laboratory for Epidemiology and Applied 
Research in Skin (CLEARS), Department of Dermatology, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)International Centre for Hidradenitis Suppurativa/Acne Inversa (ICH), 
Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, Ruhr-University Bochum, 
Bochum, Germany.
(3)Chris Hani Baragwanath Academic Hospital, Soweto, Gauteng, South Africa.
(4)4th Department of Internal Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of 
Athens, Medical School, Athens, Greece.
(5)Department of Dermatology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York 
City, NY, USA.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Zealand University Hospital, Roskilde, Denmark.
(7)Dermatology Department, Polyclinique Courlancy-Bezannes, Reims, France.
(8)Department of Dermatology, Edouard Herriot Hospital, Hospices Civils de Lyon, 
Claude Bernard Lyon I University, Lyon, France.
(9)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland.
(10)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, USA.
(11)Department of Dermatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.

Comment in
    Br J Dermatol. 2025 Mar 18;192(4):566-567. doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljaf011.

BACKGROUND: The SUNSHINE and SUNRISE phase III trials demonstrated sustained 
clinical efficacy of secukinumab in patients with moderate-to-severe 
hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) through 52 weeks. Patients completing the core 
trials could enter a 4-year extension trial.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the long-term efficacy, safety/tolerability and 
maintenance of clinical response to secukinumab through week 104 in the 
extension trial.
METHODS: Patients with a hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) clinical response (HiSCR) 
at week 52 of the core trials (extension trial baseline visit) entered a 
randomized withdrawal period. HiSCR responders receiving subcutaneous 
secukinumab 300 mg every 2 or 4 weeks (SECQ2W/SECQ4W) through week 52 in the 
core trials were randomized 2 : 1 to continue secukinumab (SECQ2W-R-Q2W or 
SECQ4W-R-Q4W) or receive placebo (SECQ2W-R-PBO or SECQ4W-R-PBO) through week 
104. The primary endpoint was time to loss of response (LOR; newly defined for 
this trial) through week 104 in week 52 HiSCR responders (SECQ2W-R-Q2W vs. 
SECQ2W-R-PBO and SECQ4W-R-Q4W vs. SECQ4W-R-PBO). Time to LOR was tested at 1.25% 
(one-sided) for each comparison (one-sided familywise alpha of 2.5%) through 
week 104. If LOR was met, patients could remain in the trial on open-label 
secukinumab treatment. Additional endpoints included safety and HiSCR. The trial 
was registered with ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT04179175).
RESULTS: Overall, 84.3% of patients who completed the core trials entered the 
extension trial; 55.9% were week 52 HiSCR responders. The primary endpoint was 
not met for either secukinumab dosing regimen. The estimated risk reduction for 
LOR was 13% (SECQ2W-R-Q2W vs. SECQ2W-R-PBO; one-sided P = 0.25) and 30% 
(SECQ4W-R-Q4W vs. SECQ4W-R-PBO; one-sided P = 0.04). The median time to LOR was 
numerically longer in the secukinumab arms vs. placebo {SECQ2W-R-Q2W [283 days; 
95% confidence interval (CI) 176, -] vs. SECQ2W-R-PBO [239 days; 95% CI 120, -]; 
SECQ4W-R-Q4W [365 days 95% CI 225, -] vs. SECQ4W-R-PBO [171 days; 95% CI 
113-337]}. In week 52 HiSCR responders reporting LOR, 44% (SECQ2W-R-Q2W), 58% 
(SECQ2W-R-PBO), 40% (SECQ4W-R-Q4W) and 34% (SECQ4W-R-PBO) were achieving HiSCR 
at the time of LOR. Overall, the safety of secukinumab was consistent with the 
core trials.
CONCLUSIONS: The primary endpoint of this trial was not met. HiSCR was 
maintained in many patients at the time of LOR. The safety of secukinumab was 
consistent with the previously characterized safety profile in the core trials.

Plain Language Summary: Hidradenitis suppurativa (or ‘HS’ for short) is a 
chronic skin condition. It causes painful recurrent boils and abscesses (also 
called lesions). The results from two large clinical trials showed that a drug 
called ‘secukinumab’ was effective in treating symptoms of HS for 1 year. It was 
also well tolerated by patients. This study followed the two large trials. It 
tested how effective and safe secukinumab is in patients who received treatment 
for HS for up to 2 years. Some patients who took secukinumab in the original 
trials were switched to receive a placebo (a dummy drug). Others kept taking 
secukinumab. Loss of response (LOR) to secukinumab was the main outcome 
measured. Because there is no established definition of LOR in HS, one was 
created for this trial. It was defined based on an increase in lesions over 
time. Patients who took secukinumab in the original trials and switched to 
placebo in this trial experienced LOR quicker than patients who continuously 
took secukinumab. However, many patients who experienced LOR showed an 
improvement in their HS. Our findings suggest that secukinumab was well 
tolerated by people with HS. No new safety issues were found, other than those 
already known.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of British 
Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1093/bjd/ljae469
PMID: 39611771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: A.B.K. reports grants 
from AbbVie, AnaptysBio, Aristea, Bristol Myers Squibb, ChemoCentryx, Lilly, 
Incyte, Janssen, MoonLake, Novartis, Pfizer, UCB Pharma and Sonoma Bio, and 
fellowship funding from AbbVie and Janssen paid to her institution; royalties 
from BIDMC; consulting fees from AbbVie, Alumis, Bayer, Bristol Myers Squibb, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Eli Lilly, FIDE, Novartis, MoonLake, Janssen, Pfizer, 
Priovant, Sonoma Bio, Sanofi, Target RWE, UCB Pharma and Ventyx; stock in 
Ventyx; served on advisory boards for Target RWE; served as an advisory council 
member to the National Institute of Health Director; and serves on the board of 
directors of Almirall. F.G.B. received honoraria for participation in advisory 
boards, in clinical trials and/or as a speaker from AbbVie, ACELYRIN, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Celltrion, Dr. Wolff, Incyte, InflaRx, Janssen-Cilag, Merck, 
Mölnlycke, MoonLake Immunotherapeutics, Novartis, Sanofi, Sitala and UCB Pharma. 
E.J.G.-B. has received honoraria from Abbott Products Operations, bioMérieux, 
GSK, UCB Pharma Sobi AB and ThermoFisher Brahms GmbH, and has received 
independent educational grants from Abbott Products Operations, AbbVie, 
bioMérieux, Johnson & Johnson, Incyte, MSD, Novartis, UCB Pharma, Sanofi and 
Sobi; and the Horizon 2020 European Grants ImmunoSep and RISCinCOVID and the 
Horizon Health grant EPIC-CROWN-2, POINT and Homi-Lung (granted to the Hellenic 
Institute for the Study of Sepsis). A.B.G. receives research/educational grants 
from Highlights Therapeutics, Bristol Myers Squibb, Janssen and UCB Pharma (all 
paid to Mount Sinai School of Medicine), and has received honoraria as an 
advisory board member and consultant for Amgen, AnaptysBio, Avotres 
Therapeutics, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol Myers Squibb, Dice Therapeutics, Eli 
Lilly, Highlights Therapeutics, Janssen, Novartis, Sanofi, Teva, UCB Pharma and 
XBiotech (stock options for rheumatoid arthritis). G.B.E.J. receives consultancy 
fees from Novartis and UCB Pharma; has received grants from AbbVie, 
ChemoCentryx, LEO Pharma, InflaRx, Novartis and UCB Pharma; and support for 
attending meetings from Sanofi. He is Vice President of the European 
Hidradenitis Suppurativa Foundation e.V. and on the board of the CHORD COUSIN 
Collaboration (C3) and CHORD; is co-coordinator of the ALLOCATE Skin group of 
the ERN (European Reference Network) Skin and vice chair of the Acne, Rosacea 
and HS (ARHS) Task Force group of the European Academy of Dermatology and 
Venereology. He is Editor-in-Chief of Dermatology. Z.R. has received honoraria 
(investigator/speaker or advisory boards) from AbbVie, Amgen, Boehringer 
Ingelheim, Incyte, Janssen, Lilly, Novartis, UCB Pharma and Sanofi. A.P.V. 
reports consulting fees from Janssen-Cilag and has received honoraria from 
AbbVie, Almirall, Bristol Myers Squibb, Janssen-Cilag, LEO Pharma, Lilly, MSD, 
Novartis and UCB Pharma. I.A., A. Bansal, F.G., R.M., B.P. and H.Z. are employed 
by Novartis. L.U. and S.R. were employed by Novartis at the time of the study 
and during manuscript preparation. A.A. serves as a board member for the 
Hidradenitis Suppurativa Foundation, as an investigator for Boehringer Ingelheim 
and Processa Pharmaceuticals, and as a consultant for AbbVie, Almirall, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Incyte, InflaRx, LEO Pharma, Kymera, Novartis, Sanofi and 
UCB. A. Badat declares no conflicts of interest.