---
reference_id: "PMID:37712339"
title: "Practical algorithms for early diagnosis of heart failure and heart stress using NT-proBNP: A clinical consensus statement from the Heart Failure Association of the ESC."
authors:
- Bayes-Genis A
- Docherty KF
- Petrie MC
- Januzzi JL
- Mueller C
- Anderson L
- Bozkurt B
- Butler J
- Chioncel O
- Cleland JGF
- Christodorescu R
- Del Prato S
- Gustafsson F
- Lam CSP
- Moura B
- Pop-Busui R
- Seferovic P
- Volterrani M
- Vaduganathan M
- Metra M
- Rosano G
journal: Eur J Heart Fail
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/ejhf.3036
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Practical algorithms for early diagnosis of heart failure and heart stress using NT-proBNP: A clinical consensus statement from the Heart Failure Association of the ESC.
**Authors:** Bayes-Genis A, Docherty KF, Petrie MC, Januzzi JL, Mueller C, Anderson L, Bozkurt B, Butler J, Chioncel O, Cleland JGF, Christodorescu R, Del Prato S, Gustafsson F, Lam CSP, Moura B, Pop-Busui R, Seferovic P, Volterrani M, Vaduganathan M, Metra M, Rosano G
**Journal:** Eur J Heart Fail (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ejhf.3036](https://doi.org/10.1002/ejhf.3036)

## Content

1. Eur J Heart Fail. 2023 Nov;25(11):1891-1898. doi: 10.1002/ejhf.3036. Epub 2023
 Sep 26.

Practical algorithms for early diagnosis of heart failure and heart stress using 
NT-proBNP: A clinical consensus statement from the Heart Failure Association of 
the ESC.

Bayes-Genis A(1), Docherty KF(2), Petrie MC(2), Januzzi JL(3), Mueller C(4), 
Anderson L(5), Bozkurt B(6), Butler J(7), Chioncel O(8), Cleland JGF(9), 
Christodorescu R(10), Del Prato S(11), Gustafsson F(12), Lam CSP(13), Moura 
B(14)(15), Pop-Busui R(16), Seferovic P(17)(18), Volterrani M(19)(20), 
Vaduganathan M(21), Metra M(22), Rosano G(23).

Author information:
(1)Heart Institute, Hospital Unbiversitari Germasn Trias i Pujol, Universitat 
Autonoma de Barcelona, CIBERCV, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)School of Cardiovascular and Metabolic Health, University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow, UK.
(3)Cardiology Division, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Cardiology and Cardiovascular Research Institute Basel (CRIB), 
University Hospital Basel, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(5)Cardiovascular Clinical Academic Group, Molecular and Clinical Sciences 
Research Institute, St. George's, University of London and St George's 
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(6)Baylor College of Medicine Medicine, DeBakey VA Medical Center, Houston, TX, 
USA.
(7)Baylor Scott and White Research Institute, Dallas, Texas and University of 
Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS, USA.
(8)Emergency Institute for Cardiovascular Diseases 'Prof. C.C. Iliescu', and, 
University of Medicine Carol Davila, Bucharest, Romania.
(9)British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, School of 
Cardiovascular and Metabolic Health, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(10)Department V Internal Medicine, University of Medicine and Pharmacy V. Babes 
Timisoara, Institute of Cardiology Research Center, Timișoara, Romania.
(11)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa and 
Sant'Anna School of Advanced Studies, Pisa, Italy.
(12)Department of Cardiology, Rigshospitalet, Department of Clinical Medicine, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(13)National Heart Centre Singapore, Duke-National University of Singapore, 
Singapore, Singapore.
(14)CINTESIS - Centro de Investigação em Tecnologias e Serviços de Saúde, Porto, 
Portugal.
(15)Serviço de Cardiologia, Hospital das Forças Armadas, Pólo do Porto, 
Portugal.
(16)Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology and Diabetes, Department of Internal 
Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(17)Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia.
(18)Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Belgrade, Serbia.
(19)Cardio Pulmonary Department, IRCCS San Raffaele, Rome, Italy.
(20)Exercise Science and Medicine, San Raffaele Open University, Rome, Italy.
(21)Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.
(22)Cardiology and Cardiac Catheterization Laboratory, Cardio-Thoracic 
Department, Civil Hospitals; Department of Medical and Surgical Specialties, 
Radiological Sciences, and Public Health, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(23)IRCCS San Raffaele, Rome, Italy.

Comment in
    Eur J Heart Fail. 2023 Nov;25(11):1887-1890. doi: 10.1002/ejhf.3096.

Diagnosing heart failure is often difficult due to the non-specific nature of 
symptoms, which can be caused by a range of medical conditions. Natriuretic 
peptides (NPs) have been recognized as important biomarkers for diagnosing heart 
failure. This document from the Heart Failure Association examines the practical 
uses of N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) in various 
clinical scenarios. The concentrations of NT-proBNP vary according to the 
patient profile and the clinical scenario, therefore values should be 
interpreted with caution to ensure appropriate diagnosis. Validated cut-points 
are provided to rule in or rule out acute heart failure in the emergency 
department and to diagnose de novo heart failure in the outpatient setting. We 
also coin the concept of 'heart stress' when NT-proBNP levels are elevated in an 
asymptomatic patient with risk factors for heart failure (i.e. diabetes, 
hypertension, coronary artery disease), underlying the development of cardiac 
dysfunction and further increased risk. We propose a simple acronym for 
healthcare professionals and patients, FIND-HF, which serves as a prompt to 
consider heart failure: Fatigue, Increased water accumulation, Natriuretic 
peptide testing, and Dyspnoea. Use of this acronym would enable the early 
diagnosis of heart failure. Overall, understanding and utilizing NT-proBNP 
levels will lead to earlier and more accurate diagnoses of heart failure 
ultimately improving patient outcomes and reducing healthcare costs.

© 2023 European Society of Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1002/ejhf.3036
PMID: 37712339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]