---
reference_id: "PMID:40800658"
title: "Medullary thyroid cancer arising from a thyroid rest: a case report."
authors:
- Beiriger J
- McCrary HC
- Carpenter P
- Witt BL
- Abraham D
- Monroe MM
journal: J Surg Case Rep
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/jscr/rjaf613
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Medullary thyroid cancer arising from a thyroid rest: a case report.
**Authors:** Beiriger J, McCrary HC, Carpenter P, Witt BL, Abraham D, Monroe MM
**Journal:** J Surg Case Rep (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jscr/rjaf613](https://doi.org/10.1093/jscr/rjaf613)

## Content

1. J Surg Case Rep. 2025 Aug 10;2025(8):rjaf613. doi: 10.1093/jscr/rjaf613. 
eCollection 2025 Aug.

Medullary thyroid cancer arising from a thyroid rest: a case report.

Beiriger J(1), McCrary HC(1), Carpenter P(1), Witt BL(2), Abraham D(3), Monroe 
MM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, University of Utah 
School of Medicine, 30 N. Mario Capecchi Drive, 4th Floor, Salt Lake City, UT 
84112, United States.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Utah School of Medicine, 15 North 
Medical Drive East, Ste. #1100, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, United States.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, University of 
Utah School of Medicine, 30 North Mario Capecchi Dr, 3rd Floor North, Salt Lake 
City, UT 84112, United States.

Medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC) is rare and originates from parafollicular C 
cells and most cases present with a primary thyroid lesion. This report 
describes a 67-year-old woman with a left-sided neck mass and no evidence of 
intrathyroidal disease. Positron emission tomography-computed tomography 
(PET-CT) revealed paratracheal lymphadenopathy; other imaging and TSH were 
unremarkable. Fine-needle aspiration was inconclusive, and excisional biopsy 
suggested high-grade metastatic neuroendocrine carcinoma, initially suspected to 
be pulmonary due to thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) positivity. Pathology 
review raised concern for MTC. Endocrine evaluation showed elevated calcitonin 
(25.4 pg/ml) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) (20.1 ng/ml). She denied 
personal or family history of thyroid disease or multiple endocrine neoplasia 
syndromes. Total thyroidectomy with central neck dissection was performed. All 
thyroid sections stained negative for calcitonin, excluding C cell hyperplasia 
or intrathyroidal MTC. Lymph node morphology and immunoprofile supported 
metastatic MTC arising from a thyroid rest. This is a rare entity, with only two 
other cases documented in the literature.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press and JSCR Publishing 
Ltd.

DOI: 10.1093/jscr/rjaf613
PMCID: PMC12342817
PMID: 40800658

Conflict of interest statement: None to disclose.