---
reference_id: "PMID:34322157"
title: Cystatin M/E Variant Causes Autosomal Dominant Keratosis Follicularis Spinulosa Decalvans by Dysregulating Cathepsins L and V.
authors:
- Eckl KM
- Gruber R
- Brennan L
- Marriott A
- Plank R
- Moosbrugger-Martinz V
- Blunder S
- Schossig A
- Altmüller J
- Thiele H
- Nürnberg P
- Zschocke J
- Hennies HC
- Schmuth M
journal: Front Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.689940
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cystatin M/E Variant Causes Autosomal Dominant Keratosis Follicularis Spinulosa Decalvans by Dysregulating Cathepsins L and V.
**Authors:** Eckl KM, Gruber R, Brennan L, Marriott A, Plank R, Moosbrugger-Martinz V, Blunder S, Schossig A, Altmüller J, Thiele H, Nürnberg P, Zschocke J, Hennies HC, Schmuth M
**Journal:** Front Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2021.689940](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2021.689940)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2021 Jul 12;12:689940. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.689940.
eCollection  2021.

Cystatin M/E Variant Causes Autosomal Dominant Keratosis Follicularis Spinulosa
Decalvans by Dysregulating Cathepsins L and V.

Eckl KM(1), Gruber R(2), Brennan L(1), Marriott A(1), Plank R(3)(4),
Moosbrugger-Martinz V(2), Blunder S(2), Schossig A(4), Altmüller J(5), Thiele
H(5), Nürnberg P(5), Zschocke J(4), Hennies HC(3)(5), Schmuth M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Edge Hill University, Ormskirk, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck,
Austria.
(3)Department of Biological and Geographical Sciences, University of
Huddersfield, Huddersfield, United Kingdom.
(4)Institute of Human Genetics, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck,
Austria.
(5)Cologne Center for Genomics, Faculty of Medicine and Cologne University
Hospital, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

Keratosis follicularis spinulosa decalvans (KFSD) is a rare cornification
disorder with an X-linked recessive inheritance in most cases. Pathogenic
variants causing X-linked KFSD have been described in MBTPS2, the gene for a
membrane-bound zinc metalloprotease that is involved in the cleavage of sterol
regulatory element binding proteins important for the control of transcription.
Few families have been identified with an autosomal dominant inheritance of
KFSD. We present two members of an Austrian family with a phenotype of KFSD, a
mother and her son. The disease was not observed in her parents, pointing to a
dominant inheritance with a de novo mutation in the index patient. Using
whole-exome sequencing, we identified a heterozygous missense variant in CST6 in
DNA samples from the index patient and her affected son. In line with family
history, the variant was not present in samples from her parents. CST6 codes for
cystatin M/E, a cysteine protease inhibitor. Patient keratinocytes showed
increased expression of cathepsin genes CTSL and CTSV and reduced expression of
transglutaminase genes TGM1 and TGM3. A relative gain of active, cleaved
transglutaminases was found in patient keratinocytes compared to control cells.
The variant found in CST6 is expected to affect protein targeting and results in
marked disruption of the balance between cystatin M/E activity and its target
proteases and eventually transglutaminases 1 and 3. This disturbance leads to an
impairment of terminal epidermal differentiation and proper hair shaft formation
seen in KFSD.

Copyright © 2021 Eckl, Gruber, Brennan, Marriott, Plank, Moosbrugger-Martinz,
Blunder, Schossig, Altmüller, Thiele, Nürnberg, Zschocke, Hennies and Schmuth.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2021.689940
PMCID: PMC8312243
PMID: 34322157

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
