---
reference_id: "PMID:24556277"
title: "Murine autoimmune cholangitis requires two hits: cytotoxic KLRG1(+) CD8 effector cells and defective T regulatory cells."
authors:
- Huang W
- Kachapati K
- Adams D
- Wu Y
- Leung PS
- Yang GX
- Zhang W
- Ansari AA
- Flavell RA
- Gershwin ME
- Ridgway WM
journal: J Autoimmun
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2014.01.034
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Murine autoimmune cholangitis requires two hits: cytotoxic KLRG1(+) CD8 effector cells and defective T regulatory cells.
**Authors:** Huang W, Kachapati K, Adams D, Wu Y, Leung PS, Yang GX, Zhang W, Ansari AA, Flavell RA, Gershwin ME, Ridgway WM
**Journal:** J Autoimmun (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaut.2014.01.034](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaut.2014.01.034)

## Content

1. J Autoimmun. 2014 May;50:123-34. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2014.01.034. Epub 2014
Feb  18.

Murine autoimmune cholangitis requires two hits: cytotoxic KLRG1(+) CD8 effector 
cells and defective T regulatory cells.

Huang W(1), Kachapati K(1), Adams D(1), Wu Y(1), Leung PS(2), Yang GX(2), Zhang 
W(2), Ansari AA(3), Flavell RA(4), Gershwin ME(2), Ridgway WM(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Immunology, Allergy and Rheumatology, University of Cincinnati 
College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45174, USA.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of 
California at Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 
30322, USA.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New 
Haven, CT 06520, USA.
(5)Division of Immunology, Allergy and Rheumatology, University of Cincinnati 
College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45174, USA. Electronic address: 
ridgwawm@ucmail.uc.edu.

Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is an enigmatic disease mediated by autoimmune 
destruction of cholangiocytes in hepatic bile ducts. The early immunological 
events leading to PBC are poorly understood; clinical signs of disease occur 
very late in the pathological process. We have used our unique murine model of 
PBC in dominant-negative TGF-β receptor type II transgenic mice to delineate 
critical early immunopathological pathways, and previously showed that dnTGFβRII 
CD8 T cells transfer biliary disease. Herein we report significantly increased 
numbers of hepatic dnTGFβRII terminally differentiated (KLRG1(+)) CD8 T cells, a 
CD8 subset previously shown to be enriched in antigen specific cells during 
hepatic immune response to viral infections. We performed bone marrow chimera 
studies to assess whether dnTGFβRII CD8 mediated disease was cell intrinsic or 
extrinsic. Unexpectedly, mixed (dnTGFβRII and B6) bone marrow chimeric (BMC) 
mice were protected from biliary disease compared to dnTGFβRII single bone 
marrow chimerics. To define the protective B6 cell subset, we performed adoptive 
transfer studies, which showed that co-transfer of B6 Tregs prevented dnTGFβRII 
CD8 T cell mediated cholangitis. Treg mediated disease protection was associated 
with significantly decreased numbers of hepatic KLRG1(+) CD8 T cells. In 
contrast, co-transfer of dnTGFβRII Tregs offered no protection, and dnTGFβRII 
Treg cells were functionally defective in suppressing effector CD8 T cells 
in vitro compared to wild type B6 Tregs. In vitro cholangiocyte cytotoxicity 
assays demonstrated significantly increased numbers of cytotoxic hepatic 
dnTGFβRII KLRG1(+) CD8 cells compared to B6. Protection from disease by B6 Tregs 
was associated with elimination of hepatic dnTGFβRII CD8 mediated cholangiocyte 
cytotoxicity. These results emphasize that autoimmune cholangitis requires 
defects in both the T effector and regulatory compartments, and that an 
intrinsic T cell effector defect is not sufficient to mediate autoimmune biliary 
disease in the setting of intact immune regulation. These results have important 
implications for understanding the early pathogenesis of human PBC.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaut.2014.01.034
PMCID: PMC4098881
PMID: 24556277 [Indexed for MEDLINE]