---
reference_id: "PMID:8331029"
title: Botulinum toxin A inhibits acetylcholine release from cultured neurons in vitro.
authors:
- Ray P
journal: In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Botulinum toxin A inhibits acetylcholine release from cultured neurons in vitro.
**Authors:** Ray P
**Journal:** In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim (1993)

## Content

1. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 1993 Jun;29A(6):456-60.

Botulinum toxin A inhibits acetylcholine release from cultured neurons in vitro.

Ray P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, Washington, DC 
20307.

Erratum in
    In Vitro Cell Dev Biol 1993 Aug;29A(8):675.

Clostridium botulinum type toxin A (BoTx) blocks stimulus-induced acetylcholine 
(ACh) release from presynaptic nerve terminals at peripheral neuromuscular 
junctions. However, the detailed mechanism of this effect remains elusive. One 
obstacle in solving this problem is the lack of a suitable in vitro homogenous 
cholinergic neuronal model system. We studied the clonal pheochromocytoma PC12 
cell line to establish such a model. PC12 cells were differentiated in culture 
by treatment with 50 ng/ml nerve growth factor (NGF) for 4 days to enhance 
cellular ACh synthesis and release properties. Stimulation of these cells with 
high K+ (80 mM) in the perfusion medium markedly increased calcium-dependent 
[3H]ACh release compared to undifferentiated cells. Stimulated [3H]ACh release 
was totally inhibited by pretreatment of cells with 2 nM BoTx for 2 h. BoTx 
inhibition of [3H]ACh release was time- and concentration-dependent. A 50% 
inhibition was obtained after 2 h incubation with a low (0.02 nM) toxin 
concentration. The time required for 2 nM BoTx to cause a measurable inhibition 
(18%) of stimulated [3H]ACh release was 30 min. Botulinum toxin inhibition of 
stimulated ACh release was prevented by toxin antiserum and heat treatment, 
suggesting the specificity of the toxin effect. Our results show that by 
differentiation with NGF, PC12 cells can be shifted from an insensitive to a 
sensitive state with respect to BoTx inhibition of stimulated ACh release. This 
cell line, therefore, may serve as a valuable in vitro cholinergic model system 
to study the mechanism of action of BoTx.

PMID: 8331029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]