---
reference_id: "PMID:16611586"
title: The involvement of lipid rafts in Alzheimer's disease.
authors:
- Cordy JM
- Hooper NM
- Turner AJ
journal: Mol Membr Biol
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1080/09687860500496417
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The involvement of lipid rafts in Alzheimer's disease.
**Authors:** Cordy JM, Hooper NM, Turner AJ
**Journal:** Mol Membr Biol (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1080/09687860500496417](https://doi.org/10.1080/09687860500496417)

## Content

1. Mol Membr Biol. 2006 Jan-Feb;23(1):111-22. doi: 10.1080/09687860500496417.

The involvement of lipid rafts in Alzheimer's disease.

Cordy JM(1), Hooper NM, Turner AJ.

Author information:
(1)Proteolysis Research Group, Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, 
Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, UK.

The amyloidogenesis occurring in Alzheimer's disease represents a fundamental 
membrane-related pathology involving a membrane-bound substrate metabolized by 
integral membrane proteases (secretases). Thus, the amyloid-beta peptide 
(Abeta), which accumulates extracellularly as plaques in the brains of 
Alzheimer's disease patients, is derived by sequential proteolytic cleavage of 
the integral transmembrane amyloid precursor protein (APP). Beta-Secretase or 
BACE-1 (beta-site APP cleaving enzyme) is a transmembrane aspartic protease 
responsible for the first of these cleavage events, generating the soluble APP 
ectodomain sAPPbeta, and a C-terminal fragment CTFbeta. CTFbeta is subsequently 
cleaved by the ?gamma-secretase complex, of which presenilin is the catalytic 
core, to produce Ass. A variety of studies indicate that cholesterol is an 
important factor in the regulation of Ass production, with high cholesterol 
levels being linked to increased Ass generation and deposition. However, the 
mechanism(s) underlying this effect are unclear at present. Recent evidence 
suggests that amyloidogenic APP processing may preferentially occur in the 
cholesterol-rich regions of membranes known as lipid rafts, and that changes in 
cholesterol levels could exert their effects by altering the distribution of 
APP-cleaving enzymes within the membrane. Rafts may be involved in the 
aggregation of Ass and also in its clearance by amyloid-degrading enzymes such 
as plasmin or possibly neprilysin (NEP).

DOI: 10.1080/09687860500496417
PMID: 16611586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]