---
reference_id: "PMID:38907139"
title: "Risk-reducing salpingectomy with delayed oophorectomy to prevent ovarian cancer in women with an increased inherited risk: insights into an alternative strategy."
authors:
- Gootzen TA
- Steenbeek MP
- van Bommel M
- IntHout J
- Kets CM
- Hermens R
- de Hullu JA
journal: Fam Cancer
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s10689-024-00412-0
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Ovarian Neoplasms/prevention & control, genetics"
- Ovariectomy/methods
- Quality of Life
- Salpingectomy/methods
- "Carcinoma, Ovarian Epithelial/genetics, prevention & control"
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Menopause, Premature"
- Salpingo-oophorectomy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk-reducing salpingectomy with delayed oophorectomy to prevent ovarian cancer in women with an increased inherited risk: insights into an alternative strategy.
**Authors:** Gootzen TA, Steenbeek MP, van Bommel M, IntHout J, Kets CM, Hermens R, de Hullu JA
**Journal:** Fam Cancer (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10689-024-00412-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10689-024-00412-0)

## Content

1. Fam Cancer. 2024 Nov;23(4):437-445. doi: 10.1007/s10689-024-00412-0. Epub 2024
 Jun 21.

Risk-reducing salpingectomy with delayed oophorectomy to prevent ovarian cancer 
in women with an increased inherited risk: insights into an alternative 
strategy.

Gootzen TA(1), Steenbeek MP(2), van Bommel M(2), IntHout J(3), Kets CM(4), 
Hermens R(3), de Hullu JA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Radboudumc, Geert Grooteplein Zuid 
10, Nijmegen, GA, 6525, The Netherlands. tamar.gootzen@radboudumc.nl.
(2)Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Radboudumc, Geert Grooteplein Zuid 
10, Nijmegen, GA, 6525, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of IQ Health, Radboudumc, Kapittelweg 54, Nijmegen, EP, 6525, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Genetics, Radboudumc, Geert Grooteplein Zuid 10, Nijmegen, GA, 
6525, The Netherlands.

Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is the most lethal type of gynaecological 
cancer, due to lack of effective screening possibilities and because the disease 
tends to metastasize before onset of symptoms. Women with an increased inherited 
risk for EOC are advised to undergo a risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy 
(RRSO), which decreases their EOC risk by 96% when performed within guideline 
ages. However, it also induces premature menopause, which has harmful 
consequences. There is compelling evidence that the majority of EOCs originate 
in the fallopian tube. Therefore, a risk-reducing salpingectomy with delayed 
oophorectomy (RRS with DO) has gained interest as an alternative strategy. 
Previous studies have shown that this alternative strategy has a positive effect 
on menopause-related quality of life and sexual health when compared to the 
standard RRSO. It is hypothesized that the alternative strategy is non-inferior 
to the standard RRSO with respect to oncological safety (EOC incidence). Three 
prospective studies are currently including patients to compare the safety 
and/or quality of life of the two distinct strategies. In this article we 
discuss the background, opportunities, and challenges of the current and 
alternative strategy.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10689-024-00412-0
PMCID: PMC11512845
PMID: 38907139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests. The 
authors have no relevant financial or non-financial interests to disclose.