---
reference_id: "PMID:32770464"
title: "The long-term outcomes of patients with immunoglobulin G4-related sclerosing cholangitis: the Mayo Clinic experience."
authors:
- Ali AH
- Bi Y
- Machicado JD
- Garg S
- Lennon RJ
- Zhang L
- Takahashi N
- Carey EJ
- Lindor KD
- Buness JG
- Tabibian JH
- Chari ST
journal: J Gastroenterol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1007/s00535-020-01714-7
keywords:
- Aged
- Bile Duct Neoplasms/epidemiology
- Cholangiocarcinoma/epidemiology
- "Cholangitis, Sclerosing/diagnosis, drug therapy, immunology"
- Cohort Studies
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- "Immunoglobulin G4-Related Disease/diagnosis, drug therapy, immunology"
- "Immunosuppressive Agents/administration & dosage"
- Liver Cirrhosis/epidemiology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Prednisone/administration & dosage"
- Retrospective Studies
- Survival Rate
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The long-term outcomes of patients with immunoglobulin G4-related sclerosing cholangitis: the Mayo Clinic experience.
**Authors:** Ali AH, Bi Y, Machicado JD, Garg S, Lennon RJ, Zhang L, Takahashi N, Carey EJ, Lindor KD, Buness JG, Tabibian JH, Chari ST
**Journal:** J Gastroenterol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00535-020-01714-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00535-020-01714-7)

## Content

1. J Gastroenterol. 2020 Nov;55(11):1087-1097. doi: 10.1007/s00535-020-01714-7. 
Epub 2020 Aug 8.

The long-term outcomes of patients with immunoglobulin G4-related sclerosing 
cholangitis: the Mayo Clinic experience.

Ali AH(#)(1), Bi Y(#)(2), Machicado JD(3), Garg S(1), Lennon RJ(4), Zhang L(5), 
Takahashi N(6), Carey EJ(7), Lindor KD(7)(8), Buness JG(9), Tabibian JH(10)(11), 
Chari ST(12).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 
200 1st St SW, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, 
USA.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic Health System, Eau 
Claire, WI, USA.
(4)Division of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
MN, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(6)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(7)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Phoenix, AZ, USA.
(8)Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA.
(9)Arizona College of Osteopathic Medicine, Midwestern University, Glendale, AZ, 
USA.
(10)Division of Gastroenterology, Olive View-UCLA Medical Center, Sylmar, CA, 
USA.
(11)David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(12)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic College of 
Medicine, 200 1st St SW, Rochester, MN, 55905, USA. Chari.Suresh@mayo.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: The long-term outcomes of immunoglobulin G4-related sclerosing 
cholangitis (IgG4-SC) are not well known.
METHODS: The outcomes of patients with IgG4-SC at Mayo Clinic (1999-2018) were 
compared to an age- and gender-matched (1:1 ratio) group of patients with 
primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC).
RESULTS: We identified 89 patients with IgG4-SC; median age at diagnosis was 
67 years, 81% were males, and the median follow-up was 5.7 years. Seventy-eight 
patients received prednisone for induction of remission, and 53 received at 
least one other immunosuppressive agent for maintenance of remission. Of the 
IgG4-SC group, 10 died (median time from diagnosis until death was 6.5 years): 2 
due to cirrhosis, 3 due to cholangiocarcinoma (CCA), and 5 due to 
non-hepatobiliary causes. Eleven patients in the PSC group underwent liver 
transplantation, while none did in the IgG4-SC group. The incidence of a 
hepatobiliary adverse event (cirrhosis or CCA) was 3.4 times greater in the PSC 
compared to the IgG4-SC group (events per 1000 person-years: 52.6; 95% CI 38-73; 
vs. 15.6; 95% CI 7-32). The probability of development of a hepatobiliary 
adverse event within 10 years was 11% in the IgG4-SC compared to 45% in the PSC 
group (P = 0.0001). The overall survival tended to be higher in the IgG4-SC 
compared to the PSC group (10-year: 79% vs. 68%, respectively; P = 0.11).
CONCLUSIONS: In a cohort of IgG4-SC patients, 88% of whom were treated with 
immunosuppressive drugs, the risk of cirrhosis and CCA was significantly lower 
compared to an age- and gender-matched group with PSC.

DOI: 10.1007/s00535-020-01714-7
PMID: 32770464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]