---
reference_id: "PMID:33545773"
title: Effect of alcohol on the progress of hepatitis B cirrhosis.
authors:
- Zhou E
- Yang C
- Gao Y
journal: Ann Palliat Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.21037/apm-20-2353
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of alcohol on the progress of hepatitis B cirrhosis.
**Authors:** Zhou E, Yang C, Gao Y
**Journal:** Ann Palliat Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.21037/apm-20-2353](https://doi.org/10.21037/apm-20-2353)

## Content

1. Ann Palliat Med. 2021 Jan;10(1):415-424. doi: 10.21037/apm-20-2353.

Effect of alcohol on the progress of hepatitis B cirrhosis.

Zhou E(1), Yang C(2), Gao Y(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing, China.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing, China. Email: chunyang678@163.com.
(3)School of Public Health and Management, Chongqing Medical University, 
Chongqing, China.

BACKGROUND: Hepatitis B virus (HBV) and alcohol are primary causes of cirrhosis. 
Alcohol can result in replication of HBV, an increase in oxidative stress, a 
compromised immune response to the virus and an increase in liver inflammation, 
all of which can result in progression of cirrhosis. The aim was to explore the 
interaction of alcohol with HBV and to show the effect of different levels of 
alcohol intake on liver fibrosis and cirrhosis.
METHODS: We selected 90 patients with hepatitis B cirrhosis and divided them 
into three groups: non-drinking, moderate drinking and excessive drinking. 
Indicators of fibrosis (type III procollagen, type IV collagen, laminin, 
hyaluronic acid), HBV-DNA load, transaminases, quantitative detection of 
hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg), Child-Pugh scoring system rating and the 
number of complications were tested at three time points: 0, 3 and 6 months 
after quitting drinking and after medical treatment.
RESULTS: We found that all indicators of fibrosis, HBV-DNA load, alanine (ALT) 
and aspartate (AST) transaminases in the excessive drinking group were highest 
among the three groups at any time. There were almost no differences between the 
moderate drinking and non-drinking groups at 0, 3 and 6 months after quitting 
drinking and treatment. We also found no difference among the three groups in 
quantitative detection of HBsAg at any time. It was observed that there are more 
patients with excessive drinking were in Child-Pugh C class and had more 
complications compared with the other two groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with chronic HBV infection and an excessive drinking habit 
activate HBV-DNA which increases liver inflammation, thus accelerating the 
progress of liver cirrhosis. Moderate drinking had no significant effect on the 
progress of liver cirrhosis. Hepatitis B cirrhosis patients with excessive 
drinking had more complications and were more likely to be in Child-Pugh C class 
compared with the other groups.

DOI: 10.21037/apm-20-2353
PMID: 33545773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]