---
reference_id: "PMID:34402453"
title: Immune checkpoints and the multiple faces of B cells in systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Stefanski AL
- Dörner T
journal: Curr Opin Rheumatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000825
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immune checkpoints and the multiple faces of B cells in systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Stefanski AL, Dörner T
**Journal:** Curr Opin Rheumatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1097/BOR.0000000000000825](https://doi.org/10.1097/BOR.0000000000000825)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2021 Nov 1;33(6):592-597. doi: 
10.1097/BOR.0000000000000825.

Immune checkpoints and the multiple faces of B cells in systemic lupus 
erythematosus.

Stefanski AL(1)(2), Dörner T(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Deutsches Rheuma-Forschungszentrum, The Leibniz Institute.
(2)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Charité 
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: B-lymphocytes are crucial in the pathogenesis of systemic 
lupus erythematosus (SLE), including autoantibody production, antigen 
presentation, co-stimulation, and cytokine secretion. Co-stimulatory and 
co-inhibitory molecules control interactions between B and T cells during an 
inflammatory response, which is essential for an appropriate host protection and 
maintenance of self-tolerance. Here, we review recent findings about checkpoint 
molecules and SLE B cells including their potential therapeutic implications and 
experiences from clinical trials.
RECENT FINDINGS: Most prominent checkpoint molecules involved in pathologic B 
and T cell interaction in SLE are CD40/CD40L and inducible co-stimulator/ICOSL, 
both also intimately involved in the formation of germinal centers and ectopic 
lymphoid tissue. Dysregulations of inhibitory checkpoint molecules, like 
programmed death-1/programmed death-ligand 1 and B- and T-lymphocyte attenuator 
have been suggested to impair B cell functions in SLE recently.
SUMMARY: Accumulating evidence indicates that dampening immune responses by 
either blocking co-activating signals or enhancing co-inhibitory signals in 
different cell types is a promising approach to treat autoimmune diseases to 
better control active disease but may also allow resolution of chronic 
autoimmunity.

Copyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/BOR.0000000000000825
PMID: 34402453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]