---
reference_id: "PMID:37815847"
title: "SEAMARK: phase II study of first-line encorafenib and cetuximab plus pembrolizumab for MSI-H/dMMR BRAFV600E-mutant mCRC."
authors:
- Elez E
- Kopetz S
- Tabernero J
- Bekaii-Saab T
- Taieb J
- Yoshino T
- Manji G
- Fernandez K
- Abbattista A
- Zhang X
- Morris VK
journal: Future Oncol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.2217/fon-2022-1249
keywords:
- Humans
- Cetuximab/therapeutic use
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Mutation
- "Colorectal Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Colonic Neoplasms
- "Clinical Trials, Phase II as Topic"
- Randomized Controlled Trials as Topic
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized"
- "Neoplastic Syndromes, Hereditary"
- Sulfonamides
- Brain Neoplasms
- Carbamates
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SEAMARK: phase II study of first-line encorafenib and cetuximab plus pembrolizumab for MSI-H/dMMR BRAFV600E-mutant mCRC.
**Authors:** Elez E, Kopetz S, Tabernero J, Bekaii-Saab T, Taieb J, Yoshino T, Manji G, Fernandez K, Abbattista A, Zhang X, Morris VK
**Journal:** Future Oncol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.2217/fon-2022-1249](https://doi.org/10.2217/fon-2022-1249)

## Content

1. Future Oncol. 2024 Apr;20(11):653-663. doi: 10.2217/fon-2022-1249. Epub 2023
Oct  10.

SEAMARK: phase II study of first-line encorafenib and cetuximab plus
pembrolizumab for MSI-H/dMMR BRAFV600E-mutant mCRC.

Elez E(1), Kopetz S(2), Tabernero J(3), Bekaii-Saab T(4), Taieb J(5), Yoshino
T(6), Manji G(7), Fernandez K(8), Abbattista A(9), Zhang X(10), Morris VK(2).

Author information:
(1)Vall d'Hebron Hospital Campus & Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Vall d'Hebron Hospital Campus & Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology,
Universitat de Vic - Universitat Central de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Mayo Clinic, Phoenix, AZ, USA.
(5)Georges Pompidou European Hospital, Université de Paris, Paris, France.
(6)National Cancer Center Hospital East, Kashiwa, Japan.
(7)Columbia University Irving Medical Center & NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital,
New York, NY, USA.
(8)Pfizer Global Product Development-Oncology, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(9)Pfizer Global Product Development-Oncology, Milan, Italy.
(10)Pfizer, New York, NY, USA.

Patients with both BRAF V600E mutations and microsatellite instability-high
(MSI-H)/mismatch repair-deficient (dMMR) metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC)
have poor prognosis. Currently, there are no specifically targeted first-line
treatment options indicated for patients with mCRC whose tumors harbor both
molecular aberrations. Pembrolizumab is a checkpoint inhibitor approved for the
treatment of MSI-H/dMMR mCRC, and the BRAF inhibitor encorafenib, in combination
with cetuximab, is approved for previously treated BRAF V600E-mutant mCRC.
Combination of pembrolizumab with encorafenib and cetuximab may synergistically
enhance antitumor activity in patients with BRAF V600E-mutant, MSI-H/dMMR mCRC.
SEAMARK is a randomized phase II study comparing the efficacy of the combination
of pembrolizumab with encorafenib and cetuximab versus pembrolizumab alone in
patients with previously untreated BRAF V600E-mutant, MSI-H/dMMR mCRC.

Plain Language Summary: Colorectal cancer (CRC) occurs when there is an abnormal
growth of cells (known as a tumor) in the colon or rectum. Some people with CRC
have changes in their tumor genes (known as gene mutations). A gene is a piece
of DNA that tells the cell to make specific molecules, such as proteins.
Mutations in a gene called BRAF can turn on signals that help the cancer cells
grow. Gene mutations that impair DNA repair mechanisms can also make the cancer
cells grow more quickly and allow the immune system to detect the cancer cells
as being foreign to the body. Targeted therapy is a type of cancer treatment
that turns off specific genes and proteins involved in cancer cell survival and
growth. BRAF and EGFR inhibitors are targeted therapies that work well together
in treating people with BRAF-mutant CRC. BRAF proteins can help cancer cells
grow, and BRAF inhibitors block these proteins to prevent, slow, or stop the
growth of the cancer cells. Immunotherapy is a type of cancer treatment that
helps a person's immune system fight cancer. Immunotherapy is effective for
treating CRC that has mutations in the DNA repair mechanisms. By combining
targeted therapy and immunotherapy, patients may be able to live longer without
their disease getting worse. In the SEAMARK study, we will use a treatment
combination including a BRAF inhibitor (encorafenib), an EGFR inhibitor
(cetuximab) and an immunotherapy (pembrolizumab) in patients with CRC who have a
BRAF mutation and deficiencies in the DNA repair mechanism. Clinical Trial
Registration: NCT05217446 (ClinicalTrials.gov), 2021-003715-26 (EudraCT).

DOI: 10.2217/fon-2022-1249
PMCID: PMC12510239
PMID: 37815847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The SEAMARK study was sponsored by Pfizer, Inc.
This study is in collaboration with Merck Sharp & Dohme LLC, a subsidiary of
Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA, Merck KGaA Darmstadt, Germany, and Eli Lilly
and Company. The authors have no other relevant affiliations or financial
involvement with any organization or entity with a financial interest in or
financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the
manuscript apart from those disclosed. E Elez reports honoraria from Amgen,
Bayer, Hoffman La-Roche, Merck Serono, MSD, Novartis, Organon, Pierre Fabre,
Pfizer, Sanofi, Seagen, Servier, and Takeda. S Kopetz reports
consulting/advisory roles for AbbVie, Amal Therapeutics, AstraZeneca/MedImmune,
Bayer Health, Bicara Therapeutics, Boehringer Ingelheim, Boston Biomedical,
Carina Biotech, Daiichi Sankyo, Eli Lilly, EMD Serono, Endeavor BioMedicines,
Flame Biosciences, Frontier Medicines, Genentech, Genomic Health, Gilead
Sciences, GlaxoSmithKline, HalioDx, Holy Stone Healthcare, Inivata, Ipsen,
Iylon, Jacobio, Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Johnson & Johnson/Janssen, Lutris, Merck,
Mirati Therapeutics, Natera, Novartis, Numab, Pierre Fabre, Pfizer, Redx Pharma,
Repare Therapeutics, Replimune, Servier, Taiho Pharmaceutical, and Xilis; stock
and other ownership interests in Frontier Medicines, Iylon, Lutris, and
MolecularMatch; research funding from Amgen, Array BioPharma, Biocartis, Daiichi
Sankyo, Eli Lilly, EMD Serono, Genentech, Guardant Health, MedImmune, Novartis,
Roche, and Sanofi. J Tabernero reports personal financial interest in the form
of scientific consultancy roles for Array Biopharma, AstraZeneca, Bayer,
Boehringer Ingelheim, Chugai, Daiichi Sankyo, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd,
Genentech Inc, HalioDX SAS, Hutchison MediPharma International, Ikena Oncology,
Inspirna Inc, IQVIA, Lilly, Menarini, Merck Serono, Merus, MSD, Mirati,
Neophore, Novartis, Ona Therapeutics, Orion Biotechnology, Peptomyc, Pfizer,
Pierre Fabre, Samsung Bioepis, Sanofi, Scandion Oncology, Scorpion Therapeutics,
Seattle Genetics, Servier, Sotio Biotech, Taiho, Tessa Therapeutics, and
TheraMyc; stocks in Oniria Therapeutics; educational collaboration with
Imedex/HMP, Medscape Education, MJH Life Sciences, PeerView Institute for
Medical Education, and Physicians Education Resource (PER); institutional
financial interest in the form of financial support for clinical trials or
contracted research for Amgen Inc, Array Biopharma Inc, AstraZeneca
Pharmaceuticals LP, BeiGene, Boehringer Ingelheim, Bristol Myers Squibb,
Celgene, Debiopharm International SA, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd, Genentech Inc,
HalioDX SAS, Hutchison MediPharma International, Janssen-Cilag SA, MedImmune,
Menarini, Merck Health KGAA, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Merus NV, Mirati, Novartis
Farmacéutica SA, Pfizer, Pharma Mar, Sanofi Aventis Recherche & Développement,
Servier, Taiho Pharma USA Inc, Spanish Association Against Cancer Scientific
Foundation, and Cancer Research UK. T Bekaii-Saab reports research funding to
Agios, Arys, Arcus, Atreca, Boston Biomedical, Bayer, Eisai, Celgene, Lilly,
Ipsen, Clovis, Seattle Genetics, Genentech, Novartis, Mirati, Merus, Abgenomics,
Incyte, Pfizer, and BMS; consulting roles for Ipsen, Arcus, Pfizer, Seattle
Genetics, Bayer, Genentech, Incyte, Eisai, Merck KGA, Merck, Stemline, AbbVie,
Boehringer Ingelheim, Janssen, Daiichi Sankyo, Natera, TreosBio, Celularity,
Caladrius Biosciences, Exact Science, Sobi, Beigene, Kanaph, AstraZeneca,
Deciphera, MJH Life Sciences, Aptitude Health, Illumina, and Foundation
Medicine; independent data monitoring committee (IDMC) or data and safety
monitoring board (DSMB) roles for Fibrogen, Suzhou Kintor, AstraZeneca,
Exelixis, Merck/Eisai, PanCan, and 1Globe; scientific advisory board roles for
Imugene, Immuneering, Xilis, Replimune, Artiva, and Sun Biopharma; inventions or
patents for Imugene and Recursion. J Taieb reports financial interests,
personal, advisory or speaker roles for Astellas, Merck, Amgen, Servier, Pierre
Fabre, BMS, Novartis, AstraZeneca, and MSD. T Yoshino reports honoraria from
Bayer Yakuhin, Chugai Pharma, Merck Biopharma, MSD, and Ono Pharmaceutical;
research funding from Amgen, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chugai Pharma, Daiichi Sankyo
Company, Limited, Genomedia, MSD, Ono Pharmaceutical, Pfizer, Sanofi, Sumitomo
Dainippon, Sysmex, and Taiho Pharmaceutical. G Manji reports advisory roles for
CEND Pharmaceuticals and Roche/Genentech, stock ownership in CEND
Pharmaceuticals, and research funding from Roche/Genentech, Regeneron,
BioLineRx, and Merck. K Fernandez reports employment and stock ownership in
Pfizer. A Abbattista reports employment and stock ownership in Pfizer. X Zhang
reports employment and stock ownership in Pfizer; and patents, royalties, and
other intellectual property in Johns Hopkins University. VK Morris reports
consulting or advisory roles for Bayer, Regeneron, Bicara, and Incyte; research
funding from Pfizer, Bristol Myers Squibb, BioNTech, Novartis, Bicara, and EMD
Serono. The authors have no other competing interests or relevant affiliations
with any organization or entity with the subject matter or materials discussed
in the manuscript apart from those disclosed.
