---
reference_id: "PMID:37070927"
title: Targeting RET Solvent-Front Mutants with Alkynyl Nicotinamide-Based Inhibitors.
authors:
- Khatri U
- Dayal N
- Hu X
- Larocque E
- Naganna N
- Shen T
- Liu X
- Holtsberg FW
- Aman MJ
- Sintim HO
- Wu J
journal: Mol Cancer Ther
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-22-0629
keywords:
- Humans
- "Administration, Oral"
- Benzamides/pharmacology
- Cell Culture Techniques
- "Niacinamide/pharmacology, analogs & derivatives"
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-ret
- Naphthyridines
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeting RET Solvent-Front Mutants with Alkynyl Nicotinamide-Based Inhibitors.
**Authors:** Khatri U, Dayal N, Hu X, Larocque E, Naganna N, Shen T, Liu X, Holtsberg FW, Aman MJ, Sintim HO, Wu J
**Journal:** Mol Cancer Ther (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-22-0629](https://doi.org/10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-22-0629)

## Content

1. Mol Cancer Ther. 2023 Jun 1;22(6):717-725. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-22-0629.

Targeting RET Solvent-Front Mutants with Alkynyl Nicotinamide-Based Inhibitors.

Khatri U(#)(1)(2), Dayal N(#)(3), Hu X(#)(1)(2), Larocque E(3), Naganna N(3),
Shen T(1)(2), Liu X(1)(2), Holtsberg FW(4), Aman MJ(4), Sintim HO(3), Wu
J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
(2)Peggy and Charles Stephenson Cancer Center, University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.
(3)Department of Chemistry and Center for Drug Discovery, Purdue University,
West Lafayette, Indiana.
(4)KinaRx, Inc., Rockville, Maryland.
(#)Contributed equally

Selpercatinib (LOXO292) and pralsetinib (BLU667) are RET protein tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs) recently approved for treating RET-altered cancers. However,
RET mutations that confer selpercatinib/pralsetinib resistance have been
identified, necessitating development of next-generation RET TKIs. While
acquired RET G810C/R/S/V mutations were reported in selpercatinib-treated
patients, it was unclear whether all of these and other potential G810 mutants
are resistant to selpercatinib and pralsetinib. Here, we profiled selpercatinib
and pralsetinib on all six possible G810 mutants derived from single nucleotide
substitution and developed novel alkynyl nicotinamide-based RET TKIs to inhibit
selpercatinib/pralsetinib-resistant RET G810 mutants. Surprisingly, the G810V
mutant found in a clinical study was not resistant to selpercatinib or
pralsetinib. Besides G810C/R/S, G810D also conferred selpercatinib/pralsetinib
resistance. Alkynyl nicotinamide compounds such as HSN608, HSL476, and HSL468
have better drug-like properties than alkynyl benzamides. Six of these compounds
inhibited all six G810 solvent-front mutants and the V804M gatekeeper mutant
with IC50 < 50 nmol/L in cell culture. Oral administration of HSN608 at a
well-tolerated dose (30 mg/kg) gave plasma level > 30x the IC50s of inhibiting
all G810 mutants in cell culture. In cell-derived xenograft tumors driven by
KIF5B-RET (G810C) that contains the most frequently observed solvent-front
mutant in selpercatinib-treated patients, HSN608, HSL476, and HSL468
significantly suppressed and caused regression of the selpercatinib-resistant
tumors. This study clarifies the sensitivities of different RET solvent-front
mutants to selpercatinib and pralsetinib and identifies novel alkylnyl
nicotinamide-based RET TKIs for inhibiting selpercatinib/pralsetinib-resistant
G810 mutants.

©2023 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-22-0629
PMCID: PMC10239345
PMID: 37070927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interests U.K, X.H., T.S., X.L. and
N.N. declare no conflict of interest. N.D. E.L. J.W. and H.O.S. are inventors on
nicotinamide patent disclosures (analogs of HSL476 or HSL468). H.O.S. is an
inventor on HSN608 patent. F.W.H. and M.J.A. are employees of KinaRx.
