---
reference_id: "PMID:22483044"
title: The pathophysiology of fragile X (and what it teaches us about synapses).
authors:
- Bhakar AL
- Dölen G
- Bear MF
journal: Annu Rev Neurosci
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1146/annurev-neuro-060909-153138
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The pathophysiology of fragile X (and what it teaches us about synapses).
**Authors:** Bhakar AL, Dölen G, Bear MF
**Journal:** Annu Rev Neurosci (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev-neuro-060909-153138](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-neuro-060909-153138)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2012;35:417-43. doi: 10.1146/annurev-neuro-060909-153138. 
Epub 2012 Apr 5.

The pathophysiology of fragile X (and what it teaches us about synapses).

Bhakar AL(1), Dölen G, Bear MF.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Picower Institute for Learning and Memory, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA. 
abhakar@mit.edu

Fragile X is the most common known inherited cause of intellectual disability 
and autism, and it typically results from transcriptional silencing of FMR1 and 
loss of the encoded protein, FMRP (fragile X mental retardation protein). FMRP 
is an mRNA-binding protein that functions at many synapses to inhibit local 
translation stimulated by metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) 1 and 5. 
Recent studies on the biology of FMRP and the signaling pathways downstream of 
mGluR1/5 have yielded deeper insight into how synaptic protein synthesis and 
plasticity are regulated by experience. This new knowledge has also suggested 
ways that altered signaling and synaptic function can be corrected in fragile X, 
and human clinical trials based on this information are under way.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev-neuro-060909-153138
PMCID: PMC4327822
PMID: 22483044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]