---
reference_id: "PMID:30614390"
title: "Recessive congenital methemoglobinemia type II: Hypoplastic basal ganglia in two siblings with a novel mutation of the cytochrome b5 reductase gene."
authors:
- Nicolas-Jilwan M
journal: Neuroradiol J
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1177/1971400918822153
keywords:
- "Basal Ganglia/abnormalities, diagnostic imaging"
- "Child, Preschool"
- Cytochromes b5/genetics
- Humans
- Infant
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging/methods
- Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy
- Male
- "Methemoglobinemia/congenital, diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Mutation
- Siblings
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recessive congenital methemoglobinemia type II: Hypoplastic basal ganglia in two siblings with a novel mutation of the cytochrome b5 reductase gene.
**Authors:** Nicolas-Jilwan M
**Journal:** Neuroradiol J (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1971400918822153](https://doi.org/10.1177/1971400918822153)

## Content

1. Neuroradiol J. 2019 Apr;32(2):143-147. doi: 10.1177/1971400918822153. Epub
2019  Jan 7.

Recessive congenital methemoglobinemia type II: Hypoplastic basal ganglia in two
siblings with a novel mutation of the cytochrome b5 reductase gene.

Nicolas-Jilwan M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre,
Saudi Arabia.

Recessive congenital methemoglobinemia type II is a very rare autosomal
recessive hematologic disorder due to NADH-cytochrome b5 reductase deficiency,
usually caused by full-stop mutations or deletions. This disease classically
presents with mild neonatal cyanosis, early onset severe progressive
developmental delay, movement disorders, and progressive microcephaly. We report
two siblings with recessive congenital methemoglobinemia type II whose
evaluation revealed a novel p.Arg92Trp missense mutation of the CYB5R3 gene and
a peculiar imaging finding of basal ganglia hypoplasia. Brain magnetic resonance
imaging was performed at age 10 months in the older sibling and at age three
months in the younger sibling. It revealed similar findings of bilateral small
size of the lentiform and caudate nuclei and reduced frontotemporal brain
volume. Our patient cases highlight that basal ganglia hypoplasia is an
interesting clue to the very rare and frequently unsuspected diagnosis of
recessive congenital methemoglobinemia type II, that may explain the associated
movement disorders. The novel missense mutation is one of very few identified
missense mutations known to cause severe type II recessive congenital
methemoglobinemia.

DOI: 10.1177/1971400918822153
PMCID: PMC6410459
PMID: 30614390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
