---
reference_id: "PMID:34261898"
title: "Paediatric polyposis syndromes: burden of disease and current concepts."
authors:
- Phen C
- Rojas I
journal: Curr Opin Pediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1097/MOP.0000000000001044
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Paediatric polyposis syndromes: burden of disease and current concepts.
**Authors:** Phen C, Rojas I
**Journal:** Curr Opin Pediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MOP.0000000000001044](https://doi.org/10.1097/MOP.0000000000001044)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2021 Oct 1;33(5):509-514. doi:
10.1097/MOP.0000000000001044.

Paediatric polyposis syndromes: burden of disease and current concepts.

Phen C(1), Rojas I.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Department of 
Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Polyposis syndromes are rare but significant entities that 
often present during childhood and adolescence. Polyposis syndromes should 
remain high on the differential diagnoses for any child presenting with rectal 
bleeding, protein-losing enteropathy or intussusception in the setting of 
multiple polyps in the gastrointestinal tract. There are three primary 
paediatric polyposis syndromes: Juvenile polyposis syndrome (JPS), Familial 
adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS). This review will 
cover recent guidelines for these conditions and advances in genetic testing.
RECENT FINDINGS: The first set of paediatric guidelines were released in 2019 by 
the European Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition 
(ESPGHAN) for FAP, JPS and PJS. Even with advances in genetic testing, a 
significant proportion of patients with polyposis syndromes have no identifiable 
genetic mutations. Recent research has shown that polyps behave differently in 
patients with and without disease-causing variants, emphasizing the role of 
genetic testing in the diagnosis and management of polyposis syndromes.
SUMMARY: Polyposis syndromes in the paediatric population are growing due to 
increased recognition and advances in genetic testing. A timely diagnosis and 
surveillance of a paediatric polyposis syndrome are pivotal for the management 
of disease burden and early identification of cancers within the 
gastrointestinal tract and beyond. Paediatricians, paediatric 
gastroenterologists, paediatric oncologists and paediatric surgeons should be 
familiar with the presentation and comorbidities of polyposis syndromes in 
children and adolescents. Further research into genotype-phenotype correlations 
is needed to tailor the care for paediatric patients with polyposis syndromes.

Copyright © 2021 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MOP.0000000000001044
PMID: 34261898 [Indexed for MEDLINE]