---
reference_id: "PMID:33721182"
title: Ruxolitinib in Aicardi-Goutières syndrome.
authors:
- Mura E
- Masnada S
- Antonello C
- Parazzini C
- Izzo G
- Garau J
- Sproviero D
- Cereda C
- Orcesi S
- Veggiotti P
- Zuccotti G
- Dilillo D
- Penagini F
- Tonduti D
journal: Metab Brain Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s11011-021-00716-5
keywords:
- "Autoimmune Diseases of the Nervous System/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy"
- Brain/diagnostic imaging
- Humans
- Infant
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Nervous System Malformations/diagnostic imaging, drug therapy"
- Nitriles/therapeutic use
- Pyrazoles/therapeutic use
- Pyrimidines/therapeutic use
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ruxolitinib in Aicardi-Goutières syndrome.
**Authors:** Mura E, Masnada S, Antonello C, Parazzini C, Izzo G, Garau J, Sproviero D, Cereda C, Orcesi S, Veggiotti P, Zuccotti G, Dilillo D, Penagini F, Tonduti D
**Journal:** Metab Brain Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11011-021-00716-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11011-021-00716-5)

## Content

1. Metab Brain Dis. 2021 Jun;36(5):859-863. doi: 10.1007/s11011-021-00716-5. Epub
 2021 Mar 15.

Ruxolitinib in Aicardi-Goutières syndrome.

Mura E(1)(2), Masnada S(1)(2), Antonello C(2)(3), Parazzini C(2)(4), Izzo
G(2)(4), Garau J(5)(6), Sproviero D(5), Cereda C(5), Orcesi S(6)(7), Veggiotti
P(1)(2)(8), Zuccotti G(2)(8)(9), Dilillo D(2)(9), Penagini F(2)(9), Tonduti
D(10)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology, V. Buzzi Children's Hospital, Via
Castelvetro 32, 20154, Milan, Italy.
(2)C.O.A.L.A (Center for diagnosis and treatment of leukodystrophies), V. Buzzi
Children's Hospital, Via Castelvetro 32, 20154, Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Pediatric Orthopedics, V. Buzzi Children's Hospital, Via
Castelvetro 32, 20154, Milan, Italy.
(4)Department of Pediatric Radiology and Neuroradiology, V. Buzzi Children's
Hospital, Via Castelvetro 32, 20154, Milan, Italy.
(5)Genomic and Post-Genomic Center, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Via Mondino 2,
27100, Pavia, Italy.
(6)Department of Brain and Behavioral Sciences, University of Pavia, Via Bassi
21, 27100, Pavia, Italy.
(7)Department of Child Neurology and Psychiatry, IRCCS Mondino Foundation, Via
Mondino 2, 27100, Pavia, Italy.
(8)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Science "L. Sacco", University of
Milan, Via Giovanni Battista Grassi 74, 20157, Milan, Italy.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, V. Buzzi Children's Hospital, Via Castelvetro 32,
20154, Milan, Italy.
(10)Department of Pediatric Neurology, V. Buzzi Children's Hospital, Via
Castelvetro 32, 20154, Milan, Italy. davidetondu@hotmail.com.
(11)C.O.A.L.A (Center for diagnosis and treatment of leukodystrophies), V. Buzzi
Children's Hospital, Via Castelvetro 32, 20154, Milan, Italy.
davidetondu@hotmail.com.

Aicardi-Goutières Syndrome (AGS) is a monogenic leukodystrophy with pediatric
onset, clinically characterized by a variable degree of neurologic impairment.
It belongs to a group of condition called type I interferonopathies that are
characterized by abnormal overproduction of interferon alpha, an inflammatory
cytokine which action is mediated by the activation of two of the four human
Janus Kinases. Thanks to an ever-increasing knowledge of the molecular basis and
pathogenetic mechanisms of the disease, Janus Kinase inhibitors (JAKIs) have
been proposed as a treatment option for selected interferonopathies. Here we
reported the 24 months follow-up of the fifth AGS patient treated with
ruxolitinib described so far in literature. The treatment was globally well
tolerated; clinical examinations and radiological images demonstrated a
progressively improving course. It is however to note that patients
presenting with mild and spontaneously improving course have been reported.
Large natural history studies on AGS spectrum are strongly required in order to
get a better understanding of the results emerging from ongoing therapeutic
trials on such rare disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s11011-021-00716-5
PMID: 33721182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
