---
reference_id: "PMID:32142651"
title: SARS-CoV-2 Cell Entry Depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and Is Blocked by a Clinically Proven Protease Inhibitor.
authors:
- Hoffmann M
- Kleine-Weber H
- Schroeder S
- Krüger N
- Herrler T
- Erichsen S
- Schiergens TS
- Herrler G
- Wu NH
- Nitsche A
- Müller MA
- Drosten C
- Pöhlmann S
journal: Cell
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.052
keywords:
- Ammonium Chloride/pharmacology
- Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme 2
- Animals
- "Antibodies, Neutralizing/immunology"
- "Antibodies, Viral/immunology"
- "Betacoronavirus/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- COVID-19
- Cell Line
- "Coronavirus/chemistry, genetics, physiology"
- "Coronavirus Infections/drug therapy, immunology, therapy"
- Drug Development
- Esters
- "Gabexate/analogs & derivatives, pharmacology"
- Guanidines
- Humans
- "Immunization, Passive"
- "Leucine/analogs & derivatives, pharmacology"
- Pandemics
- "Peptidyl-Dipeptidase A/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Pneumonia, Viral/drug therapy"
- Protease Inhibitors/pharmacology
- "Receptors, Virus/chemistry, metabolism"
- Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus/physiology
- SARS-CoV-2
- Serine Endopeptidases/metabolism
- "Spike Glycoprotein, Coronavirus/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Vesiculovirus/genetics
- Virus Internalization/drug effects
- COVID-19 Serotherapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SARS-CoV-2 Cell Entry Depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and Is Blocked by a Clinically Proven Protease Inhibitor.
**Authors:** Hoffmann M, Kleine-Weber H, Schroeder S, Krüger N, Herrler T, Erichsen S, Schiergens TS, Herrler G, Wu NH, Nitsche A, Müller MA, Drosten C, Pöhlmann S
**Journal:** Cell (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.052](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.052)

## Content

1. Cell. 2020 Apr 16;181(2):271-280.e8. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.052. Epub
2020  Mar 5.

SARS-CoV-2 Cell Entry Depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and Is Blocked by a Clinically
Proven Protease Inhibitor.

Hoffmann M(1), Kleine-Weber H(2), Schroeder S(3), Krüger N(4), Herrler T(5),
Erichsen S(6), Schiergens TS(7), Herrler G(8), Wu NH(8), Nitsche A(9), Müller
MA(10), Drosten C(3), Pöhlmann S(11).

Author information:
(1)Infection Biology Unit, German Primate Center - Leibniz Institute for Primate
Research, Göttingen, Germany. Electronic address: mhoffmann@dpz.eu.
(2)Infection Biology Unit, German Primate Center - Leibniz Institute for Primate
Research, Göttingen, Germany; Faculty of Biology and Psychology, University
Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.
(3)Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität
Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health,
Institute of Virology, Berlin, Germany; German Centre for Infection Research,
associated partner Charité, Berlin, Germany.
(4)Institute of Virology, University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover, Hannover,
Germany; Research Center for Emerging Infections and Zoonoses, University of
Veterinary Medicine Hannover, Hannover, Germany.
(5)BG Unfallklinik Murnau, Murnau, Germany.
(6)Institute for Biomechanics, BG Unfallklinik Murnau, Murnau, Germany;
Institute for Biomechanics, Paracelsus Medical University Salzburg, Salzburg,
Austria.
(7)Biobank of the Department of General, Visceral, and Transplant Surgery,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany.
(8)Institute of Virology, University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover, Hannover,
Germany.
(9)Robert Koch Institute, ZBS 1 Highly Pathogenic Viruses, WHO Collaborating
Centre for Emerging Infections and Biological Threats, Berlin, Germany.
(10)Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität
Berlin, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health,
Institute of Virology, Berlin, Germany; German Centre for Infection Research,
associated partner Charité, Berlin, Germany; Martsinovsky Institute of Medical
Parasitology, Tropical and Vector Borne Diseases, Sechenov University, Moscow,
Russia.
(11)Infection Biology Unit, German Primate Center - Leibniz Institute for
Primate Research, Göttingen, Germany; Faculty of Biology and Psychology,
University Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany. Electronic address: spoehlmann@dpz.eu.

Comment in
    Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2020 May 21;64(6):e00754-20. doi:
10.1128/AAC.00754-20.
    Immunity. 2020 May 19;52(5):731-733. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2020.04.003.
    Pharmacol Res. 2020 Jul;157:104837. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2020.104837.
    Phytother Res. 2020 Jun;34(6):1189-1190. doi: 10.1002/ptr.6711.
    Signal Transduct Target Ther. 2020 Jun 17;5(1):98. doi:
10.1038/s41392-020-0195-x.
    Front Oncol. 2020 Aug 19;10:1448. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2020.01448.

The recent emergence of the novel, pathogenic SARS-coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) in
China and its rapid national and international spread pose a global health
emergency. Cell entry of coronaviruses depends on binding of the viral spike (S)
proteins to cellular receptors and on S protein priming by host cell proteases.
Unravelling which cellular factors are used by SARS-CoV-2 for entry might
provide insights into viral transmission and reveal therapeutic targets. Here,
we demonstrate that SARS-CoV-2 uses the SARS-CoV receptor ACE2 for entry and the
serine protease TMPRSS2 for S protein priming. A TMPRSS2 inhibitor approved for
clinical use blocked entry and might constitute a treatment option. Finally, we
show that the sera from convalescent SARS patients cross-neutralized
SARS-2-S-driven entry. Our results reveal important commonalities between
SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV infection and identify a potential target for antiviral
intervention.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.052
PMCID: PMC7102627
PMID: 32142651 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Interests The authors declare no
competing interests.
