---
reference_id: "PMID:39375714"
title: "Triheptanoin in patients with long-chain fatty acid oxidation disorders: clinical experience in Italy."
authors:
- Porta F
- Maiorana A
- Gragnaniello V
- Procopio E
- Gasperini S
- Taurisano R
- Spada M
- Dionisi-Vici C
- Burlina A
journal: Ital J Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13052-024-01782-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Triheptanoin in patients with long-chain fatty acid oxidation disorders: clinical experience in Italy.
**Authors:** Porta F, Maiorana A, Gragnaniello V, Procopio E, Gasperini S, Taurisano R, Spada M, Dionisi-Vici C, Burlina A
**Journal:** Ital J Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13052-024-01782-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13052-024-01782-y)

## Content

1. Ital J Pediatr. 2024 Oct 7;50(1):204. doi: 10.1186/s13052-024-01782-y.

Triheptanoin in patients with long-chain fatty acid oxidation disorders: 
clinical experience in Italy.

Porta F(1), Maiorana A(2), Gragnaniello V(3), Procopio E(4), Gasperini S(5), 
Taurisano R(2), Spada M(1), Dionisi-Vici C(#)(6), Burlina A(#)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University of Turin, Turin, Italy.
(2)Division of Metabolic Diseases and Hepatology, Bambino Gesù Children‛s 
Hospital IRCCS, Piazza S. Onofrio 4, 00165, Rome, Italy.
(3)Division of Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Department of Women and Children‛s 
Health, Reference Centre for Expanded Newborn Screening, University Hospital, 
Padua, Italy.
(4)Metabolic and Neuromuscular Unit, Meyer Children‛s Hospital IRCCS, Florence, 
Italy.
(5)Department of Paediatrics, Fondazione IRCCS San Gerardo Dei Tintori, Monza, 
Italy.
(6)Division of Metabolic Diseases and Hepatology, Bambino Gesù Children‛s 
Hospital IRCCS, Piazza S. Onofrio 4, 00165, Rome, Italy. 
carlo.dionisivici@opbg.net.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Long-chain fatty acid oxidation disorders (LC-FAOD) are rare and 
potentially life-threatening diseases that cause deficient energy production and 
accumulation of toxic metabolites. Despite dietary management, adherence to 
maximum fasting guidelines, restricted long-chain triglyceride intake and 
supplementation with medium-chain triglyceride (MCT) oil (current standard of 
care), most patients experience recurrent decompensation episodes that can 
require hospitalisation. Herein, we analysed the effectiveness and safety of 
triheptanoin (a highly purified, synthetic medium odd-chain triglyceride) 
treatment in a cohort of Italian patients with LC-FAOD.
METHODS: This retrospective, nationwide study included nine patients with 
LC-FAOD who switched from standard therapy with MCT oil to triheptanoin oral 
liquid. Data were collected between 2018 and 2022. Clinical outcome measures 
were the number and duration of intercurrent catabolic episodes and number and 
duration of metabolic decompensation episodes requiring hospitalisation. 
Creatine kinase (CK) levels and treatment-related adverse effects were also 
reported.
RESULTS: Patients were provided a mean ± standard deviation (SD) triheptanoin 
dose of 1.5 ± 0.9 g/kg/day in four divided administrations, which accounted for 
23.9 ± 8.9% of patients' total daily caloric intake. Triheptanoin treatment was 
started between 2.7 and 16 years of age and was continued for 2.2 ± 0.9 years. 
The number of intercurrent catabolic episodes during triheptanoin treatment was 
significantly lower than during MCT therapy (4.3 ± 5.3 vs 22.0 ± 22.2; 
p = 0.034), as were the number of metabolic decompensations requiring 
hospitalisation (mean ± SD: 2.0 ± 2.5 vs 18.3 ± 17.7; p = 0.014), and annualised 
hospitalisation rates and duration. Mean CK levels (outside metabolic 
decompensation episodes) were lower with triheptanoin treatment versus MCT oil 
for seven patients. No intensive care unit admissions were required during 
triheptanoin treatment. Epigastric pain and diarrhoea were recorded as adverse 
effects during both MCT and triheptanoin treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: The significant improvement in clinical outcome measures after the 
administration of triheptanoin highlights that this treatment approach can be 
more effective than MCT supplementation in patients with LC-FAOD. Triheptanoin 
was well tolerated and decreased the number of intercurrent catabolic episodes, 
metabolic decompensation episodes requiring hospitalisation, and the annualised 
rate and duration of hospitalisations.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13052-024-01782-y
PMCID: PMC11460043
PMID: 39375714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: VG received honoraria for lectures, 
presentations, speaker bureaus, manuscript writing or educational events from 
Sanofi and Nutricia; and financial support for attending meetings and/or travel 
expenses from Sanofi, Nutricia, Amicus and PIAM. SG, EP, FP, AM, CD-V and AB 
received fees for participation on the advisory board following personal 
experience in using triheptanoin. MS declares they have no competing interests.