---
reference_id: "PMID:40272888"
title: Ketogenesis mitigates metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease through mechanisms that extend beyond fat oxidation.
authors:
- Queathem ED
- Stagg DB
- Nelson AB
- Chaves AB
- Crown SB
- Fulghum K
- "d'Avignon DA"
- Ryder JR
- Bolan PJ
- Hayir A
- Gillingham JR
- Jannatpour S
- Rome FI
- Williams AS
- Muoio DM
- Ikramuddin S
- Hughey CC
- Puchalska P
- Crawford PA
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1172/JCI191021
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Mice
- Oxidation-Reduction
- Male
- "Fatty Liver/metabolism, pathology, genetics"
- "Ketone Bodies/metabolism, biosynthesis"
- Female
- "Liver/metabolism, pathology"
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA Synthase/metabolism, genetics"
- Citric Acid Cycle
- Lipid Metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ketogenesis mitigates metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease through mechanisms that extend beyond fat oxidation.
**Authors:** Queathem ED, Stagg DB, Nelson AB, Chaves AB, Crown SB, Fulghum K, d'Avignon DA, Ryder JR, Bolan PJ, Hayir A, Gillingham JR, Jannatpour S, Rome FI, Williams AS, Muoio DM, Ikramuddin S, Hughey CC, Puchalska P, Crawford PA
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI191021](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI191021)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2025 Apr 24;135(12):e191021. doi: 10.1172/JCI191021.
eCollection  2025 Jun 16.

Ketogenesis mitigates metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease
through mechanisms that extend beyond fat oxidation.

Queathem ED(1)(2)(3), Stagg DB(1), Nelson AB(1), Chaves AB(4), Crown SB(4),
Fulghum K(1), d'Avignon DA(1), Ryder JR(5)(6), Bolan PJ(7), Hayir A(1),
Gillingham JR(1)(2), Jannatpour S(8), Rome FI(1), Williams AS(4), Muoio
DM(4)(9)(10), Ikramuddin S(8), Hughey CC(1), Puchalska P(1), Crawford PA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Department of Medicine.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, and.
(3)Department of Integrative Biology and Physiology, University of Minnesota
Medical School, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(4)Duke Molecular Physiology Institute and Sarah W. Stedman Nutrition and
Metabolism Center, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.
(5)Department of Surgery, Lurie Children's Hospital, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(6)Department of Surgery, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(7)Department of Radiology, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis,
Minnesota, USA.
(8)Department of Surgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(9)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism, and Nutrition, Department of Medicine,
and.
(10)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.

The progression of metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease
(MASLD) to metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis (MASH) involves
alterations in both liver-autonomous and systemic metabolism that influence the
liver's balance of fat accretion and disposal. Here, we quantify the
contributions of hepatic oxidative pathways to liver injury in MASLD-MASH. Using
NMR spectroscopy, UHPLC-MS, and GC-MS, we performed stable isotope tracing and
formal flux modeling to quantify hepatic oxidative fluxes in humans across the
spectrum of MASLD-MASH, and in mouse models of impaired ketogenesis. In humans
with MASH, liver injury correlated positively with ketogenesis and total fat
oxidation, but not with turnover of the tricarboxylic acid cycle.
Loss-of-function mouse models demonstrated that disruption of mitochondrial
HMG-CoA synthase (HMGCS2), the rate-limiting step of ketogenesis, impairs
overall hepatic fat oxidation and induces an MASLD-MASH-like phenotype.
Disruption of mitochondrial β-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase (BDH1), the terminal
step of ketogenesis, also impaired fat oxidation, but surprisingly did not
exacerbate steatotic liver injury. Taken together, these findings suggest that
quantifiable variations in overall hepatic fat oxidation may not be a primary
determinant of MASLD-to-MASH progression, but rather that maintenance of
ketogenesis could serve a protective role through additional mechanisms that
extend beyond overall rates of fat oxidation.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI191021
PMCID: PMC12165805
PMID: 40272888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: PAC has served as an
external consultant for Selah Therapeutics.
