---
reference_id: "PMID:18254060"
title: Fluid therapy for acute bacterial meningitis.
authors:
- Maconochie I
- Baumer H
- Stewart ME
journal: Cochrane Database Syst Rev
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD004786.pub3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fluid therapy for acute bacterial meningitis.
**Authors:** Maconochie I, Baumer H, Stewart ME
**Journal:** Cochrane Database Syst Rev (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/14651858.CD004786.pub3](https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD004786.pub3)

## Content

1. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2008 Jan 23;(1):CD004786. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD004786.pub3.

Fluid therapy for acute bacterial meningitis.

Maconochie I(1), Baumer H, Stewart ME.

Author information:
(1)St Mary's Hospital, Department of Paediatrics A&E, South Wharf Road, 
Paddington, London, UK WC2 1NY. i.maconochie@ic.ac.uk

Update in
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014 May 05;(5):CD004786. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD004786.pub4.

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005 Jul 20;(3):CD004786. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD004786.pub2.

BACKGROUND: Acute bacterial meningitis remains a disease with high mortality and 
morbidity rates. However, with prompt and adequate antimicrobial and supportive 
treatment, the chances for survival have improved, especially in infants and 
children. Careful management of fluid and electrolyte balance is an important 
supportive therapy. Both over- and under-hydration are associated with adverse 
outcomes.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate differing volumes of fluid given in the initial 
management of bacterial meningitis.
SEARCH STRATEGY: We searched the Cochrane Acute Respiratory Infection Group's 
trials register, the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) 
(The Cochrane Library 2007, Issue 1), MEDLINE (1966 to March 2007), EMBASE (1980 
to March 2007), and CINAHL (1982 to February 2007).
SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomised controlled trials of differing volumes of fluid 
given in the initial management of bacterial meningitis were eligible for 
inclusion.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Six trials were identified in the initial search. 
On careful inspection three of these met the inclusion criteria. Data were 
extracted and trials were assessed for quality by all four of the original 
review authors (one author, R.O.W. has died since the original review, see 
acknowledgements). Data were combined for meta-analysis using relative risks for 
dichotomous data or weighted mean difference for continuous data. A fixed-effect 
statistical model was used.
MAIN RESULTS: The largest of the three trials was conducted in settings with 
high mortality rates. The meta-analysis found no significant difference between 
the maintenance-fluid and restricted-fluid groups in number of deaths (RR 0.82, 
95% CI 0.53 to 1.27); acute severe neurological sequelae (RR 0.67, 95% CI 0.41 
to 1.08); or in mild to moderate sequelae (RR 1.24, 95% CI 0.58 to 2.65). 
However, when neurological sequelae were defined further, there was a 
statistically significant difference in favour of the maintenance-fluid group in 
regard to spasticity (RR 0.50, 95% CI 0.27 to 0.93), seizures at both 72 hours 
(RR 0.59, 95% CI 0.42 to 0.83) and 14 days (RR 0.19, 95% CI 0.04 to 0.88), and 
chronic severe neurological sequelae at three-months follow up (RR 0.42, 95% CI 
0.20 to 0.89).
AUTHORS' CONCLUSIONS: Some evidence supports maintaining intravenous fluids 
rather than restricted them in the first 48 hours, in settings with high 
mortality rates and where patients present late. However, where children present 
early and mortality rates are lower there is insufficient evidence to guide 
practice.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD004786.pub3
PMID: 18254060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]