---
reference_id: PMID:32070692
title: "Behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia in mouse models of Alzheimer's disease-related pathology."
authors:
- Kosel F
- Pelley JMS
- Franklin TB
journal: Neurosci Biobehav Rev
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.02.012
keywords:
- "Alzheimer Disease/physiopathology, psychology"
- Animals
- "Behavior, Animal/physiology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Social Behavior
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia in mouse models of Alzheimer's disease-related pathology.
**Authors:** Kosel F, Pelley JMS, Franklin TB
**Journal:** Neurosci Biobehav Rev (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.02.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.02.012)

## Content

1. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2020 May;112:634-647. doi: 
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.02.012. Epub 2020 Feb 15.

Behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia in mouse models of 
Alzheimer's disease-related pathology.

Kosel F(1), Pelley JMS(1), Franklin TB(2).

Author information:
(1)The Social Lab, Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Dalhousie 
University, Halifax, B3H 4R2, Canada.
(2)The Social Lab, Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Dalhousie 
University, Halifax, B3H 4R2, Canada. Electronic address: 
tamara.franklin@dal.ca.

Transgenic mouse models have been used extensively to model the cognitive 
impairments arising from Alzheimer's disease (AD)-related pathology. However, 
less is known about the relationship between AD-related pathology and the 
behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD) commonly presented by 
patients. This review discusses the BPSD-like behaviours recapitulated by 
several mouse models of AD-related pathology, including the APP/PS1, Tg2576, 
3xTg-AD, 5xFAD, and APP23 models. Current evidence suggests that social 
withdrawal and depressive-like behaviours increase with progressive 
neuropathology, and increased aggression and sleep-wake disturbances are present 
even at early stages; however, there is no clear evidence to support increased 
anxiety-like behaviours, agitation (hyperactivity), or general apathy. Overall, 
transgenic mouse models of AD-related pathology recapitulate some of the 
BPSD-like behaviours associated with AD, but these behaviours vary by model. 
This reflects the patient population, where AD patients typically exhibit one or 
more BPSD, but rarely all symptoms at once. As a result, we suggest that 
transgenic mouse models are an important tool to investigate the pathology 
underlying BPSD in human AD patients.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.02.012
PMID: 32070692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]