---
reference_id: "PMID:23185500"
title: Hepatitis B virus infection does not significantly influence Plasmodium parasite density in asymptomatic infections in Ghanaian transfusion recipients.
authors:
- Freimanis GL
- Owusu-Ofori S
- Allain JP
journal: PLoS One
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049967
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis B virus infection does not significantly influence Plasmodium parasite density in asymptomatic infections in Ghanaian transfusion recipients.
**Authors:** Freimanis GL, Owusu-Ofori S, Allain JP
**Journal:** PLoS One (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0049967](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0049967)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49967. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049967. Epub 2012 Nov 
21.

Hepatitis B virus infection does not significantly influence Plasmodium parasite 
density in asymptomatic infections in Ghanaian transfusion recipients.

Freimanis GL(1), Owusu-Ofori S, Allain JP.

Author information:
(1)Division of Transfusion Medicine, Department of Haematology, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Areas endemic for malaria and Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection 
largely overlap geographically. A recent study has suggested the existence of an 
interaction between the two pathogens in symptomatic co-infected individuals on 
the South-American continent. We examined this issue in a hyperendemic area for 
both pathogens in sub-Saharan Africa.
METHODOLOGY AND FINDINGS: Pre-transfusion samples from a retrospective cohort of 
154 blood transfusion recipients were screened for both serological and 
molecular markers of HBV and Plasmodium genomes using species-specific nested 
PCR and quantitative real-time PCR. Thirty-seven individuals met exclusion 
criteria and were subsequently eliminated from further analysis. Of 117 
participants, 90% of recipients exhibited evidence of exposure to HBV, 42% with 
HBsAg and/or HBV DNA and 48% anti-HBc reactive without detectable HBV DNA. 
Plasmodium genome prevalence by NAT was 50%. Parasitemic individuals were 
significantly younger than non-parasitemic individuals (P = 0.04). Parasitemia 
level was not significantly lower in individuals with HBV DNA positive 
infections compared to those with HBV DNA negative exposures. HBV DNA load was 
not significantly different in parasitemic and non-parasitemic individuals.
CONCLUSION: The data presented suggests that, in sub-Saharan Africa, 
asymptomatic co-infections with these two ubiquitous pathogens do not appear to 
significantly affect each other and evolve independently.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049967
PMCID: PMC3503819
PMID: 23185500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.