---
reference_id: "PMID:29723362"
title: "Sclerodermiform basal cell carcinoma: how much can we rely on dermatoscopy to differentiate from non-aggressive basal cell carcinomas? Analysis of 1256 cases."
authors:
- Husein-ElAhmed H
journal: An Bras Dermatol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1590/abd1806-4841.20186699
keywords:
- Adult
- Age Factors
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/classification, diagnosis, pathology"
- Dermoscopy/methods
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Early Detection of Cancer/methods
- Female
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Reproducibility of Results
- Retrospective Studies
- Sex Factors
- "Skin Neoplasms/classification, diagnosis, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Sclerodermiform basal cell carcinoma: how much can we rely on dermatoscopy to differentiate from non-aggressive basal cell carcinomas? Analysis of 1256 cases.
**Authors:** Husein-ElAhmed H
**Journal:** An Bras Dermatol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1590/abd1806-4841.20186699](https://doi.org/10.1590/abd1806-4841.20186699)

## Content

1. An Bras Dermatol. 2018 Mar;93(2):229-232. doi: 10.1590/abd1806-4841.20186699.

Sclerodermiform basal cell carcinoma: how much can we rely on dermatoscopy to
differentiate from non-aggressive basal cell carcinomas? Analysis of 1256 cases.

Husein-ElAhmed H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hospital de Baza, Granada, Spain.

BACKGROUND: The behaviour of each basal cell carcinoma is known to be different
according to the histological growth pattern. Among these aggressive lesions,
sclerodermiform basal cell carcinomas are the most common type. This is a
challenging-to-treat lesion due to its deep tissue invasion, rapid growth, risk
of metastasis and overall poor prognosis if not diagnosed in early stages.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate if sclerodermiform basal cell carcinomas are diagnosed
later compared to non-sclerodermiform basal cell carcinoma Method: All lesions
excised from 2000 to 2010 were included. A pathologist classified the lesions in
two cohorts: one with specimens of non-aggressive basal cell carcinoma
(superficial, nodular and pigmented), and other with sclerodermiform basal cell
carcinoma. For each lesion, we collected patient's information from digital
medical records regarding: gender, age when first attending the clinic and the
tumor location.
RESULTS: 1256 lesions were included, out of which 296 (23.6%) corresponded to
sclerodermiform basal cell carcinoma, whereas 960 (76.4%) were non-aggressive
subtypes of basal cell carcinoma. The age of diagnosis was: 72.78±12.31 years
for sclerodermiform basal cell and 69.26±13.87 years for non-aggressive basal
cell carcinoma (P<.0001). Sclerodermiform basal cell carcinomas are diagnosed on
average 3.52 years later than non-aggressive basal cell carcinomas.
Sclerodermiform basal cell carcinomas were diagnosed 3.40 years and 2.34 years
later than non-aggressive basal cell carcinomas in younger and older patients
respectively (P=.002 and P=.03, respectively).
STUDY LIMITATIONS: retrospective design.
CONCLUSION: The diagnostic accuracy and primary clinic conjecture of
sclerodermiform basal cell carcinomas is quite low compared to other forms of
basal cell carcinoma such as nodular, superficial and pigmented. The dermoscopic
vascular patterns, which is the basis for the diagnosis of non-melanocytic
nonpigmented skin tumors, may not be particularly useful in identifying
sclerodermiform basal cell carcinomas in early stages. As a distinct entity,
sclerodermiform basal cell carcinomas show a lack of early diagnosis compared to
less-aggressive subtypes of BCC, and thus, more accurate diagnostic tools apart
from dermatoscopy are required to reach the goal of early-stage diagnosis of
sclerodermiform basal cell carcinomas.

DOI: 10.1590/abd1806-4841.20186699
PMCID: PMC5916395
PMID: 29723362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None.
