---
reference_id: "PMID:17122731"
title: "Chorea-acanthocytosis: a mimicker of Huntington disease case report and review of the literature."
authors:
- Gold MM
- Shifteh K
- Bello JA
- Lipton M
- Kaufman DM
- Brown AD
journal: Neurologist
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1097/01.nrl.0000245817.18773.f4
keywords:
- Adult
- Brain/pathology
- Chorea/diagnosis
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Diagnostic Errors
- Female
- Humans
- Huntington Disease/diagnosis
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed/methods"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chorea-acanthocytosis: a mimicker of Huntington disease case report and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Gold MM, Shifteh K, Bello JA, Lipton M, Kaufman DM, Brown AD
**Journal:** Neurologist (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.nrl.0000245817.18773.f4](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.nrl.0000245817.18773.f4)

## Content

1. Neurologist. 2006 Nov;12(6):327-9. doi: 10.1097/01.nrl.0000245817.18773.f4.

Chorea-acanthocytosis: a mimicker of Huntington disease case report and review 
of the literature.

Gold MM(1), Shifteh K, Bello JA, Lipton M, Kaufman DM, Brown AD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Montefiore 
Medical Center, Bronx, NY 10467, USA. megold@montefiore.org

BACKGROUND: Neuroacanthocytosis consists of a group of rare heterogeneous 
neurodegenerative disorders associated with acanthocytosis. 
Chorea-acanthocytosis, a variety of neuroacanthocytosis, is an autosomal 
recessive condition with clinical and radiologic features similar to Huntington 
disease. Although difficult, distinguishing between these entities is crucial as 
the implications for genetic counseling are significant.
REVIEW SUMMARY: We report the case of a 33-year-old female who presented to our 
institution with a 3-year history of chorea. The patient's prominent orofacial 
symptoms and the presence of acanthocytes on peripheral blood smear led to the 
correct diagnosis of chorea-acanthocytosis.
CONCLUSIONS: The significant similarities between chorea-acanthocytosis and 
Huntington disease at the clinical and radiologic levels can lead to an initial 
misdiagnosis. Clinical clues suggestive of chorea-acanthocytosis include 
prominent orofacial dyskinesias, often causing dysarthria and dysphagia. 
Acanthocytosis, when present on peripheral blood smear, can confirm the 
diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1097/01.nrl.0000245817.18773.f4
PMID: 17122731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]