---
reference_id: "PMID:38524112"
title: Investigation of a bacterial meningitis cluster in a refugee settlement, Obongi District, Uganda, March 2023.
authors:
- Agaba B
- Akunzirwe R
- Baliruno LN
- Naiga HN
- Okello P
- Kadobera D
- Bulage L
- Migisha R
- Ario AR
journal: Pan Afr Med J
year: '2024'
doi: 10.11604/pamj.2024.47.11.42377
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Investigation of a bacterial meningitis cluster in a refugee settlement, Obongi District, Uganda, March 2023.
**Authors:** Agaba B, Akunzirwe R, Baliruno LN, Naiga HN, Okello P, Kadobera D, Bulage L, Migisha R, Ario AR
**Journal:** Pan Afr Med J (2024)
**DOI:** [10.11604/pamj.2024.47.11.42377](https://doi.org/10.11604/pamj.2024.47.11.42377)

## Content

1. Pan Afr Med J. 2024 Jan 10;47:11. doi: 10.11604/pamj.2024.47.11.42377. 
eCollection 2024.

Investigation of a bacterial meningitis cluster in a refugee settlement, Obongi 
District, Uganda, March 2023.

Agaba B(1), Akunzirwe R(1), Baliruno LN(1), Naiga HN(1), Okello P(1), Kadobera 
D(1), Bulage L(1), Migisha R(1), Ario AR(1).

Author information:
(1)Uganda Public Health Fellowship Program, Uganda National Institute of Public 
Health, Kampala, Uganda.

On 6 March 2023, Neisseria meningitidis serogroup C was isolated from a cerebral 
spinal fluid sample from Obongi District, Uganda. This sample was one of many 
from patients who were presenting with fever, convulsions, and altered 
consciousness. We investigated to determine the scope of the meningitis cluster, 
identify risk factors of contracting meningitis, and inform control measures. We 
reviewed medical records, conducted active community case finding, and conducted 
key informant interviews in the affected communities to identify cases and 
factors associated with contracting meningitis. We analysed case data by person, 
place, and time. Between 22 December 2022 and 1 May 2023, 25 cases with 2 deaths 
of bacterial meningitis occurred in Palorinya Refugee Settlement, Obongi 
District. Of these, 4 were laboratory-confirmed with Neisseria meningitidis 
serogroup C, 6 were probable cases, and 15 were suspected cases. Most (76%) of 
case-patients were <18 years old with a median age of 12 years (range 1-66 
years). None of the case-patients was vaccinated against Neisseria meningitidis 
serogroup C. Each case-patient was from a different household and there was no 
epidemiological link between any of the cases. This meningococcal meningitis 
cluster caused by Neisseria meningitidis serogroup C occurred among 
non-vaccinated persons mostly aged <18 years in Palorinya Refugee Settlement. We 
recommended vaccination of at-risk persons.

Copyright: Brian Agaba et al.

DOI: 10.11604/pamj.2024.47.11.42377
PMCID: PMC10957730
PMID: 38524112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.