---
reference_id: "PMID:21114196"
title: Treating moderate-to-severe allergic asthma with anti-IgE monoclonal antibody (omalizumab). An update.
authors:
- D'Amato G
- Perticone M
- Bucchioni E
- Salzillo A
- D'Amato M
- Liccardi G
journal: Eur Ann Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2010'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treating moderate-to-severe allergic asthma with anti-IgE monoclonal antibody (omalizumab). An update.
**Authors:** D'Amato G, Perticone M, Bucchioni E, Salzillo A, D'Amato M, Liccardi G
**Journal:** Eur Ann Allergy Clin Immunol (2010)

## Content

1. Eur Ann Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010 Aug;42(4):135-40.

Treating moderate-to-severe allergic asthma with anti-IgE monoclonal antibody 
(omalizumab). An update.

D'Amato G(1), Perticone M, Bucchioni E, Salzillo A, D'Amato M, Liccardi G.

Author information:
(1)Division of Respiratory and Allergic Diseases, Department of Respiratory 
Diseases, High Speciality Hospital A. Cardarelli, Naples, Italy.

Increased asthma severity is not only associated with enhanced recurrent 
hospitalisation and mortality but also with higher social costs. Most cases of 
asthma are atopic in nature, with the trigger for acute asthma attacks and 
chronic worsening of inflammation being allergens inducing an immune response 
through immunoglobulins of IgE class. Currently antiinflammatory treatments are 
effective for most of asthma patients, but there are subjects whose disease is 
incompletely controlled by inhaled or systemic corticosteroids and these 
patients account for about 50% of the healthcare costs of asthma. Omalizumab is 
a humanized recombinant monoclonal anti-IgE antibody developed for the treatment 
of allergic diseases and with clear efficacy in adolescent and adult patients 
with moderate-to-severe allergic asthma.. The anti-IgE antibody inhibits IgE 
functions blocking free serum IgE and inhibiting their binding to cellular 
receptors. By reducing serum IgE levels and IgE receptor expression on 
inflammatory cells in the context of allergic cascade, omalizumab represents a 
really new approach to the treatment of atopic asthma. Omalizumab improves 
quality of life of patients with severe persistent allergic asthma that is 
inadequately controlled by currently available asthma medications. This therapy 
is well tolerated and significantly improves symptoms, disease control, reducing 
asthma exacerbations and the need to use high dosage of inhaled corticosteroids. 
In other words, omalizumab may fulfil an important need in patients with 
moderate-to-severe asthma.

PMID: 21114196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]