---
reference_id: "PMID:26940953"
title: "Original Research: Parvovirus B19 infection in children with sickle cell disease in the hydroxyurea era."
authors:
- Hankins JS
- Penkert RR
- Lavoie P
- Tang L
- Sun Y
- Hurwitz JL
journal: Exp Biol Med (Maywood)
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1177/1535370216636723
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Original Research: Parvovirus B19 infection in children with sickle cell disease in the hydroxyurea era.
**Authors:** Hankins JS, Penkert RR, Lavoie P, Tang L, Sun Y, Hurwitz JL
**Journal:** Exp Biol Med (Maywood) (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1535370216636723](https://doi.org/10.1177/1535370216636723)

## Content

1. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2016 Apr;241(7):749-54. doi: 10.1177/1535370216636723.
 Epub 2016 Mar 2.

Original Research: Parvovirus B19 infection in children with sickle cell disease 
in the hydroxyurea era.

Hankins JS(1), Penkert RR(2), Lavoie P(3), Tang L(4), Sun Y(4), Hurwitz JL(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 
38105, USA jane.hankins@stjude.org.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, TN 38105, USA.
(3)Department of Hematology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 
38105, USA.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, 
TN 38105, USA.
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, TN 38105, USA Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Biochemistry, 
University of Tennessee, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Parvovirus B19 infection causes transient aplastic crisis in sickle cell disease 
(SCD) due to a temporary interruption in the red blood cell production. Toxicity 
from hydroxyurea includes anemia and reticulocytopenia, both of which also occur 
during a transient aplastic crisis event. Hydroxyurea inhibits proliferation of 
hematopoietic cells and may be immunosuppressive. We postulated that hydroxyurea 
could exacerbate parvovirus B19-induced aplastic crisis and inhibit the 
development of specific immune responses in children with SCD. We conducted a 
retrospective review of parvovirus B19 infection in 330 children with SCD. 
Altogether there were 120 known cases of aplastic crisis attributed to 
parvovirus B19 infection, and 12% of children were on hydroxyurea treatment 
during the episode. We evaluated hematological and immune responses. Children 
with HbSS or HbSβ(0)-thalassemia treated with hydroxyurea, when compared with 
untreated children, required fewer transfusions and had higher Hb concentration 
nadir during transient aplastic crisis. Duration of hospital stays was no 
different between hydroxyurea-treated and untreated groups. Children tested 
within a week following aplastic crisis were positive for parvovirus-specific 
IgG. Immune responses lasted for the duration of the observation period, up to 
13 years after transient aplastic crisis, and there were no repeat aplastic 
crisis episodes. The frequencies of parvovirus-specific antibodies in all 
children with SCD increased with age, as expected due to the increased 
likelihood of a parvovirus exposure, and were comparable to frequencies reported 
for healthy children. Approximately one-third of children had a positive 
parvovirus B19-specific IgG test without a documented history of transient 
aplastic crisis, and 64% of them were treated with hydroxyurea. Hydroxyurea may 
reduce requirements for blood transfusions and may attenuate symptoms during 
transient aplastic crisis episodes caused by parvovirus B19 infections. Children 
with SCD, whether treated or untreated with hydroxyurea, generate sustained and 
protective parvovirus B19-specific immune responses.

© 2016 by the Society for Experimental Biology and Medicine.

DOI: 10.1177/1535370216636723
PMCID: PMC4950380
PMID: 26940953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]