---
reference_id: "PMID:37333273"
title: ENPP1 is an innate immune checkpoint of the anticancer cGAMP-STING pathway.
authors:
- Wang S
- Böhnert V
- Joseph AJ
- Sudaryo V
- Swinderman J
- Yu FB
- Lyu X
- Skariah G
- Subramanyam V
- Gilbert LA
- Goodarzi H
- Lingyin L
journal: bioRxiv
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1101/2023.06.01.543353
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ENPP1 is an innate immune checkpoint of the anticancer cGAMP-STING pathway.
**Authors:** Wang S, Böhnert V, Joseph AJ, Sudaryo V, Swinderman J, Yu FB, Lyu X, Skariah G, Subramanyam V, Gilbert LA, Goodarzi H, Lingyin L
**Journal:** bioRxiv (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1101/2023.06.01.543353](https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.06.01.543353)

## Content

1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2023 Jun 5:2023.06.01.543353. doi:
10.1101/2023.06.01.543353.

ENPP1 is an innate immune checkpoint of the anticancer cGAMP-STING pathway.

Wang S(1)(2)(3), Böhnert V(1)(2), Joseph AJ(1)(2)(3), Sudaryo V(1)(2)(3),
Swinderman J(3)(4)(5), Yu FB(3), Lyu X(2), Skariah G(1)(2), Subramanyam
V(4)(5)(6)(7), Gilbert LA(3)(4)(5), Goodarzi H(4)(5)(6)(7), Lingyin L(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Stanford University, Stanford 94305, USA.
(2)ChEM-H Institute, Stanford University, Stanford 94305, USA.
(3)Arc Institute, Palo Alto 94304, USA.
(4)Department of Urology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco
94143, USA.
(5)UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.
(6)Department of Biophysics & Biochemistry, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco 94143, USA.
(7)UCSF Baker Computational Health Science Institute, University of California,
San Francisco, 94143, USA.

Update in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2023 Dec 26;120(52):e2313693120. doi:
10.1073/pnas.2313693120.

ENPP1 expression correlates with poor prognosis in many cancers, and we
previously discovered that ENPP1 is the dominant hydrolase of extracellular
cGAMP: a cancer-cell-produced immunotransmitter that activates the anticancer
STING pathway. However, ENPP1 has other catalytic activities and the molecular
and cellular mechanisms contributing to its tumorigenic effects remain unclear.
Here, using single cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq), we show that ENPP1 overexpression
drives primary breast tumor growth and metastasis by synergistically dampening
extracellular cGAMP-STING mediated antitumoral immunity and activating
immunosuppressive extracellular adenosine (eADO) signaling. In addition to
cancer cells, stromal and immune cells in the tumor microenvironment (TME) also
express ENPP1 that restrains their response to tumor-derived cGAMP. Enpp1
loss-of-function in both cancer cells and normal tissues slowed primary tumor
initiation and growth and prevented metastasis in an extracellular cGAMP- and
STING-dependent manner. Selectively abolishing the cGAMP hydrolysis activity of
ENPP1 phenocopied total ENPP1 knockout, demonstrating that restoration of
paracrine cGAMP-STING signaling is the dominant anti-cancer mechanism of ENPP1
inhibition. Strikingly, we find that breast cancer patients with low ENPP1
expression have significantly higher immune infiltration and improved response
to therapeutics impacting cancer immunity upstream or downstream of the
cGAMP-STING pathway, like PARP inhibitors and anti-PD1. Altogether, selective
inhibition of ENPP1's cGAMP hydrolase activity alleviates an innate immune
checkpoint to boost cancer immunity and is therefore a promising therapeutic
approach against breast cancer that may synergize with other cancer
immunotherapies.

DOI: 10.1101/2023.06.01.543353
PMCID: PMC10274658
PMID: 37333273

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interest L.L. has filed patents
on ENPP1 inhibitors and is a co-founder of Angarus Therapeutics. L.A.G has filed
patents on CRISPR technologies and is a co-founder of Chroma Medicine.
