---
reference_id: "PMID:37725003"
title: "Genetic screening for hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis with polyneuropathy in western Sicily: Two years of experience in a neurological clinic."
authors:
- Di Stefano V
- Lupica A
- Alonge P
- Pignolo A
- Augello SM
- Gentile F
- Gagliardo A
- Giglia F
- Brinch D
- Cappello M
- Di Lisi D
- Novo G
- Borgione E
- Scuderi C
- Brighina F
journal: Eur J Neurol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/ene.16065
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic screening for hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis with polyneuropathy in western Sicily: Two years of experience in a neurological clinic.
**Authors:** Di Stefano V, Lupica A, Alonge P, Pignolo A, Augello SM, Gentile F, Gagliardo A, Giglia F, Brinch D, Cappello M, Di Lisi D, Novo G, Borgione E, Scuderi C, Brighina F
**Journal:** Eur J Neurol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/ene.16065](https://doi.org/10.1111/ene.16065)

## Content

1. Eur J Neurol. 2024 Jan;31(1):e16065. doi: 10.1111/ene.16065. Epub 2023 Sep 19.

Genetic screening for hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis with polyneuropathy 
in western Sicily: Two years of experience in a neurological clinic.

Di Stefano V(1), Lupica A(1), Alonge P(1), Pignolo A(1), Augello SM(1), Gentile 
F(1), Gagliardo A(1), Giglia F(2), Brinch D(3), Cappello M(3), Di Lisi D(4), 
Novo G(4), Borgione E(5), Scuderi C(5), Brighina F(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Neurology, Department of Biomedicine, Neuroscience, and Advanced 
Diagnostics, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(2)Unit of Neurology With Stroke Unit, S. Giovanni di Dio Hospital, Agrigento, 
Italy.
(3)Section of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Health Promotion, 
Mother and Child Care, Internal Medicine, and Medical Specialties, University of 
Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
(4)Section of Cardiology, Department of Health Promotion, Mother and Child Care, 
Internal Medicine, and Medical Specialties, University of Palermo, Palermo, 
Italy.
(5)Unit of Neuromuscular Diseases, Oasi Research Institute, IRCCS, Troina, 
Italy.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis with polyneuropathy 
(ATTRv-PN) is caused by mutations in the TTR gene, leading to misfolded monomers 
that aggregate generating amyloid fibrils.
METHODS: A prospective systematic genetic screening for ATTRv-PN was proposed in 
patients presenting with a sensory-motor idiopathic polyneuropathy and two or 
more "red flags" among the following: family history of polyneuropathy or 
cardiopathy, bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome, cardiac insufficiency, renal 
amyloidosis, lumbar tract stenosis, autonomic dysfunction, idiopathic 
gastrointestinal disease, amyloid deposits on biopsy, and vitreous opacities. 
The detection rate was calculated, and nonparametric analyses were carried out 
to underline differences among screened positive versus negative patients.
RESULTS: In the first step, 145 suspected patients underwent genetic testing, 
revealing a diagnosis of ATTRv-PN in 14 patients (10%). Then, cascade screening 
allowed early recognition of 33 additional individuals (seven symptomatic 
ATTRv-PN patients and 26 presymptomatic carriers) among 84 first-degree 
relatives. Patients with a positive genetic test presented a higher frequency of 
unexplained weight loss, gastrointestinal symptoms, and family history of 
cardiopathy.
CONCLUSIONS: A systematic screening for ATTRv-PN yielded an increased 
recognition of the disease in our neurological clinic. Unexplained weight loss 
associated with axonal polyneuropathy had the highest predictive value in the 
guidance of clinical suspicion. A focused approach for the screening of ATTRv-PN 
could lead to an earlier diagnosis and identification of asymptomatic carriers, 
who will be promptly treated after a strict follow-up at the clinical onset.

© 2023 The Authors. European Journal of Neurology published by John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd on behalf of European Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1111/ene.16065
PMCID: PMC11235612
PMID: 37725003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.