---
reference_id: "PMID:19374900"
title: beta-N-methylamino-l-alanine induces oxidative stress and glutamate release through action on system Xc(-).
authors:
- Liu X
- Rush T
- Zapata J
- Lobner D
journal: Exp Neurol
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2009.04.002
keywords:
- "Amino Acid Transport System y+/drug effects, metabolism"
- "Amino Acids, Diamino/metabolism, toxicity"
- "Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/chemically induced, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Animals
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Central Nervous System/drug effects, metabolism, physiopathology"
- Coculture Techniques
- Cyanobacteria Toxins
- Cystine/metabolism
- "Excitatory Amino Acid Agonists/metabolism, toxicity"
- "Extracellular Space/drug effects, metabolism"
- Glutamic Acid/metabolism
- "Glutathione/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Neurodegenerative Diseases/chemically induced, metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Neurons/drug effects, metabolism"
- "Neurotoxins/metabolism, toxicity"
- "Oxidative Stress/drug effects, physiology"
- "Receptor, Metabotropic Glutamate 5"
- "Receptors, Metabotropic Glutamate/drug effects, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# beta-N-methylamino-l-alanine induces oxidative stress and glutamate release through action on system Xc(-).
**Authors:** Liu X, Rush T, Zapata J, Lobner D
**Journal:** Exp Neurol (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.expneurol.2009.04.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.expneurol.2009.04.002)

## Content

1. Exp Neurol. 2009 Jun;217(2):429-33. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2009.04.002. Epub
 2009 Apr 15.

beta-N-methylamino-l-alanine induces oxidative stress and glutamate release 
through action on system Xc(-).

Liu X(1), Rush T, Zapata J, Lobner D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Marquette University, 561 N. 15th Street, 
Rm 446 Milwaukee, WI 53233, USA.

beta-N-methylamino-l-alanine (BMAA) is a non-protein amino acid implicated in 
the neurodegenerative disease amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/Parkinson-dementia 
complex (ALS/PDC) on Guam. BMAA has recently been discovered in the brains of 
Alzheimer's patients in Canada and is produced by various species of 
cyanobacteria around the world. These findings suggest the possibility that BMAA 
may be of concern not only for specific groups of Pacific Islanders, but for a 
much larger population. Previous studies have indicated that BMAA can act as an 
excitotoxin by acting on the NMDA receptor. We have shown that the mechanism of 
neurotoxicity is actually three-fold; it involves not only direct action on the 
NMDA receptor, but also activation of metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 (mGluR5) 
and induction of oxidative stress. We now explore the mechanism by which BMAA 
activates the mGluR5 receptor and induces oxidative stress. We found that BMAA 
inhibits the cystine/glutamate antiporter (system Xc(-)) mediated cystine 
uptake, which in turn leads to glutathione depletion and increased oxidative 
stress. BMAA also appears to drive glutamate release via system Xc(-) and this 
glutamate induces toxicity through activation of the mGluR5 receptor. Therefore, 
the oxidative stress and mGluR5 activation induced by BMAA are both mediated 
through action at system Xc(-). The multiple mechanisms of BMAA toxicity, 
particularly the depletion of glutathione and enhanced oxidative stress, may 
account for its ability to induce complex neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2009.04.002
PMID: 19374900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]