---
reference_id: "PMID:36526090"
title: "TNF and IL6/Jak2 signaling pathways are the main contributors of the glia-derived neuroinflammation present in Lafora disease, a fatal form of progressive myoclonus epilepsy."
authors:
- Rubio T
- Viana R
- Moreno-Estellés M
- Campos-Rodríguez Á
- Sanz P
journal: Neurobiol Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2022.105964
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- Interleukin-6
- Lafora Disease/genetics
- "Myoclonic Epilepsies, Progressive"
- Neuroglia/metabolism
- Neuroinflammatory Diseases
- "Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases, Non-Receptor/genetics"
- Signal Transduction
- Tumor Necrosis Factors/metabolism
- Janus Kinase 2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TNF and IL6/Jak2 signaling pathways are the main contributors of the glia-derived neuroinflammation present in Lafora disease, a fatal form of progressive myoclonus epilepsy.
**Authors:** Rubio T, Viana R, Moreno-Estellés M, Campos-Rodríguez Á, Sanz P
**Journal:** Neurobiol Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nbd.2022.105964](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2022.105964)

## Content

1. Neurobiol Dis. 2023 Jan;176:105964. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2022.105964. Epub 2022 
Dec 14.

TNF and IL6/Jak2 signaling pathways are the main contributors of the 
glia-derived neuroinflammation present in Lafora disease, a fatal form of 
progressive myoclonus epilepsy.

Rubio T(1), Viana R(1), Moreno-Estellés M(2), Campos-Rodríguez Á(1), Sanz P(3).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia, CSIC, Jaime Roig 11, 46010 Valencia, 
Spain.
(2)Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia, CSIC, Jaime Roig 11, 46010 Valencia, 
Spain; Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), 
46010 Valencia, Spain.
(3)Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia, CSIC, Jaime Roig 11, 46010 Valencia, 
Spain; Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), 
46010 Valencia, Spain.. Electronic address: sanz@ibv.csic.es.

Lafora disease (LD; OMIM#254780) is a rare form of progressive myoclonus 
epilepsy (prevalence <1:1,000,000) characterized by the accumulation of 
insoluble deposits of aberrant glycogen (polyglucosans), named Lafora bodies, in 
the brain but also in peripheral tissues. LD is the most severe form of the 
group of progressive myoclonus epilepsies, since patients present a rapid 
deterioration and dementia with amplification of seizures, leading to death 
after a decade from the onset of the first symptoms. We have recently described 
that reactive glia-derived neuroinflammation should be considered a novel 
hallmark of LD since we observed a florid upregulation of differentially 
expressed genes in both LD mouse lines, which were mainly related to mediators 
of inflammatory response. In this work, we define an upregulation of the 
expression of mediators of the TNF and IL6/JAK2 signaling pathways in LD. In 
addition, we describe the activation of the non-canonical form of the 
inflammasome. Furthermore, we describe the infiltration of peripheral immune 
cells in the brain parenchyma, which could aggravate glia-derived 
neuroinflammation. Finally, we describe CXCL10 and S100b as blood biomarkers of 
the disease, which will allow the study of the progression of the disease using 
serum blood samples. We consider that the identification of these initial 
inflammatory changes in LD will be very important to implement possible 
anti-inflammatory therapeutic strategies to prevent the development of the 
disease.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2022.105964
PMCID: PMC10682476
PMID: 36526090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest Authors 
declare that none of them has any type of conflict of interest.