---
reference_id: "PMID:23323754"
title: "Thanatophoric dysplasia: autopsy findings over a 25-year period."
authors:
- Vogt C
- Blaas HG
journal: Pediatr Dev Pathol
year: '2013'
doi: 10.2350/12-09-1253-OA.1
keywords:
- Autopsy
- Humans
- "Thanatophoric Dysplasia/epidemiology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Thanatophoric dysplasia: autopsy findings over a 25-year period.
**Authors:** Vogt C, Blaas HG
**Journal:** Pediatr Dev Pathol (2013)
**DOI:** [10.2350/12-09-1253-OA.1](https://doi.org/10.2350/12-09-1253-OA.1)

## Content

1. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2013 May-Jun;16(3):160-7. doi: 10.2350/12-09-1253-OA.1.
Epub  2013 Jan 16.

Thanatophoric dysplasia: autopsy findings over a 25-year period.

Vogt C(1), Blaas HG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Medical Genetics, St Olavs Hospital, Trondheim
University Hospital, Trondheim, Norway. christina.vogt@ntnu.no

The aim of our study was to retrospectively assess morphological findings in
thanatophoric dysplasia, particularly, in how many cases were cerebral
manifestations with temporal lobe dysplasia identified. We also wanted to
register and analyze the proportions between lung, brain, and body weight.
Criteria for inclusion were an autopsy performed during the period ranging from
1985 to 2009 with a diagnosis of thanatophoric dysplasia. During a 25-year
period 25 cases of thanatophoric dysplasia were registered. Temporal lobe
dysplasia was recognized in 52% of the cases, and after 1998 temporal lobe
dysplasia was described in all cases. In 19 cases the brain/body weight ratio
was increased, and in all cases the lung/body weight ratio was below the
corresponding ratio calculated according to standard measurements. In all but
one case the ratio of brain to lung weight was increased. This study focuses on
morphological findings, stressing the importance of temporal lobe dysplasia in
confirming a diagnosis of thanatophoric dysplasia. Lung/body, brain/body, and
brain/lung weight ratios confirm macrocephaly and lung hypoplasia, which are
constant findings in cases involving thanatophoric dysplasia. Femur and brain
morphology inclusive histology remains the ultimate tool for confirmation of
this lethal condition, although it has to be seen in a context inclusive of
radiological examination.

DOI: 10.2350/12-09-1253-OA.1
PMID: 23323754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
