---
reference_id: "PMID:39213029"
title: Defining cell type-specific immune responses in a mouse model of allergic contact dermatitis by single-cell transcriptomics.
authors:
- Liu Y
- Yin M
- Mao X
- Wu S
- Wei S
- Heng S
- Yang Y
- Huang J
- Guo Z
- Li C
- Ji C
- Hu L
- Liu W
- Zhang LJ
journal: Elife
year: '2024'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.94698
keywords:
- Animals
- Mice
- "Dermatitis, Allergic Contact/immunology, genetics"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Fibroblasts/metabolism, immunology"
- Single-Cell Analysis
- Transcriptome
- Gene Expression Profiling
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Receptors, CXCR3/genetics, metabolism"
- Interferon-gamma/metabolism
- CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes/immunology
- "Skin/immunology, pathology"
- "Receptors, Interferon/genetics, metabolism"
- Cytokines/metabolism
- Female
- Interferon gamma Receptor
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Defining cell type-specific immune responses in a mouse model of allergic contact dermatitis by single-cell transcriptomics.
**Authors:** Liu Y, Yin M, Mao X, Wu S, Wei S, Heng S, Yang Y, Huang J, Guo Z, Li C, Ji C, Hu L, Liu W, Zhang LJ
**Journal:** Elife (2024)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.94698](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.94698)

## Content

1. Elife. 2024 Aug 30;13:RP94698. doi: 10.7554/eLife.94698.

Defining cell type-specific immune responses in a mouse model of allergic 
contact dermatitis by single-cell transcriptomics.

Liu Y(#)(1), Yin M(#)(1), Mao X(#)(2), Wu S(#)(3), Wei S(2)(4), Heng S(1), Yang 
Y(1), Huang J(5), Guo Z(6), Li C(2), Ji C(5), Hu L(2), Liu W(1), Zhang LJ(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.
(2)Zhejiang Yangshengtang Institute of Natural Medication Co Ltd, Hangzhou, 
China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, School of Life Sciences, 
Xiamen University, Xiamen, China.
(4)Yang Sheng Tang (Anji) Cosmetics Co Ltd, Zhejiang, China.
(5)Department of Dermatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Fujian Medical 
University, Fuzhou, China.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Update of
    doi: 10.1101/2024.01.16.575925.
    doi: 10.7554/eLife.94698.1.
    doi: 10.7554/eLife.94698.2.

Allergic contact dermatitis (ACD), a prevalent inflammatory skin disease, is 
elicited upon repeated skin contact with protein-reactive chemicals through a 
complex and poorly characterized cellular network between immune cells and skin 
resident cells. Here, single-cell transcriptomic analysis of the murine 
hapten-elicited model of ACD reveals that upon elicitation of ACD, infiltrated 
CD4+ or CD8+ lymphocytes were primarily the IFNγ-producing type 1 central memory 
phenotype. In contrast, type 2 cytokines (IL4 and IL13) were dominantly 
expressed by basophils, IL17A was primarily expressed by δγ T cells, and IL1β 
was identified as the primary cytokine expressed by activated 
neutrophils/monocytes and macrophages. Furthermore, analysis of skin resident 
cells identified a sub-cluster of dermal fibroblasts with preadipocyte signature 
as a prominent target for IFNγ+ lymphocytes and dermal source for key T cell 
chemokines CXCL9/10. IFNγ treatment shifted dermal fibroblasts from 
collagen-producing to CXCL9/10-producing, which promoted T cell polarization 
toward the type-1 phenotype through a CXCR3-dependent mechanism. Furthermore, 
targeted deletion of Ifngr1 in dermal fibroblasts in mice reduced Cxcl9/10 
expression, dermal infiltration of CD8+ T cell, and alleviated ACD inflammation 
in mice. Finally, we showed that IFNγ+ CD8+ T cells and CXCL10-producing dermal 
fibroblasts co-enriched in the dermis of human ACD skin. Together, our results 
define the cell type-specific immune responses in ACD, and recognize an 
indispensable role of dermal fibroblasts in shaping the development of type-1 
skin inflammation through the IFNGR-CXCR3 signaling circuit during ACD 
pathogenesis.

© 2024, Liu, Yin, Mao et al.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.94698
PMCID: PMC11364439
PMID: 39213029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: YL, MY, SW, SH, YY, JH, ZG, CJ, WL, LZ No 
competing interests declared, XM Xiaoting Mao is affiliated with Zhejiang 
Yangshengtang Institute of Natural Medication Co., Ltd. The author has no other 
competing interests to declare, SW Shuangping Wei is affiliated with Zhejiang 
Yangshengtang Institute of Natural Medication Co., Ltd. and Yang Sheng Tang 
(Anji) Cosmetics Co., Ltd. The author has no other competing interests to 
declare, CL Chuan Li is affiliated with Zhejiang Yangshengtang Institute of 
Natural Medication Co., Ltd. The author has no other competing interests to 
declare, LH Liu Hu is affiliated with Zhejiang Yangshengtang Institute of 
Natural Medication Co., Ltd. The author has no other competing interests to 
declare