---
reference_id: "PMID:38680772"
title: "Cutaneous Larva Migrans (CLM) may not be easy to diagnose: a case report and narrative review."
authors:
- Osman S
- Tarnari N
- Ahsan A
- Ahmed KAHM
journal: Oxf Med Case Reports
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/omcr/omae025
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cutaneous Larva Migrans (CLM) may not be easy to diagnose: a case report and narrative review.
**Authors:** Osman S, Tarnari N, Ahsan A, Ahmed KAHM
**Journal:** Oxf Med Case Reports (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/omcr/omae025](https://doi.org/10.1093/omcr/omae025)

## Content

1. Oxf Med Case Reports. 2024 Apr 25;2024(4):omae025. doi: 10.1093/omcr/omae025. 
eCollection 2024 Apr.

Cutaneous Larva Migrans (CLM) may not be easy to diagnose: a case report and 
narrative review.

Osman S(1), Tarnari N(1), Ahsan A(2), Ahmed KAHM(3).

Author information:
(1)Assistant Professor of Dermatology, Internal Security Force, Doha, Qatar.
(2)School of Health Sciences, Foundation University, Islamabad, Pakistan.
(3)Faculty of Medicine, University of Khartoum, Khartoum, Sudan.

BACKGROUND: Cutaneous Larva Migrans (CLM) is one of the most common zoonotic 
dermatoses in subtropical and tropical regions and some European countries. It 
is caused by different types of hookworm, such as Ancylostoma braziliense, 
Ancylostoma caninum, and Uncinaria stenocephala. It is usually easy to diagnose, 
but the atypical presentation may occasionally mimic other dermatoses.
CASE REPORT: A 32-year-old man presented with an extensive eczematous rash that 
developed during a recent vacation in Thailand. He didn't respond to 
antihistamines and systemic steroids. Finally, he was diagnosed with an atypical 
presentation of CLM and treated successfully with anthelminthic therapy.
CONCLUSION: The report of an atypical presentation of CLM is crucial to increase 
awareness among healthcare workers, helping in early diagnosis and reducing 
potential psychological distress that patients may face.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/omcr/omae025
PMCID: PMC11049579
PMID: 38680772

Conflict of interest statement: There is no conflict of interest of any author.