---
reference_id: "PMID:30118353"
title: Tofacitinib for the treatment of psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis.
authors:
- Berekmeri A
- Mahmood F
- Wittmann M
- Helliwell P
journal: Expert Rev Clin Immunol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1080/1744666X.2018.1512404
keywords:
- "Antirheumatic Agents/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Arthritis, Psoriatic/drug therapy"
- Clinical Trials as Topic
- Drug Approval
- Humans
- "Janus Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Nasopharyngitis/etiology
- "Piperidines/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Psoriasis/drug therapy
- "Pyrimidines/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- "Pyrroles/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tofacitinib for the treatment of psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis.
**Authors:** Berekmeri A, Mahmood F, Wittmann M, Helliwell P
**Journal:** Expert Rev Clin Immunol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1080/1744666X.2018.1512404](https://doi.org/10.1080/1744666X.2018.1512404)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2018 Sep;14(9):719-730. doi:
10.1080/1744666X.2018.1512404.

Tofacitinib for the treatment of psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis.

Berekmeri A(1), Mahmood F(2), Wittmann M(1), Helliwell P(3).

Author information:
(1)a Leeds Institute of Rheumatic and Musculoskeletal Medicine (LIRMM) ,
University of Leeds, NIHR Leeds Biomedical Research Centre (BRC) & Department of
Dermatology, Leeds Teaching Hospitals , Leeds , UK.
(2)b Rheumatology , Bradford Teaching Hospitals , Bradford , UK.
(3)c Rheumatology, Leeds Institute of Rheumatic and Musculoskeletal Medicine
(LIRMM) , University of Leeds, Chapel Allerton Hospital , Leeds , UK.

Psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis (PsA) are inflammatory immune-mediated
conditions which can cause considerable disability and reduced quality of life.
Management can be complex as clinical heterogeneity may lead to different
treatment pathways. Tofacitinib is a novel, oral Janus Kinase (JAK) inhibitor
with proven efficacy in rheumatoid arthritis. Areas covered: This review
analyzes recent studies of tofacitinib in psoriatic disease treatment. The
relevant literature was identified using clinicaltrials.gov, PubMed, and Google
Scholar. Tofacitinib efficacy was demonstrated in PsA by the OPAL Broaden and
OPAL Beyond phase-III studies, and received FDA and EMA approval. Tofacitinib
was superior to placebo for the treatment of moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis
in the OPT Pivotal 1 and 2, OPT Retreatment studies, but FDA approval was
declined for this indication based on issues of clinical efficacy and long-term
safety. Expert commentary: Tofacitinib is an important oral drug for the
treatment of PsA. However, the long-term safety data require further evaluation.
Tofacitinib and other JAK inhibitors show potential to broaden the treatment
options in PsA and other inflammatory conditions.

DOI: 10.1080/1744666X.2018.1512404
PMID: 30118353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
