---
reference_id: "PMID:30503862"
title: Heterozygosity for Nuclear Factor One X in mice models features of Malan syndrome.
authors:
- Oishi S
- Harkins D
- Kurniawan ND
- Kasherman M
- Harris L
- Zalucki O
- Gronostajski RM
- Burne THJ
- Piper M
journal: EBioMedicine
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2018.11.044
keywords:
- Animals
- Cerebral Cortex/diagnostic imaging
- Connectome
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Haploinsufficiency
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnostic imaging, genetics, psychology"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- "Megalencephaly/diagnostic imaging, genetics, psychology"
- Mice
- NFI Transcription Factors/genetics
- Organ Size
- Spatial Learning
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Heterozygosity for Nuclear Factor One X in mice models features of Malan syndrome.
**Authors:** Oishi S, Harkins D, Kurniawan ND, Kasherman M, Harris L, Zalucki O, Gronostajski RM, Burne THJ, Piper M
**Journal:** EBioMedicine (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ebiom.2018.11.044](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2018.11.044)

## Content

1. EBioMedicine. 2019 Jan;39:388-400. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2018.11.044. Epub 2018
 Nov 29.

Heterozygosity for Nuclear Factor One X in mice models features of Malan 
syndrome.

Oishi S(1), Harkins D(1), Kurniawan ND(2), Kasherman M(3), Harris L(4), Zalucki 
O(1), Gronostajski RM(5), Burne THJ(6), Piper M(7).

Author information:
(1)The School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, 
QLD 4072, Australia.
(2)The Centre for Advanced Imaging, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 
4072, Australia.
(3)The School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, 
QLD 4072, Australia; Griffith Institute for Drug Discovery, Griffith University, 
Brisbane, QLD 4111, Australia.
(4)The School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, 
QLD 4072, Australia; The Francis Crick Institute, 1 Midland Road, King's Cross, 
London, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Program in Genetics, Genomics and Bioinformatics, 
Center of Excellence in Bioinformatics and Life Sciences, State University of 
New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14203, USA.
(6)The Queensland Brain Institute, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 
4072, Australia; Queensland Centre for Mental Health Research, The Park Centre 
for Mental Health, Wacol, Brisbane, QLD 4076, Australia.
(7)The School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, 
QLD 4072, Australia; The Queensland Brain Institute, The University of 
Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia. Electronic address: 
m.piper@uq.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Nuclear Factor One X (NFIX) haploinsufficiency in humans results in 
Malan syndrome, a disorder characterized by overgrowth, macrocephaly and 
intellectual disability. Although clinical assessments have determined the 
underlying symptomology of Malan syndrome, the fundamental mechanisms 
contributing to the enlarged head circumference and intellectual disability in 
these patients remains undefined.
METHODS: Here, we used Nfix heterozygous mice as a model to investigate these 
aspects of Malan syndrome. Volumetric magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was used 
to calculate the volumes of 20 brain sub regions. Diffusion tensor MRI was used 
to perform tractography-based analyses of the corpus callosum, hippocampal 
commissure, and anterior commissure, as well as structural connectome mapping of 
the whole brain. Immunohistochemistry examined the neocortical cellular 
populations. Two behavioral assays were performed, including the active place 
avoidance task to assess spatial navigation and learning and memory function, 
and the 3-chambered sociability task to examine social behaviour.
FINDINGS: Adult Nfix+/- mice exhibit significantly increased brain volume 
(megalencephaly) compared to wildtypes, with the cerebral cortex showing the 
highest increase. Moreover, all three forebrain commissures, in particular the 
anterior commissure, revealed significantly reduced fractional anisotropy, axial 
and radial diffusivity, and tract density intensity. Structural connectome 
analyses revealed aberrant connectivity between many crucial brain regions. 
Finally, Nfix+/- mice exhibit behavioral deficits that model intellectual 
disability.
INTERPRETATION: Collectively, these data provide a significant conceptual 
advance in our understanding of Malan syndrome by suggesting that megalencephaly 
underlies the enlarged head size of these patients, and that disrupted cortical 
connectivity may contribute to the intellectual disability these patients 
exhibit. FUND: Australian Research Council (ARC) Discovery Project Grants, ARC 
Fellowship, NYSTEM and Australian Postgraduate Fellowships.

Copyright © 2018 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2018.11.044
PMCID: PMC6354567
PMID: 30503862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]