---
reference_id: "PMID:26169613"
title: "Vismodegib Exerts Targeted Efficacy Against Recurrent Sonic Hedgehog-Subgroup Medulloblastoma: Results From Phase II Pediatric Brain Tumor Consortium Studies PBTC-025B and PBTC-032."
authors:
- Robinson GW
- Orr BA
- Wu G
- Gururangan S
- Lin T
- Qaddoumi I
- Packer RJ
- Goldman S
- Prados MD
- Desjardins A
- Chintagumpala M
- Takebe N
- Kaste SC
- Rusch M
- Allen SJ
- Onar-Thomas A
- Stewart CF
- Fouladi M
- Boyett JM
- Gilbertson RJ
- Curran T
- Ellison DW
- Gajjar A
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2014.60.1591
keywords:
- Adult
- Anilides/therapeutic use
- "Brain Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- "Hedgehog Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- Male
- "Medulloblastoma/drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- Middle Aged
- Pyridines/therapeutic use
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Vismodegib Exerts Targeted Efficacy Against Recurrent Sonic Hedgehog-Subgroup Medulloblastoma: Results From Phase II Pediatric Brain Tumor Consortium Studies PBTC-025B and PBTC-032.
**Authors:** Robinson GW, Orr BA, Wu G, Gururangan S, Lin T, Qaddoumi I, Packer RJ, Goldman S, Prados MD, Desjardins A, Chintagumpala M, Takebe N, Kaste SC, Rusch M, Allen SJ, Onar-Thomas A, Stewart CF, Fouladi M, Boyett JM, Gilbertson RJ, Curran T, Ellison DW, Gajjar A
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2014.60.1591](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2014.60.1591)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2015 Aug 20;33(24):2646-54. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2014.60.1591. Epub 
2015 Jul 13.

Vismodegib Exerts Targeted Efficacy Against Recurrent Sonic Hedgehog-Subgroup 
Medulloblastoma: Results From Phase II Pediatric Brain Tumor Consortium Studies 
PBTC-025B and PBTC-032.

Robinson GW(1), Orr BA(2), Wu G(2), Gururangan S(2), Lin T(2), Qaddoumi I(2), 
Packer RJ(2), Goldman S(2), Prados MD(2), Desjardins A(2), Chintagumpala M(2), 
Takebe N(2), Kaste SC(2), Rusch M(2), Allen SJ(2), Onar-Thomas A(2), Stewart 
CF(2), Fouladi M(2), Boyett JM(2), Gilbertson RJ(2), Curran T(2), Ellison DW(2), 
Gajjar A(2).

Author information:
(1)Giles W. Robinson, Brent A. Orr, Gang Wu, Tong Lin, Ibrahim Qaddoumi, Sue C. 
Kaste, Michael Rusch, Sariah J. Allen, Arzu Onar-Thomas, Clinton F. Stewart, 
James M. Boyett, Richard J. Gilbertson, David W. Ellison, and Amar Gajjar, St 
Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN; Sridharan Gururangan and Annick 
Desjardins, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC; Roger J. Packer, 
Children's National Medical Center, Washington, DC; Stewart Goldman, Ann and 
Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, IL; Michael D. Prados, 
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA; Murali Chintagumpala, 
Texas Children's Cancer Center, Houston, TX; Naoko Takebe, National Cancer 
Institute, Bethesda, MD; Maryam Fouladi, Cincinnati Children's Hospital, 
Cincinnati, OH; and Tom Curran, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA. giles.robinson@stjude.org.
(2)Giles W. Robinson, Brent A. Orr, Gang Wu, Tong Lin, Ibrahim Qaddoumi, Sue C. 
Kaste, Michael Rusch, Sariah J. Allen, Arzu Onar-Thomas, Clinton F. Stewart, 
James M. Boyett, Richard J. Gilbertson, David W. Ellison, and Amar Gajjar, St 
Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN; Sridharan Gururangan and Annick 
Desjardins, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC; Roger J. Packer, 
Children's National Medical Center, Washington, DC; Stewart Goldman, Ann and 
Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, IL; Michael D. Prados, 
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA; Murali Chintagumpala, 
Texas Children's Cancer Center, Houston, TX; Naoko Takebe, National Cancer 
Institute, Bethesda, MD; Maryam Fouladi, Cincinnati Children's Hospital, 
Cincinnati, OH; and Tom Curran, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, PA.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2015 Aug 20;33(24):2692-4. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2015.62.2225.

PURPOSE: Two phase II studies assessed the efficacy of vismodegib, a sonic 
hedgehog (SHH) pathway inhibitor that binds smoothened (SMO), in pediatric and 
adult recurrent medulloblastoma (MB).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Adult patients enrolled onto PBTC-025B and pediatric 
patients enrolled onto PBTC-032 were treated with vismodegib (150 to 300 mg/d). 
Protocol-defined response, which had to be sustained for 8 weeks, was confirmed 
by central neuroimaging review. Molecular tests to identify patterns of response 
and insensitivity were performed when tissue was available.
RESULTS: A total of 31 patients were enrolled onto PBTC-025B, and 12 were 
enrolled onto PBTC-032. Three patients in PBTC-025B and one in PBTC-032, all 
with SHH-subgroup MB (SHH-MB), exhibited protocol-defined responses. 
Progression-free survival (PFS) was longer in those with SHH-MB than in those 
with non-SHH-MB, and prolonged disease stabilization occurred in 41% of patient 
cases of SHH-MB. Among those with SHH-MB, loss of heterozygosity of PTCH1 was 
associated with prolonged PFS, and diffuse staining of P53 was associated with 
reduced PFS. Whole-exome sequencing identified mutations in SHH genes downstream 
from SMO in four of four tissue samples from nonresponders and upstream of SMO 
in two of four patients with favorable responses.
CONCLUSION: Vismodegib exhibits activity against adult recurrent SHH-MB but not 
against recurrent non-SHH-MB. Inadequate accrual of pediatric patients precluded 
conclusions in this population. Molecular analyses support the hypothesis that 
SMO inhibitor activity depends on the genomic aberrations within the tumor. Such 
inhibitors should be advanced in SHH-MB studies; however, molecular and genomic 
work remains imperative to identify target populations that will truly benefit.

© 2015 by American Society of Clinical Oncology.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2014.60.1591
PMCID: PMC4534527
PMID: 26169613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors' disclosures of potential conflicts of 
interest are found in the article online at www.jco.org. Author contributions 
are found at the end of this article.