---
reference_id: "PMID:36535611"
title: The link between post-traumatic stress disorder and systemic lupus erythematosus.
authors:
- Goldschen L
- Ellrodt J
- Amonoo HL
- Feldman CH
- Case SM
- Koenen KC
- Kubzansky LD
- Costenbader KH
journal: Brain Behav Immun
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2022.12.012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The link between post-traumatic stress disorder and systemic lupus erythematosus.
**Authors:** Goldschen L, Ellrodt J, Amonoo HL, Feldman CH, Case SM, Koenen KC, Kubzansky LD, Costenbader KH
**Journal:** Brain Behav Immun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bbi.2022.12.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2022.12.012)

## Content

1. Brain Behav Immun. 2023 Feb;108:292-301. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2022.12.012. Epub 
2022 Dec 17.

The link between post-traumatic stress disorder and systemic lupus 
erythematosus.

Goldschen L(1), Ellrodt J(2), Amonoo HL(3), Feldman CH(2), Case SM(2), Koenen 
KC(4), Kubzansky LD(5), Costenbader KH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 60 Fenwood Road, MA 
02115, USA. Electronic address: lgoldschen@partners.org.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, Inflammation and Immunity, Department of Medicine, 
Brigham and Women's Hospital, 60 Fenwood Road, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 60 Fenwood Road, MA 
02115, USA; Department of Psychosocial Oncology and Palliative Care, Dana-Farber 
Cancer Institute, 450 Brookline Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
(4)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, 677 
Huntington Ave, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(5)Department of Social and Behavioral Sciences, Harvard T.H. Chan School of 
Public Health, 677 Huntington Ave, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a heterogeneous, multisystem autoimmune 
disorder characterized by unpredictable disease flares. Although the 
pathogenesis of SLE is complex, an epidemiologic link between posttraumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD) and the development of SLE has been identified, 
suggesting that stress-related disorders alter the susceptibility to SLE. 
Despite the strong epidemiologic evidence connecting PTSD and SLE, gaps remain 
in our understanding of how the two may be connected. Perturbations in the 
autonomic nervous system, neuroendocrine system, and at the genomic level may 
cause and sustain immune dysregulation that could lower the threshold for the 
development and propagation of SLE. We first describe shared risk factors for 
SLE and PTSD. We then describe potential biological pathways which may 
facilitate excessive inflammation in the context of PTSD. Among those 
genetically predisposed to SLE, systemic inflammation that accompanies chronic 
stress may fan the flames of smoldering SLE by priming immune pathways. Further 
studies on the connection between trauma and inflammation will provide important 
data on pathogenesis, risk factors, and novel treatments for SLE.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbi.2022.12.012
PMCID: PMC10018810
PMID: 36535611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal 
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this 
paper.