---
reference_id: "PMID:32159800"
title: What dose of aspirin should be used in the initial treatment of Kawasaki disease? A meta-analysis.
authors:
- Jia X
- Du X
- Bie S
- Li X
- Bao Y
- Jiang M
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/keaa050
content_type: abstract_only
---

# What dose of aspirin should be used in the initial treatment of Kawasaki disease? A meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Jia X, Du X, Bie S, Li X, Bao Y, Jiang M
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/keaa050](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/keaa050)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2020 Aug 1;59(8):1826-1833. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/keaa050.

What dose of aspirin should be used in the initial treatment of Kawasaki 
disease? A meta-analysis.

Jia X(1)(2), Du X(1), Bie S(1), Li X(2), Bao Y(2), Jiang M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Children's Hospital, Zhejiang University 
School of Medicine, National Clinical Research Center for Child Health, 
Hangzhou.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Jinhua Hospital, Zhejiang University and Jinhua 
Municipal Central Hospital, Jinhua, Zhejiang, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: The use of IVIG plus high- or low-dose aspirin for the initial 
treatment of Kawasaki disease remains controversial. The aim of this study was 
to evaluate the efficacy of IVIG plus high-dose aspirin compared with IVIG plus 
low-dose aspirin in the treatment of Kawasaki disease.
METHODS: Studies related to aspirin therapy for Kawasaki disease were selected 
by searching the databases of Medline (PubMed), Embase and the Cochrane Library 
before March 2019. Statistical analyses were performed by using a Review Manager 
Software package and STATA v.15.1.
RESULTS: Eight retrospective cohort studies, characterizing 12 176 patients, 
were analysed. Overall, no significant difference was found in the incidence of 
coronary artery abnormalities between the high- and low-dose aspirin groups 
[relative risk (RR) 1.15; 95% CI: 0.93, 1.43; P = 0.19; random-effects model]. 
The patients treated with high-dose aspirin had slightly faster resolution of 
fever [mean difference (MD) -0.30; 95% CI: -0.58, -0.02; P = 0.04; 
random-effects model]. but the rates of IVIG resistance (RR, 1.26; 95% CI: 0.55, 
2.92; P = 0.59; random-effects model) and days in hospital (MD, 0.22; 95% CI: 
-0.93, 1.37; P = 0.71; random-effects model) were similar between the two 
groups.
CONCLUSION: Low-dose aspirin plus IVIG might be as effective as high-dose 
aspirin plus IVIG for the initial treatment of Kawasaki disease. Considering 
that high-dose aspirin may cause more adverse reactions than low-dose aspirin, 
low-dose aspirin plus IVIG should be recommended as the first-line therapy in 
the initial treatment of Kawasaki disease.

© The Author(s) 2020. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
British Society for Rheumatology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/keaa050
PMID: 32159800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]