---
reference_id: "PMID:30528431"
title: Emergence and Spread of Basal Lineages of Yersinia pestis during the Neolithic Decline.
authors:
- Rascovan N
- Sjögren KG
- Kristiansen K
- Nielsen R
- Willerslev E
- Desnues C
- Rasmussen S
journal: Cell
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.11.005
keywords:
- Biological Evolution
- "DNA, Bacterial/genetics"
- Europe
- "Genome, Bacterial"
- "History, Ancient"
- Humans
- Pandemics
- Phylogeny
- Plague/history
- "Yersinia pestis/classification, pathogenicity"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Emergence and Spread of Basal Lineages of Yersinia pestis during the Neolithic Decline.
**Authors:** Rascovan N, Sjögren KG, Kristiansen K, Nielsen R, Willerslev E, Desnues C, Rasmussen S
**Journal:** Cell (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2018.11.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2018.11.005)

## Content

1. Cell. 2019 Jan 10;176(1-2):295-305.e10. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.11.005. Epub
2018 Dec 6.

Emergence and Spread of Basal Lineages of Yersinia pestis during the Neolithic
Decline.

Rascovan N(1), Sjögren KG(2), Kristiansen K(2), Nielsen R(3), Willerslev E(4),
Desnues C(5), Rasmussen S(6).

Author information:
(1)Aix Marseille Université, UMR MEPHI, CNRS FRE2013, IRD 198, AP-HM, IHU -
Méditerranée Infection, 19-21 Boulevard Jean Moulin, 13005 Marseille, France.
Electronic address: nicorasco@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Historical Studies, University of Gothenburg, 405 30
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(3)Center for GeoGenetics, Natural History Museum of Denmark, University of
Copenhagen, 1350 Copenhagen, Denmark; Department of Integrative Biology,
University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA.
(4)Center for GeoGenetics, Natural History Museum of Denmark, University of
Copenhagen, 1350 Copenhagen, Denmark; Department of Zoology, University of
Cambridge, Downing Street, Cambridge CB2 3EJ, UK; Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire CB10 1SA, UK.
(5)Aix Marseille Université, UMR MEPHI, CNRS FRE2013, IRD 198, AP-HM, IHU -
Méditerranée Infection, 19-21 Boulevard Jean Moulin, 13005 Marseille, France.
(6)Department of Bio and Health Informatics, Technical University of Denmark,
Kemitorvet 208, 2800 Kongens Lyngby, Denmark. Electronic address:
simon.rasmussen@cpr.ku.dk.

Between 5,000 and 6,000 years ago, many Neolithic societies declined throughout
western Eurasia due to a combination of factors that are still largely debated.
Here, we report the discovery and genome reconstruction of Yersinia pestis, the
etiological agent of plague, in Neolithic farmers in Sweden, pre-dating and
basal to all modern and ancient known strains of this pathogen. We investigated
the history of this strain by combining phylogenetic and molecular clock
analyses of the bacterial genome, detailed archaeological information, and
genomic analyses from infected individuals and hundreds of ancient human samples
across Eurasia. These analyses revealed that multiple and independent lineages
of Y. pestis branched and expanded across Eurasia during the Neolithic decline,
spreading most likely through early trade networks rather than massive human
migrations. Our results are consistent with the existence of a prehistoric
plague pandemic that likely contributed to the decay of Neolithic populations in
Europe.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2018.11.005
PMID: 30528431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
