---
reference_id: "PMID:33199206"
title: "5-Aminolevulinate dehydratase porphyria: Update on hepatic 5-aminolevulinic acid synthase induction and long-term response to hemin."
authors:
- Lahiji AP
- Anderson KE
- Chan A
- Simon A
- Desnick RJ
- Ramanujam VMS
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2020.10.011
keywords:
- "5-Aminolevulinate Synthetase/blood, genetics"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Heme/genetics
- "Hemin/administration & dosage"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Liver/metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation/genetics
- Porphobilinogen/metabolism
- "Porphobilinogen Synthase/blood, deficiency, genetics"
- "Porphyria, Acute Intermittent/blood, drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Porphyrias, Hepatic/blood, drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "RNA, Messenger/blood"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# 5-Aminolevulinate dehydratase porphyria: Update on hepatic 5-aminolevulinic acid synthase induction and long-term response to hemin.
**Authors:** Lahiji AP, Anderson KE, Chan A, Simon A, Desnick RJ, Ramanujam VMS
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2020.10.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2020.10.011)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2020 Dec;131(4):418-423. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2020.10.011.
Epub  2020 Oct 26.

5-Aminolevulinate dehydratase porphyria: Update on hepatic 5-aminolevulinic acid
synthase induction and long-term response to hemin.

Lahiji AP(1), Anderson KE(2), Chan A(3), Simon A(3), Desnick RJ(4), Ramanujam
VMS(1).

Author information:
(1)Departments of Preventive Medicine and Population Health, and Internal
Medicine (Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology), University of Texas
Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA.
(2)Departments of Preventive Medicine and Population Health, and Internal
Medicine (Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology), University of Texas
Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA. Electronic address: kanderso@utmb.edu.
(3)Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, MA, USA.
(4)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: 5-Aminolevulinic acid dehydratase (ALAD) porphyria (ADP) is an
ultrarare autosomal recessive disease, with only eight documented cases, all of
whom were males. Although classified as an acute hepatic porphyria (AHP),
induction of the rate limiting hepatic enzyme 5-aminolevulinic acid synthase-1
(ALAS1) has not been demonstrated, and the marrow may also contribute excess
5-aminolevulinic acid (ALA). Two patients have died and reported follow up for
the others is limited, so the natural history of this disease is poorly
understood and treatment experience limited.
METHODS: We report new molecular findings and update the clinical course and
treatment of the sixth reported ADP patient, now 31 years old and the only known
case in the Americas, and review published data regarding genotype-phenotype
correlation and treatment.
RESULTS: Circulating hepatic 5-aminolevulinic acid synthase-1 (ALAS1) mRNA was
elevated in this case, as in other AHPs. Gain of function mutation of erythroid
specific ALAS2 - an X-linked modifying gene in some other porphyrias - was not
found. Seven reported ADP cases had compound heterozygous ALAD mutations
resulting in very low residual ALAD activity and symptoms early in life or
adolescence. One adult with a germline ALAD mutant allele developed ADP in
association with a clonal myeloproliferative disorder, polycythemia vera.
CONCLUSIONS: Elevation in circulating hepatic ALAS1 and response to treatment
with hemin indicate that the liver is an important source of excess ALA in ADP,
although the marrow may also contribute. Intravenous hemin was effective in most
reported cases for treatment and prevention of acute attacks of neurological
symptoms.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2020.10.011
PMID: 33199206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest AP Lahiji and
VM Sadagopa Ramanujam declare no conflicts. A Chan and A Simon are employees of
Alnylam Pharmaceuticals. KE Anderson and RJ Desnick consult for Alnylam
Pharmaceuticals, Recordati Rare Diseases and Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma America.
All authors had access to the data and a role in writing the manuscript.
