---
reference_id: "PMID:37626447"
title: "Advances in treatment of alveolar soft part sarcoma: an updated review."
authors:
- Fujiwara T
- Kunisada T
- Nakata E
- Nishida K
- Yanai H
- Nakamura T
- Tanaka K
- Ozaki T
journal: Jpn J Clin Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/jjco/hyad102
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Young Adult
- Humans
- "Sarcoma, Alveolar Soft Part/genetics, therapy, diagnosis"
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- "Soft Tissue Neoplasms/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Translocation, Genetic"
- Combined Modality Therapy
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Advances in treatment of alveolar soft part sarcoma: an updated review.
**Authors:** Fujiwara T, Kunisada T, Nakata E, Nishida K, Yanai H, Nakamura T, Tanaka K, Ozaki T
**Journal:** Jpn J Clin Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jjco/hyad102](https://doi.org/10.1093/jjco/hyad102)

## Content

1. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2023 Nov 5;53(11):1009-1018. doi: 10.1093/jjco/hyad102.

Advances in treatment of alveolar soft part sarcoma: an updated review.

Fujiwara T(1), Kunisada T(1), Nakata E(1), Nishida K(2), Yanai H(2), Nakamura 
T(3), Tanaka K(4), Ozaki T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Okayama University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan.
(2)Department of Pathology, Okayama University Hospital, Okayama, Japan.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Mie University, Tsu, Japan.
(4)Department of Advanced Medical Sciences, Oita University, Yufu, Japan.

Alveolar soft part sarcoma is a rare neoplasm of uncertain histogenesis that 
belongs to a newly defined category of ultra-rare sarcomas. The neoplasm is 
characterized by a specific chromosomal translocation, der (17) t(X; 
17)(p11.2;q25), that results in ASPSCR1-TFE3 gene fusion. The natural history of 
alveolar soft part sarcoma describes indolent behaviour with slow progression in 
deep soft tissues of the extremities, trunk and head/neck in adolescents and 
young adults. A high rate of detection of distant metastasis at presentation has 
been reported, and the most common metastatic sites in decreasing order of 
frequency are the lung, bone and brain. Complete surgical resection remains the 
standard treatment strategy, whereas radiotherapy is indicated for patients with 
inadequate surgical margins or unresectable tumours. Although alveolar soft part 
sarcoma is refractory to conventional doxorubicin-based chemotherapy, 
monotherapy or combination therapy using tyrosine kinase inhibitors and immune 
checkpoint inhibitors have provided antitumor activity and emerged as new 
treatment strategies. This article provides an overview of the current 
understanding of this ultra-rare sarcoma and recent advancements in treatments 
according to the clinical stage of alveolar soft part sarcoma.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/jjco/hyad102
PMCID: PMC10632598
PMID: 37626447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None declared.