---
reference_id: "PMID:26075877"
title: Deletion of autophagy inducer RB1CC1 results in degeneration of the retinal pigment epithelium.
authors:
- Yao J
- Jia L
- Khan N
- Lin C
- Mitter SK
- Boulton ME
- Dunaief JL
- Klionsky DJ
- Guan JL
- Thompson DA
- Zacks DN
journal: Autophagy
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1041699
keywords:
- Animals
- Autophagy/genetics
- Autophagy-Related Proteins
- Electroretinography/methods
- Epithelium/metabolism
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/genetics
- Mice
- Mitochondria/genetics
- Retinal Pigment Epithelium/metabolism
- Sequence Deletion/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deletion of autophagy inducer RB1CC1 results in degeneration of the retinal pigment epithelium.
**Authors:** Yao J, Jia L, Khan N, Lin C, Mitter SK, Boulton ME, Dunaief JL, Klionsky DJ, Guan JL, Thompson DA, Zacks DN
**Journal:** Autophagy (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1080/15548627.2015.1041699](https://doi.org/10.1080/15548627.2015.1041699)

## Content

1. Autophagy. 2015;11(6):939-53. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1041699.

Deletion of autophagy inducer RB1CC1 results in degeneration of the retinal
pigment epithelium.

Yao J(1), Jia L, Khan N, Lin C, Mitter SK, Boulton ME, Dunaief JL, Klionsky DJ,
Guan JL, Thompson DA, Zacks DN.

Author information:
(1)a Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences ; University of Michigan ;
Ann Arbor , MI USA.

Autophagy regulates cellular homeostasis and response to environmental stress.
Within the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) of the eye, the level of autophagy
can change with both age and disease. The purpose of this study is to determine
the relationship between reduced autophagy and age-related degeneration of the
RPE. The gene encoding RB1CC1/FIP200 (RB1-inducible coiled-coil 1), a protein
essential for induction of autophagy, was selectively knocked out in the RPE by
crossing Best1-Cre mice with mice in which the Rb1cc1 gene was flanked with
Lox-P sites (Rb1cc1(flox/flox)). Ex vivo and in vivo analyses, including western
blot, immunohistochemistry, transmission electron microscopy, fundus
photography, optical coherence tomography, fluorescein angiography, and
electroretinography were performed to assess the structure and function of the
retina as a function of age. Deletion of Rb1cc1 resulted in multiple autophagy
defects within the RPE including decreased conversion of LC3-I to LC3-II,
accumulation of autophagy-targeted precursors, and increased numbers of
mitochondria. Age-dependent degeneration of the RPE occurred, with formation of
atrophic patches, subretinal migration of activated microglial cells, subRPE
deposition of inflammatory and oxidatively damaged proteins, subretinal
drusenoid deposits, and occasional foci of choroidal neovascularization. There
was secondary loss of photoreceptors overlying the degenerated RPE and reduction
in the electroretinogram. These observations are consistent with a critical role
of autophagy in the maintenance of normal homeostasis in the aging RPE, and
indicate that disruption of autophagy leads to retinal phenotypes associated
with age-related degeneration.

DOI: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1041699
PMCID: PMC4502815
PMID: 26075877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
