---
reference_id: "PMID:38003022"
title: "SNP Array Screening and Long Range PCR-Based Targeted Next Generation Sequencing for Autosomal Recessive Disease with Consanguinity: Insight from a Case of Xeroderma Pigmentosum Group C."
authors:
- Nomura F
- Shimizu A
- Togi S
- Ura H
- Niida Y
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/genes14112079
keywords:
- Humans
- "Xeroderma Pigmentosum/diagnosis, genetics, epidemiology"
- Consanguinity
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SNP Array Screening and Long Range PCR-Based Targeted Next Generation Sequencing for Autosomal Recessive Disease with Consanguinity: Insight from a Case of Xeroderma Pigmentosum Group C.
**Authors:** Nomura F, Shimizu A, Togi S, Ura H, Niida Y
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes14112079](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes14112079)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Nov 15;14(11):2079. doi: 10.3390/genes14112079.

SNP Array Screening and Long Range PCR-Based Targeted Next Generation Sequencing 
for Autosomal Recessive Disease with Consanguinity: Insight from a Case of 
Xeroderma Pigmentosum Group C.

Nomura F(1), Shimizu A(1), Togi S(2)(3), Ura H(2)(3), Niida Y(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Kanazawa Medical University, Uchinada 920-0293, 
Japan.
(2)Center for Clinical Genomics, Kanazawa Medical University Hospital, Uchinada 
920-0293, Japan.
(3)Department of Advanced Medicine, Division of Genomic Medicine, Medical 
Research Institute, Kanazawa Medical University, Uchinada 920-0293, Japan.

Advances in genetic technologies have made genetic testing more accessible than 
ever before. However, depending on national, regional, legal, and health 
insurance circumstances, testing procedures may still need to be streamlined in 
real-world clinical practice. In cases of autosomal recessive disease with 
consanguinity, the mutation locus is necessarily isodisomy because both alleles 
originate from a common ancestral chromosome. Based on this premise, we 
implemented integrated genetic diagnostic methods using SNP array screening and 
long range PCR-based targeted NGS in a Japanese patient with xeroderma 
pigmentosum (XP) under the limitation of the national health insurance system. 
SNP array results showed isodisomy only in XPC and ERCC4 loci. NGS, with a 
minimal set of long-range PCR primers, detected a homozygous frameshift mutation 
in XPC; NM_004628.5:c.218_219insT p.(Lys73AsnfsTer9), confirmed by Sanger 
sequencing, leading to a rapid diagnosis of XP group C. This shortcut strategy 
is applicable to all autosomal recessive diseases caused by consanguineous 
marriages, especially in scenarios with a moderate number of genes to test, a 
common occurrence in clinical genetic practice.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14112079
PMCID: PMC10671442
PMID: 38003022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.