---
reference_id: "PMID:24119386"
title: "Improvement of the quality of BRAF testing in melanomas with nationwide external quality assessment, for the BRAF EQA group."
authors:
- Emile JF
- Tisserand J
- Bergougnoux L
- Nowak F
- Faucher G
- Surel S
- Lamy A
- Lecorre D
- Helias-Rodzewicz Z
- Hofman P
- Sabourin JC
- Laurent-Puig P
- BRAF EQA Group
journal: BMC Cancer
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-472
keywords:
- Codon
- "DNA Mutational Analysis/methods, standards"
- France
- "Genetic Testing/methods, standards"
- Humans
- "Melanoma/diagnosis, genetics"
- Mutation
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- Quality Control
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Improvement of the quality of BRAF testing in melanomas with nationwide external quality assessment, for the BRAF EQA group.
**Authors:** Emile JF, Tisserand J, Bergougnoux L, Nowak F, Faucher G, Surel S, Lamy A, Lecorre D, Helias-Rodzewicz Z, Hofman P, Sabourin JC, Laurent-Puig P, BRAF EQA Group
**Journal:** BMC Cancer (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1471-2407-13-472](https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2407-13-472)

## Content

1. BMC Cancer. 2013 Oct 11;13:472. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-472.

Improvement of the quality of BRAF testing in melanomas with nationwide external
quality assessment, for the BRAF EQA group.

Emile JF(1), Tisserand J, Bergougnoux L, Nowak F, Faucher G, Surel S, Lamy A,
Lecorre D, Helias-Rodzewicz Z, Hofman P, Sabourin JC, Laurent-Puig P; BRAF EQA
Group.

Collaborators: Aube C, Baala L, Hattar JB, Boyer C, Charlotte F, Cervera P, De
Fraipont F, Clauser E, De Fraipont F, Dechelotte P, Delvincourt C, Denis M,
Doucet L, Durand K, Escande F, Ferraro-Peyret C, Galateau-Salle F, Haratyk C,
Heller R, Jonveaux P, Karayan-Tapon L, Lacave R, Lacroix L, Lamant L, Lamoril J,
Lamy J, Lemoine A, Leroy K, Lizard S, Lopez-Rios F, Merkelbach-Bruse S, Merlin
JL, Merlio JP, Mourah S, Nanni Metellus I, Pages J, Pedeutour F, Peoc'h M,
Pretet JL, Prunier D, Rioux-Leclercq N, Rouleau E, Sobol H, Solassol J, Trudel
S, Vande Borght S, Wang Q.

Author information:
(1)EA4340, Versailles SQY University, Boulogne, France.
jean-francois.emile@uvsq.fr.

BACKGROUND: Knowledge about tumour gene mutation status is essential for the
treatment of increasing numbers of cancer patients, and testing quality has a
major impact on treatment response and cost. In 2012, 4,629 tests for BRAF
p.V600 were performed in France, in patients with melanomas.
METHODS: Two batches of unstained melanoma sections were sent, in May and
November 2012, to the 46 laboratories supported by the French National Institute
of Cancer (INCa). An external quality assessment (EQA) evaluated mutation
status, response times and compliance with INCa recommendations.
RESULTS: All the French laboratories involved in testing participated in the
EQA. Fourteen different methods were used to detect BRAF mutations, most
consisting of combinations of in-house techniques. False responses were noted in
25/520 cases (4.8%), 11 of which concerned confusion between p.V600E and
p.V600K. Thus, 2.7% of responses would have led to inappropriate treatment.
Within six months, mean response times decreased from 22 to 12 days (P<0.001),
and the percentage of samples evaluated by a pathologist for tumour cell content
increased, from 75.2% to 96.9% (P<0.001).
CONCLUSION: Despite the use of non-certified methods, the false response rate
was low. Nationwide EQA can improve the quality of molecular pathology tests on
tumours.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-472
PMCID: PMC3852250
PMID: 24119386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
