---
reference_id: "PMID:21908116"
title: Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency and epilepsy.
authors:
- Prasad C
- Rupar T
- Prasad AN
journal: Brain Dev
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2011.08.003
keywords:
- Child
- "Epilepsy/diagnosis, etiology"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Metabolic Networks and Pathways
- Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex/metabolism
- "Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex Deficiency Disease/complications, diagnosis, etiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency and epilepsy.
**Authors:** Prasad C, Rupar T, Prasad AN
**Journal:** Brain Dev (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.braindev.2011.08.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.braindev.2011.08.003)

## Content

1. Brain Dev. 2011 Nov;33(10):856-65. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2011.08.003. Epub
2011 Sep 9.

Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency and epilepsy.

Prasad C(1), Rupar T, Prasad AN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario,
Canada. Chitra.Prasad@lhsc.on.ca

The pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDHc) is a mitochondrial matrix multienzyme
complex that provides the link between glycolysis and the tricarboxylic acid
(TCA) cycle by catalyzing the conversion of pyruvate into acetyl-CoA. PDHc
deficiency is one of the commoner metabolic disorders of lactic acidosis
presenting with neurological phenotypes that vary with age and gender. In this
mini-review, we postulate mechanisms of epilepsy in the setting of PDHc
deficiency using two illustrative cases (one with pyruvate dehydrogenase complex
E1-alpha polypeptide (PDHA1) deficiency and the second one with pyruvate
dehydrogenase complex E1-beta subunit (PDHB) deficiency (a rare subtype of PDHc
deficiency)) and a selected review of published case series. PDHc plays a
critical role in the pathway of carbohydrate metabolism and energy production.
In severe deficiency states the resulting energy deficit impacts on brain
development in utero resulting in structural brain anomalies and epilepsy.
Milder deficiency states present with variable manifestations that include
cognitive delay, ataxia, and seizures. Epileptogenesis in PDHc deficiency is
linked to energy failure, development of structural brain anomalies and abnormal
neurotransmitter metabolism. The use of the ketogenic diet bypasses the
metabolic block, by providing a direct source of acetyl-CoA, leading to
amelioration of some symptoms. Genetic counseling is essential as PDHA1
deficiency (commonest defect) is X-linked although females can be affected due
to unfavorable lyonization, while PDHB and PDH phosphatase (PDP) deficiencies
(much rarer defects) are of autosomal recessive inheritance. Research is in
progress for looking into animal models to better understand pathogenesis and
management of this challenging disorder.

Copyright © 2011 The Japanese Society of Child Neurology. Published by Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.braindev.2011.08.003
PMID: 21908116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
