---
reference_id: "PMID:33090520"
title: Dengue RNA detection and seroprevalence in blood donors during an outbreak in the São Paulo State, Brazil, 2016.
authors:
- Slavov SN
- Santos EV
- Hespanhol MR
- Rodrigues ES
- Haddad R
- Ubiali EMA
- Covas DT
- Kashima S
journal: J Med Virol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1002/jmv.26619
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dengue RNA detection and seroprevalence in blood donors during an outbreak in the São Paulo State, Brazil, 2016.
**Authors:** Slavov SN, Santos EV, Hespanhol MR, Rodrigues ES, Haddad R, Ubiali EMA, Covas DT, Kashima S
**Journal:** J Med Virol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jmv.26619](https://doi.org/10.1002/jmv.26619)

## Content

1. J Med Virol. 2021 Jun;93(6):3344-3349. doi: 10.1002/jmv.26619. Epub 2020 Oct
30.

Dengue RNA detection and seroprevalence in blood donors during an outbreak in 
the São Paulo State, Brazil, 2016.

Slavov SN(1)(2), Santos EV(1), Hespanhol MR(1), Rodrigues ES(1), Haddad R(3)(4), 
Ubiali EMA(1), Covas DT(1)(2), Kashima S(1).

Author information:
(1)Blood Center of Ribeirão Preto, Faculty of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, 
University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, São Paulo, Brazil.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, 
University of São Paulo, Brazil.
(3)Laboratory of Clinical Analyses, Faculty of Ceilandia, University of 
Brasilia, Brasilia, Federal District, Brazil.
(4)Center for Tropical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Brasilia, 
Brasilia, Federal District, Brazil.

Most dengue virus (DENV) infections remain asymptomatic. This increases the risk 
of DENV transfusion transmission (TT-DENV) during outbreaks. We evaluated DENV 
viremia in 8475 blood donations assembled in minipools for the presence of DENV 
RNA. The tested samples were obtained between February and May, 2016, during a 
large DENV outbreak in Ribeirão Preto city, northeast region of the São Paulo 
State, Brazil. The DENV RNA + samples were serotyped and screened for DENV NS1. 
We also tested a significant number of plasma samples (n = 372) to estimate the 
DENV seroprevalence among blood donors in the region. We detected three DENV 
RNA + samples in the tested blood donations (n = 3/8475, 0.04%). From these, two 
samples were further serotyped as DENV-1 and one sample as DENV-2. All DENV RNA 
positive samples were negative for anti-DENV IgG, indicating the presence of 
primary acute infection. Moreover, two of the DENV RNA + samples were also NS1 
antigen positive (antigenemia). The anti-DENV IgG seroprevalence among blood 
donor population was 50.8% (n = 189/372). Our results are in accordance with the 
presence of DENV primary infection in blood donors which can lead to transfusion 
transmission of the infection to recipients. Measures to exclude such donors 
should be adopted to prevent TT-DENV.

© 2020 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/jmv.26619
PMID: 33090520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]