---
reference_id: "PMID:38431502"
title: Dissecting the biology of feeding and eating disorders.
authors:
- Huckins LM
- Brennand K
- Bulik CM
journal: Trends Mol Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2024.01.009
keywords:
- Humans
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Feeding and Eating Disorders/genetics
- Anorexia Nervosa/genetics
- Phenotype
- Biology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dissecting the biology of feeding and eating disorders.
**Authors:** Huckins LM, Brennand K, Bulik CM
**Journal:** Trends Mol Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.molmed.2024.01.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molmed.2024.01.009)

## Content

1. Trends Mol Med. 2024 Apr;30(4):380-391. doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2024.01.009.
Epub  2024 Mar 1.

Dissecting the biology of feeding and eating disorders.

Huckins LM(1), Brennand K(2), Bulik CM(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Division of Molecular Psychiatry, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06511, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Division of Molecular Psychiatry, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06511, USA; Department of Genetics, Wu Tsai
Institute, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06511, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC, USA; Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Department of Nutrition, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. Electronic address:
cynthia_bulik@med.unc.edu.

Feeding and eating disorders (FEDs) are heterogenous and characterized by
varying patterns of dysregulated eating and weight. Genome-wide association
studies (GWASs) are clarifying their underlying biology and their genetic
relationship to other psychiatric and metabolic/anthropometric traits. Genetic
research on anorexia nervosa (AN) has identified eight significant loci and
uncovered genetic correlations implicating both psychiatric and
metabolic/anthropometric risk factors. Careful explication of these metabolic
contributors may be key to developing effective and enduring treatments for
devastating, life-altering, and frequently lethal illnesses. We discuss clinical
phenomenology, genomics, phenomics, intestinal microbiota, and functional
genomics and propose a path that translates variants to genes, genes to
pathways, and pathways to metabolic outcomes to advance the science and
eventually treatment of FEDs.

Copyright © 2024 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molmed.2024.01.009
PMID: 38431502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests C.M.B. declares the
following interests: Pearson (author, royalty recipient). L.M.H. and K.B. have
no interests to declare.
