---
reference_id: "PMID:40673334"
title: "Beyond newborn screening: the role of reverse cascade testing in familial disease detection."
authors:
- Gaviglio A
- Petritis K
- Tagi V
- Vasco A
- Mauri A
- Zuccotti G
- Verduci E
- Cereda C
- Ferraro S
journal: Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1080/10408363.2025.2527288
keywords:
- Humans
- Neonatal Screening/methods
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Genetic Testing/methods
- "Genetic Diseases, Inborn/diagnosis, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Beyond newborn screening: the role of reverse cascade testing in familial disease detection.
**Authors:** Gaviglio A, Petritis K, Tagi V, Vasco A, Mauri A, Zuccotti G, Verduci E, Cereda C, Ferraro S
**Journal:** Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1080/10408363.2025.2527288](https://doi.org/10.1080/10408363.2025.2527288)

## Content

1. Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci. 2026 Jan;63(1):1-11. doi:
10.1080/10408363.2025.2527288.  Epub 2025 Jul 17.

Beyond newborn screening: the role of reverse cascade testing in familial
disease detection.

Gaviglio A(1), Petritis K(2), Tagi V(3), Vasco A(4), Mauri A(4)(5), Zuccotti
G(6)(7), Verduci E(3)(8), Cereda C(4), Ferraro S(7).

Author information:
(1)4ES Corporation, Contractor, Newborn Screening and Molecular Biology Branch,
Division of Laboratory Sciences, National Center for Environmental Health,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(2)Newborn Screening and Molecular Biology Branch, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, Division of Laboratory Services, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(3)Metabolic Disease Unit, Buzzi Children's Hospital, Milan, Italy.
(4)Center of Functional Genomics and Rare Diseases, Buzzi Children's Hospital,
Milan, Italy.
(5)Pediatric Clinical Research Center "Romeo ed Enrica Invernizzi", University
of Milan, Milan, Italy.
(6)Department of Biomedical and Clinical Science, University of Milan, Milan,
Italy.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Buzzi Children's Hospital, Milan, Italy.
(8)Department of Health Sciences, University of Milan, Milan, Italy.

Over the past 60 years, preventative public health screening programs have
evolved since their inception and now include newborn screening (NBS) aimed at
identifying infants after birth for a number of rare, congenital, inherited
diseases. Most of the conditions detected through NBS are autosomal recessive
disorders or exhibit X-linked inheritance, meaning that family members of
individuals with these conditions have a higher risk for being either affected
or obligate heterozygotes. For example, the X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy
(X-ALD) in the screening panel identifies affected newborns and asymptomatic
relatives through subsequent testing. Thus, NBS becomes a gateway to family-wide
prevention, through the application of reverse cascade testing (RCS). In this
paper we examined the scenarios where RCS may be appropriate. Accordingly, we
have identified a list of criteria assessing whether a NBS disease would benefit
from RCS: (1) autosomal recessive or X-linked inheritance; (2) high carrier
rates, (3) variable expressivity, (4) mild or late-onset forms; and (5)
association with diagnostic delays and recent addition to the screening panel.
More than one criterion usually needs to be met for a disease to benefit from
RCS. We have identified a list of diseases and highlighted the potential
benefits of RCS: X-ALD, Cystic Fibrosis, Sickle Cell Disease, Spinal Muscular
Atrophy and Pompe disease. There are additional scenarios within NBS where
disease maternal conditions (3-methylcrotonyl-CoA carboxylase deficiency and
carnitine uptake deficiency) or nutritional maternal conditions (vitamin B12
deficiency) may cause a screen-positive NBS result. Whenever a maternal
nutritional deficiency is a potential reason for a positive NBS, this is
indicative of a non-inherited condition that may require treatment in the
newborn owing to possible neurological damage and delay in normal growth in
newborns with certain secondary deficiencies. For these cases RCS is
recommended, as the mother's status may put her at risk for future adverse
events (i.e. cardiovascular and musculoskeletal disorders, hepatic involvement,
and neurodegeneration). The RCS-NBS strategy discussed in this paper offers a
set of criteria against which diseases can be assessed for the potential need
for RCS. Implementation of this strategy requires several considerations
including educational needs, ethical issues, uptake of testing, logistics and
costs for this expanded screening and counseling, and availability of
appropriate specialists for ongoing management.

DOI: 10.1080/10408363.2025.2527288
PMID: 40673334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
