---
reference_id: "PMID:37245481"
title: "Juvenile CLN3 disease is a lysosomal cholesterol storage disorder: similarities with Niemann-Pick type C disease."
authors:
- Chen J
- Soni RK
- Xu Y
- Simoes S
- Liang FX
- DeFreitas L
- Hwang R Jr
- Montesinos J
- Lee JH
- Area-Gomez E
- Nandakumar R
- Vardarajan B
- Marquer C
journal: EBioMedicine
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2023.104628
keywords:
- Humans
- "Niemann-Pick Disease, Type C/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Cholesterol/metabolism
- Lysosomal Storage Diseases/metabolism
- Proteins/metabolism
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- "Membrane Glycoproteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Molecular Chaperones/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Juvenile CLN3 disease is a lysosomal cholesterol storage disorder: similarities with Niemann-Pick type C disease.
**Authors:** Chen J, Soni RK, Xu Y, Simoes S, Liang FX, DeFreitas L, Hwang R Jr, Montesinos J, Lee JH, Area-Gomez E, Nandakumar R, Vardarajan B, Marquer C
**Journal:** EBioMedicine (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ebiom.2023.104628](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2023.104628)

## Content

1. EBioMedicine. 2023 Jun;92:104628. doi: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2023.104628. Epub 2023
May 26.

Juvenile CLN3 disease is a lysosomal cholesterol storage disorder: similarities
with Niemann-Pick type C disease.

Chen J(1), Soni RK(2), Xu Y(3), Simoes S(4), Liang FX(5), DeFreitas L(3), Hwang
R Jr(1), Montesinos J(6), Lee JH(7), Area-Gomez E(8), Nandakumar R(3),
Vardarajan B(9), Marquer C(10).

Author information:
(1)Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain,
Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York City, NY 10032, USA.
(2)Proteomics and Macromolecular Crystallography Shared Resource, Herbert Irving
Comprehensive Cancer Center, New York City, NY 10032, USA.
(3)Biomarkers Core Laboratory, Irving Institute for Clinical and Translational
Research, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York City, NY 10032,
USA.
(4)Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain,
Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York City, NY 10032, USA;
Department of Neurology, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York
City, NY 10032, USA.
(5)Microscopy Core Laboratory of Division of Advanced Research Technologies, New
York University Grossman School of Medicine, New York City, NY 10016, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York
City, NY 10032, USA.
(7)Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain,
Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York City, NY 10032, USA;
Department of Neurology, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York
City, NY 10032, USA; G. H. Sergievsky Center, Columbia University Irving Medical
Center, New York City, NY 10032, USA; Department of Epidemiology, Columbia
University Irving Medical Center, New York City, NY 10032, USA.
(8)Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain,
Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York City, NY 10032, USA;
Department of Neurology, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York
City, NY 10032, USA; Institute of Human Nutrition, Columbia University Irving
Medical Center, New York City, NY 10032, USA.
(9)Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain,
Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York City, NY 10032, USA;
Department of Neurology, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York
City, NY 10032, USA; G. H. Sergievsky Center, Columbia University Irving Medical
Center, New York City, NY 10032, USA.
(10)Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain,
Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York City, NY 10032, USA;
Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University Irving Medical
Center, New York City, NY 10032, USA. Electronic address:
cm3244@cumc.columbia.edu.

BACKGROUND: The most common form of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (NCL) is
juvenile CLN3 disease (JNCL), a currently incurable neurodegenerative disorder
caused by mutations in the CLN3 gene. Based on our previous work and on the
premise that CLN3 affects the trafficking of the cation-independent mannose-6
phosphate receptor and its ligand NPC2, we hypothesised that dysfunction of CLN3
leads to the aberrant accumulation of cholesterol in the late
endosomes/lysosomes (LE/Lys) of JNCL patients' brains.
METHODS: An immunopurification strategy was used to isolate intact LE/Lys from
frozen autopsy brain samples. LE/Lys isolated from samples of JNCL patients were
compared with age-matched unaffected controls and Niemann-Pick Type C (NPC)
disease patients. Indeed, mutations in NPC1 or NPC2 result in the accumulation
of cholesterol in LE/Lys of NPC disease samples, thus providing a positive
control. The lipid and protein content of LE/Lys was then analysed using
lipidomics and proteomics, respectively.
FINDINGS: Lipid and protein profiles of LE/Lys isolated from JNCL patients were
profoundly altered compared to controls. Importantly, cholesterol accumulated in
LE/Lys of JNCL samples to a comparable extent than in NPC samples. Lipid
profiles of LE/Lys were similar in JNCL and NPC patients, except for levels of
bis(monoacylglycero)phosphate (BMP). Protein profiles detected in LE/Lys of JNCL
and NPC patients appeared identical, except for levels of NPC1.
INTERPRETATION: Our results support that JNCL is a lysosomal cholesterol storage
disorder. Our findings also support that JNCL and NPC disease share pathogenic
pathways leading to aberrant lysosomal accumulation of lipids and proteins, and
thus suggest that the treatments available for NPC disease may be beneficial to
JNCL patients. This work opens new avenues for further mechanistic studies in
model systems of JNCL and possible therapeutic interventions for this disorder.
FUNDING: San Francisco Foundation.

Copyright © 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ebiom.2023.104628
PMCID: PMC10227369
PMID: 37245481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no
competing financial interests.
