---
reference_id: "PMID:29626599"
title: Expanding the histomorphologic spectrum of TFE3-rearranged perivascular epithelioid cell tumors.
authors:
- Maloney N
- Giannikou K
- Lefferts J
- Bridge JA
- Linos K
journal: Hum Pathol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2018.03.023
keywords:
- Adult
- Basic Helix-Loop-Helix Leucine Zipper Transcription Factors/genetics
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- Biopsy
- Cell Differentiation
- Female
- Gene Rearrangement
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- "In Situ Hybridization, Fluorescence"
- "Perivascular Epithelioid Cell Neoplasms/genetics, pathology, surgery"
- Phenotype
- "Soft Tissue Neoplasms/genetics, pathology, surgery"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Expanding the histomorphologic spectrum of TFE3-rearranged perivascular epithelioid cell tumors.
**Authors:** Maloney N, Giannikou K, Lefferts J, Bridge JA, Linos K
**Journal:** Hum Pathol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.humpath.2018.03.023](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humpath.2018.03.023)

## Content

1. Hum Pathol. 2018 Dec;82:125-130. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2018.03.023. Epub 2018
 Apr 4.

Expanding the histomorphologic spectrum of TFE3-rearranged perivascular 
epithelioid cell tumors.

Maloney N(1), Giannikou K(2), Lefferts J(1), Bridge JA(3), Linos K(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical 
Center and Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA.
(2)Department of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine and of Genetics, Brigham 
and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical 
Center, 983135 Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198-3135, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Dartmouth Hitchcock Medical 
Center and Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA. 
Electronic address: Konstantinos.Linos@Hitchcock.org.

Perivascular epithelioid cell tumors (PEComas) are a family of mesenchymal 
neoplasms that have smooth muscle and melanocytic differentiation. They can be 
sporadic or associated with tuberous sclerosis complex and commonly present in 
the kidney as angiomyolipoma or in the lung as pulmonary clear cell sugar tumors 
or lymphangioleiomyomatosis. However, they can present at any visceral or soft 
tissue site. They usually have a benign clinical course, but rarely can behave 
in a malignant fashion. Most PEComas demonstrate abnormalities of TSC2, but a 
recently described subset harbor TFE3 rearrangements that seem to be mutually 
exclusive of TSC2 alterations. TFE3-rearranged PEComas demonstrate a distinct 
alveolar morphology that lacks spindle cells and smooth muscle differentiation. 
Distinction between these may have important therapeutic consequences. Herein, 
we present a case of a TFE3-rearranged PEComa without the customary morphology 
that required ancillary investigation with TFE3 immunohistochemistry and 
break-apart fluorescence in situ hybridization for proper categorization.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humpath.2018.03.023
PMID: 29626599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]