---
reference_id: "PMID:34246578"
title: "Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS): Priorities for POTS care and research from a 2019 National Institutes of Health Expert Consensus Meeting - Part 2."
authors:
- Raj SR
- Bourne KM
- Stiles LE
- Miglis MG
- Cortez MM
- Miller AJ
- Freeman R
- Biaggioni I
- Rowe PC
- Sheldon RS
- Shibao CA
- Diedrich A
- Systrom DM
- Cook GA
- Doherty TA
- Abdallah HI
- Grubb BP
- Fedorowski A
- Stewart JM
- Arnold AC
- Pace LA
- Axelsson J
- Boris JR
- Moak JP
- Goodman BP
- Chémali KR
- Chung TH
- Goldstein DS
- Darbari A
- Vernino S
journal: Auton Neurosci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.autneu.2021.102836
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS): Priorities for POTS care and research from a 2019 National Institutes of Health Expert Consensus Meeting - Part 2.
**Authors:** Raj SR, Bourne KM, Stiles LE, Miglis MG, Cortez MM, Miller AJ, Freeman R, Biaggioni I, Rowe PC, Sheldon RS, Shibao CA, Diedrich A, Systrom DM, Cook GA, Doherty TA, Abdallah HI, Grubb BP, Fedorowski A, Stewart JM, Arnold AC, Pace LA, Axelsson J, Boris JR, Moak JP, Goodman BP, Chémali KR, Chung TH, Goldstein DS, Darbari A, Vernino S
**Journal:** Auton Neurosci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autneu.2021.102836](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autneu.2021.102836)

## Content

1. Auton Neurosci. 2021 Nov;235:102836. doi: 10.1016/j.autneu.2021.102836. Epub 
2021 Jun 30.

Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS): Priorities for POTS care and 
research from a 2019 National Institutes of Health Expert Consensus Meeting - 
Part 2.

Raj SR(1), Bourne KM(2), Stiles LE(3), Miglis MG(4), Cortez MM(5), Miller AJ(6), 
Freeman R(7), Biaggioni I(8), Rowe PC(9), Sheldon RS(2), Shibao CA(10), Diedrich 
A(11), Systrom DM(12), Cook GA(13), Doherty TA(14), Abdallah HI(15), Grubb 
BP(16), Fedorowski A(17), Stewart JM(18), Arnold AC(19), Pace LA(20), Axelsson 
J(21), Boris JR(22), Moak JP(23), Goodman BP(24), Chémali KR(25), Chung TH(26), 
Goldstein DS(27), Darbari A(23), Vernino S(28).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiac Sciences, Libin Cardiovascular Institute, Cumming 
School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada; Autonomic 
Dysfunction Center, Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Medicine, 
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA. Electronic address: 
satish.raj@ucalgary.ca.
(2)Department of Cardiac Sciences, Libin Cardiovascular Institute, Cumming 
School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(3)Department of Neurology, Stony Brook University Renaissance School of 
Medicine, Stony Brook, NY, USA; Dysautonomia International, East Moriches, NY, 
USA.
(4)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(6)Department of Neural and Behavioral Sciences, Pennsylvania State University 
College of Medicine, Hershey, PA, USA.
(7)Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; Center for 
Autonomic and Peripheral Nerve Disorders, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 
Boston, MA, USA.
(8)Autonomic Dysfunction Center, Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department 
of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA; Autonomic 
Dysfunction Center, Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of 
Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(10)Autonomic Dysfunction Center, Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department 
of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(11)Autonomic Dysfunction Center, Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department 
of Medicine and Biomedical Engineering, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, 
Nashville, TN, USA.
(12)Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(13)Department of Neurology, Uniformed Services University, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(14)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and Immunology, Department of Medicine, 
University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(15)Children's Heart Institute, Fredericksburg, VA, USA.
(16)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, The University of Toledo 
Medical Center, USA.
(17)Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden; Department 
of Cardiology, Skåne University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.
(18)Center for Hypotension, Departments of Pediatrics and Physiology, New York 
Medical College, Valhalla, NY USA.
(19)Autonomic Dysfunction Center, Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department 
of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA; 
Department of Neural and Behavioral Sciences, Pennsylvania State University 
College of Medicine, Hershey, PA, USA.
(20)Center for Genomic Medicine and Department of Pediatrics, Division of 
Medical Genetics and Genomics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(21)Department of Clinical Immunology, Karolinska University Hospital, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(22)Jeffrey R. Boris, MD LLC, Moylan, PA, USA.
(23)Department of Pediatrics, George Washington University School of Medicine 
and Health Sciences, Washington, DC, USA.
(24)Neuromuscular Division, Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, 
AZ, USA.
(25)Department of Neurology, Eastern Virginia Medical School, Division of 
Neurology, Neuromuscular and Autonomic Center, Sentara Healthcare, Norfolk, VA, 
USA.
(26)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(27)Autonomic Medicine Section, Clinical Neurosciences Program, Division of 
Intramural Research, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(28)Department of Neurology, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.

The National Institutes of Health hosted a workshop in 2019 to build consensus 
around the current state of understanding of the pathophysiology of postural 
orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) and to identify knowledge gaps that must 
be addressed to enhance clinical care of POTS patients through research. This 
second (of two) articles summarizes current knowledge gaps, and outlines the 
clinical and research priorities for POTS. POTS is a complex, multi-system, 
chronic disorder of the autonomic nervous system characterized by orthostatic 
intolerance and orthostatic tachycardia without hypotension. Patients often 
experience a host of other related disabling symptoms. The functional and 
economic impacts of this disorder are significant. The pathophysiology remains 
incompletely understood. Beyond the significant gaps in understanding the 
disorder itself, there is a paucity of evidence to guide treatment which can 
contribute to suboptimal care for this patient population. The vast majority of 
physicians have minimal to no familiarity or training in the assessment and 
management of POTS. Funding for POTS research remains very low relative to the 
size of the patient population and impact of the syndrome. In addition to 
efforts to improve awareness and physician education, an investment in research 
infrastructure including the development of standardized disease-specific 
evaluation tools and outcome measures is needed to facilitate effective 
collaborative research. A national POTS research consortium could facilitate 
well-controlled multidisciplinary clinical research studies and therapeutic 
trials. These priorities will require a substantial increase in the number of 
research investigators and the amount of research funding in this area.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autneu.2021.102836
PMCID: PMC8455430
PMID: 34246578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]