---
reference_id: "PMID:31740261"
title: "\"Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and phenotypes: a state-of-the-art.\"."
authors:
- Corlateanu A
- Mendez Y
- Wang Y
- Garnica RJA
- Botnaru V
- Siafakas N
journal: Pulmonology
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.pulmoe.2019.10.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# "Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and phenotypes: a state-of-the-art.".
**Authors:** Corlateanu A, Mendez Y, Wang Y, Garnica RJA, Botnaru V, Siafakas N
**Journal:** Pulmonology (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.pulmoe.2019.10.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pulmoe.2019.10.006)

## Content

1. Pulmonology. 2020 Mar-Apr;26(2):95-100. doi: 10.1016/j.pulmoe.2019.10.006.
Epub  2019 Nov 15.

"Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and phenotypes: a state-of-the-art.".

Corlateanu A(1), Mendez Y(2), Wang Y(3), Garnica RJA(4), Botnaru V(5), Siafakas 
N(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, State University of Medicine and Pharmacy 
"Nicolae Testemitanu", Chisinau, Moldova. Electronic address: 
alexandru_corlateanu@yahoo.com.
(2)Research Physician at Faculty of Medicine "Dr. Alberto Romo Caballero", 
Universidad Autonoma de Tamaulipas. Research Assistant II at Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Texas. USA.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Health Sciences, 
Wuhan University, 185 Donghu Road, Wuchang District, Wuhan 430071, China. 
Electronic address: wonyhfon@whu.edu.cn.
(4)Benemerita Universidad Autonoma de Puebla, Mexico. Electronic address: 
ricardoag92@yahoo.com.mx.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine, State University of Medicine and Pharmacy 
"Nicolae Testemitanu", Chisinau, Moldova.
(6)Professor of Thoracic Medicine, Department of Thoracic Medicine, University 
General Hospital, Heraklion, Greece.

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) is a heterogeneous and 
multisystemic disease with progressive increasing morbidity and mortality. COPD 
is now widely accepted as a heterogeneous condition with multiple phenotypes and 
endotypes. This review will discuss the old and new concepts for the different 
types of COPD phenotypes, as well as the inclusion of them in current 
guidelines. Phenotypical approach to COPD is having huge impact on everyday 
practice and changed nonpharmacological and pharmacological management of COPD 
in last decade. However, phenotypical approach is small step to precision 
medicine in COPD management in the absence of big, specific and well-designed 
COPD trials with exact identification of phenotypes for more personalization of 
the treatment of COPD.

Copyright © 2019 Sociedade Portuguesa de Pneumologia. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pulmoe.2019.10.006
PMID: 31740261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]