---
reference_id: "PMID:12373568"
title: Effect of continuous glucose therapy with uncooked cornstarch on the long-term clinical course of type 1a glycogen storage disease.
authors:
- Weinstein DA
- Wolfsdorf JI
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1007/s00431-002-1000-2
keywords:
- Adenoma/etiology
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Albuminuria/etiology
- Female
- "Glycogen Storage Disease Type I/complications, diet therapy, physiopathology"
- Growth
- Humans
- Liver Neoplasms/etiology
- Male
- Starch/therapeutic use
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Effect of continuous glucose therapy with uncooked cornstarch on the long-term clinical course of type 1a glycogen storage disease.
**Authors:** Weinstein DA, Wolfsdorf JI
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00431-002-1000-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00431-002-1000-2)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 2002 Oct;161 Suppl 1:S35-9. doi: 10.1007/s00431-002-1000-2.
Epub  2002 Jul 31.

Effect of continuous glucose therapy with uncooked cornstarch on the long-term
clinical course of type 1a glycogen storage disease.

Weinstein DA(1), Wolfsdorf JI.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Children's Hospital Boston, 300 Longwood Avenue,
Boston MA 02115, USA. david.weinstein@tch.harvard.edu

To evaluate the effects of uncooked cornstarch (UCS) on metabolic control,
growth, and complications of pubertal and postpubertal subjects with type 1a
glycogen storage disease, we studied 26 subjects (16 males), mean age 20.8+/-5.1
years, in whom continuous glucose therapy with cornstarch began at 6.8+/-4.3
years. At the time of this analysis, subjects had received cornstarch for
14.1+/-3.5 years. Metabolic control was determined with subjects receiving their
usual home dietary regimens: 4.1+/-1.3 doses of UCS in the day (9.7+/-2.6 g/h)
and 2.0+/-0.4 doses at night (11.7+/-2.2 g/h). Mean height standard deviation
score (SDS) was -1.2+/-1.3, significantly less than the mean target height of
-0.2+/-1.1 ( P<0.01). Mean weight SDS was 0.5+/-1.9 and body mass index SDS was
0.7+/-1.0. Of all subjects, 50% had at least one focal hepatic lesion consistent
with an adenoma. Urinary albumin excretion was increased (>20 micro g/min) in
31% of subjects; two subjects had clinical albuminuria (>300 mg per 24 h), but
none has progressed to chronic renal insufficiency. Of 26 subjects, 13 (50%) had
anemia. All of the complications were associated with evidence of suboptimal
metabolic control, whereas subjects with no evidence of any long-term
complications had near normal blood lactate and total CO(2) concentrations.
CONCLUSION: The achievement of optimal biochemical control of glycogen storage
disease type 1a continues to be a challenge, but is attainable by meticulous
adherence to an individualized dietary regimen based on the results of periodic
metabolic evaluation and home blood glucose monitoring. Minimizing the metabolic
abnormalities of the disease may decrease the risk of long-term complications.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-002-1000-2
PMID: 12373568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
