---
reference_id: "PMID:33574867"
title: "Hepatitis B Virus: From Diagnosis to Treatment."
authors:
- Guvenir M
- Arikan A
journal: Pol J Microbiol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.33073/pjm-2020-044
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis B Virus: From Diagnosis to Treatment.
**Authors:** Guvenir M, Arikan A
**Journal:** Pol J Microbiol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.33073/pjm-2020-044](https://doi.org/10.33073/pjm-2020-044)

## Content

1. Pol J Microbiol. 2020 Dec;69(4):391-399. doi: 10.33073/pjm-2020-044. Epub 2020
 Dec 27.

Hepatitis B Virus: From Diagnosis to Treatment.

Guvenir M(1), Arikan A(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Near East University, Vocational School of Health Services, Nicosia, Northern 
Cyprus.
(2)Near East University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical 
Microbiology, Nicosia, Northern Cyprus.
(3)Near East University, DESAM Institute, Nicosia, Northern Cyprus.

Hepatitis B infection is still a global concern progressing as acute-chronic 
hepatitis, severe liver failure, and death. The infection is most widely 
transmitted from the infected mother to a child, with infected blood and body 
fluids. Pregnant women, adolescents, and all adults at high risk of chronic 
infection are recommended to be screened for hepatitis B infection. The initial 
analysis includes serological tests that allow differentiation of acute and 
chronic hepatitis. Molecular assays performed provide detection and 
quantification of viral DNA, genotyping, drug resistance, and precore/core 
mutation analysis to confirm infection and monitor disease progression in 
chronic hepatitis B patients. All patients with chronic hepatitis B should be 
treated with antiviral medications and regularly monitored for efficient 
treatment. The current treatment is based on nucleos(t)ide analogs and pegylated 
interferons that save lives by decreasing liver cancer death, liver transplant, 
slow or reverse the progression of liver disease as well as the virus 
infectivity.

© 2020 Meryem Guvenir and Ayse Arikan.

DOI: 10.33073/pjm-2020-044
PMCID: PMC7812357
PMID: 33574867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors do not report 
any financial or personal connections with other persons or organizations, which 
might negatively affect the contents of this publication and/or claim authorship 
rights to this publication.