---
reference_id: "PMID:35200702"
title: Left Ventricular Noncompaction Is Associated with Valvular Regurgitation and a Variety of Arrhythmias.
authors:
- Li Q
- Miao L
- Xia L
- Abdelnasser HY
- Zhang F
- Lu Y
- Nusrat A
- Tabassum M
- Li J
- Wu M
journal: J Cardiovasc Dev Dis
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/jcdd9020049
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Left Ventricular Noncompaction Is Associated with Valvular Regurgitation and a Variety of Arrhythmias.
**Authors:** Li Q, Miao L, Xia L, Abdelnasser HY, Zhang F, Lu Y, Nusrat A, Tabassum M, Li J, Wu M
**Journal:** J Cardiovasc Dev Dis (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jcdd9020049](https://doi.org/10.3390/jcdd9020049)

## Content

1. J Cardiovasc Dev Dis. 2022 Feb 2;9(2):49. doi: 10.3390/jcdd9020049.

Left Ventricular Noncompaction Is Associated with Valvular Regurgitation and a 
Variety of Arrhythmias.

Li Q(1)(2), Miao L(2)(3), Xia L(1), Abdelnasser HY(3), Zhang F(1), Lu Y(2)(3), 
Nusrat A(3), Tabassum M(3), Li J(1), Wu M(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital of 
Nanchang University, Nanchang 330006, China.
(2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Albany Medical College, 
Albany, NY 12208, USA.
(3)Department of Pharmacological and Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of 
Pharmacy, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204, USA.

Left ventricular noncompaction (LVNC) is a type of cardiomyopathy characterized 
anatomically by prominent ventricular trabeculation and deep intertrabecular 
recesses. The mortality associated with LVNC ranges from 5% to 47%. The etiology 
of LVNC is yet to be fully understood, although decades have passed since its 
recognition as a clinical entity globally. Furthermore, critical questions, 
i.e., whether LVNC represents an acquired pathology or has a congenital origin 
and whether the reduced contractile function in LVNC patients is a cause or 
consequence of noncompaction, remain to be addressed. In this study, to answer 
some of these questions, we analyzed the clinical features of LVNC patients. Out 
of 9582 subjects screened for abnormal cardiac functions, 45 exhibit the 
characteristics of LVNC, and 1 presents right ventricular noncompaction (RVNC). 
We found that 40 patients show valvular regurgitation, 39 manifest reduced 
systolic contractions, and 46 out of the 46 present different forms of 
arrhythmias that are not restricted to be caused by the noncompact myocardium. 
This retrospective examination of LVNC patients reveals some novel findings: 
LVNC is associated with regurgitation in most patients and arrhythmias in all 
patients. The thickness ratio of the trabecular layer to compact layer 
negatively correlates with fractional shortening, and reduced contractility 
might result from LVNC. This study adds evidence to support a congenital origin 
of LVNC that might benefit the diagnosis and subsequent characterization of LVNC 
patients.

DOI: 10.3390/jcdd9020049
PMCID: PMC8876824
PMID: 35200702

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The 
funder had no role in the design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or 
interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or in the decision to 
publish the results.