---
reference_id: "PMID:18953351"
title: Niemann-Pick disease type C1 is a sphingosine storage disease that causes deregulation of lysosomal calcium.
authors:
- Lloyd-Evans E
- Morgan AJ
- He X
- Smith DA
- Elliot-Smith E
- Sillence DJ
- Churchill GC
- Schuchman EH
- Galione A
- Platt FM
journal: Nat Med
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1038/nm.1876
keywords:
- Acids
- Animals
- Calcium/metabolism
- "Carrier Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Line
- Cholesterol/metabolism
- Curcumin/therapeutic use
- Glycosphingolipids/metabolism
- Homeostasis
- Humans
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
- Lysosomes/metabolism
- "Membrane Glycoproteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- Mutation/genetics
- Niemann-Pick C1 Protein
- "Niemann-Pick Disease, Type C/classification, drug therapy, genetics, metabolism"
- Phenotype
- "Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Sphingosine/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Niemann-Pick disease type C1 is a sphingosine storage disease that causes deregulation of lysosomal calcium.
**Authors:** Lloyd-Evans E, Morgan AJ, He X, Smith DA, Elliot-Smith E, Sillence DJ, Churchill GC, Schuchman EH, Galione A, Platt FM
**Journal:** Nat Med (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nm.1876](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm.1876)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2008 Nov;14(11):1247-55. doi: 10.1038/nm.1876. Epub 2008 Oct 26.

Niemann-Pick disease type C1 is a sphingosine storage disease that causes 
deregulation of lysosomal calcium.

Lloyd-Evans E(1), Morgan AJ, He X, Smith DA, Elliot-Smith E, Sillence DJ, 
Churchill GC, Schuchman EH, Galione A, Platt FM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Mansfield Road, Oxford, UK. 
(emyr.lloyd-evans@pharm.ox.ac.uk

Niemann-Pick type C1 (NPC1) disease is a neurodegenerative lysosomal storage 
disorder caused by mutations in the acidic compartment (which we define as the 
late endosome and the lysosome) protein, NPC1. The function of NPC1 is unknown, 
but when it is dysfunctional, sphingosine, glycosphingolipids, sphingomyelin and 
cholesterol accumulate. We have found that NPC1-mutant cells have a large 
reduction in the acidic compartment calcium store compared to wild-type cells. 
Chelating luminal endocytic calcium in normal cells with high-affinity 
Rhod-dextran induced an NPC disease cellular phenotype. In a drug-induced NPC 
disease cellular model, sphingosine storage in the acidic compartment led to 
calcium depletion in these organelles, which then resulted in cholesterol, 
sphingomyelin and glycosphingolipid storage in these compartments. Sphingosine 
storage is therefore an initiating factor in NPC1 disease pathogenesis that 
causes altered calcium homeostasis, leading to the secondary storage of 
sphingolipids and cholesterol. This unique calcium phenotype represents a new 
target for therapeutic intervention, as elevation of cytosolic calcium with 
curcumin normalized NPC1 disease cellular phenotypes and prolonged survival of 
the NPC1 mouse.

DOI: 10.1038/nm.1876
PMID: 18953351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]