---
reference_id: "PMID:15278325"
title: Does the transition zone reliably delineate aganglionic bowel in Hirschsprung's disease?
authors:
- Jamieson DH
- Dundas SE
- Belushi SA
- Cooper M
- Blair GK
journal: Pediatr Radiol
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1007/s00247-004-1292-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Does the transition zone reliably delineate aganglionic bowel in Hirschsprung's disease?
**Authors:** Jamieson DH, Dundas SE, Belushi SA, Cooper M, Blair GK
**Journal:** Pediatr Radiol (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00247-004-1292-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00247-004-1292-7)

## Content

1. Pediatr Radiol. 2004 Oct;34(10):811-5. doi: 10.1007/s00247-004-1292-7. Epub
2004  Jul 27.

Does the transition zone reliably delineate aganglionic bowel in Hirschsprung's 
disease?

Jamieson DH(1), Dundas SE, Belushi SA, Cooper M, Blair GK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, BCCH, 4480 Oak Street, V6H 3V4, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada. djamieson@cw.bc.ca

BACKGROUND: Knowledge of the extent of aganglionic bowel is important for 
preoperative planning of trans-anal surgery in patients with Hirschsprung's 
disease (HD).
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the accuracy of the transition zone, as identified by 
contrast enema study, for identifying the extent of aganglionic bowel.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 32 patients with preoperative contrast enema 
studies and pathologic identification of aganglionic extent were reviewed. Two 
pediatric radiologists independently reviewed the contrast enema studies. The 
radiographic transition zone was compared to the pathological extent of 
aganglionic bowel.
RESULTS: Radiologist agreement of the site of transition zone on contrast enema 
was 90.6%. The concordance between the radiographic transition zone and 
pathologic extent of aganglionic bowel was 62.5%. The subgroup of patients with 
long-segment HD revealed a concordance of only 25%.
CONCLUSION: Contrast enema delineation of the transition zone in HD needs to be 
regarded with caution. This is especially true in long-segment disease, where 
knowledge of the extent of aganglionic bowel is most crucial to surgical 
planning.

DOI: 10.1007/s00247-004-1292-7
PMID: 15278325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]