---
reference_id: "PMID:11598619"
title: "Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF): mechanism of transmission and pathogenicity."
authors:
- Mwanatambwe M
- Yamada N
- Arai S
- Shimizu-Suganuma M
- Shichinohe K
- Asano G
journal: J Nippon Med Sch
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1272/jnms.68.370
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF): mechanism of transmission and pathogenicity.
**Authors:** Mwanatambwe M, Yamada N, Arai S, Shimizu-Suganuma M, Shichinohe K, Asano G
**Journal:** J Nippon Med Sch (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1272/jnms.68.370](https://doi.org/10.1272/jnms.68.370)

## Content

1. J Nippon Med Sch. 2001 Oct;68(5):370-5. doi: 10.1272/jnms.68.370.

Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF): mechanism of transmission and pathogenicity.

Mwanatambwe M(1), Yamada N, Arai S, Shimizu-Suganuma M, Shichinohe K, Asano G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan.

Hemorrhagic fevers represent a wide spectrum of viral infectious diseases, 
out-breaking mostly as epidemics, some of them being highly lethal. They range 
from those caused by bunyaviridae, associated with renal or pulmonary syndromes 
and those recently emerging and caused by the filoviridae family of thread-like 
viruses. Among the latter, Ebola hemorrhagic fever (EHF) bears the highest 
mortality and morbidity rates. One form of the disease has been documented only 
in monkeys. The human form, has occurred mainly in areas surrounding rain 
forests in central Africa. Patients present with signs of hemorrhagic diathesis, 
fever, diarrhea and neurological disorders, leading sometimes to confusion with 
local endemic diseases. Fatal victims of the disease die of dehydration. Poor 
hygienic conditions facilitate the spread of the virus. Biologically, the virus 
seems to target both the host blood coagulative and immune defense systems. 
Intensive epidemiologic search have failed to establish the definitive natural 
host of the virus. Twice, with a 19-year interval, major outbreaks have taken 
place in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The second major outbreak in the 
northwestern city of Kikwit in April 1995 will serve here to elucidate the 
mechanism of the viral infection.

DOI: 10.1272/jnms.68.370
PMID: 11598619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]