---
reference_id: "PMID:29800646"
title: Cognitive deficits in the Snord116 deletion mouse model for Prader-Willi syndrome.
authors:
- Adhikari A
- Copping NA
- Onaga B
- Pride MC
- Coulson RL
- Yang M
- Yasui DH
- LaSalle JM
- Silverman JL
journal: Neurobiol Learn Mem
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.nlm.2018.05.011
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cognitive Dysfunction/etiology, genetics"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Gene Deletion
- Humans
- Mice
- "Prader-Willi Syndrome/complications, genetics"
- "RNA, Small Nucleolar/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cognitive deficits in the Snord116 deletion mouse model for Prader-Willi syndrome.
**Authors:** Adhikari A, Copping NA, Onaga B, Pride MC, Coulson RL, Yang M, Yasui DH, LaSalle JM, Silverman JL
**Journal:** Neurobiol Learn Mem (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nlm.2018.05.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nlm.2018.05.011)

## Content

1. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 2019 Nov;165:106874. doi: 10.1016/j.nlm.2018.05.011. Epub
 2018 May 23.

Cognitive deficits in the Snord116 deletion mouse model for Prader-Willi 
syndrome.

Adhikari A(1), Copping NA(1), Onaga B(1), Pride MC(1), Coulson RL(2), Yang M(3), 
Yasui DH(2), LaSalle JM(2), Silverman JL(4).

Author information:
(1)MIND Institute, University of California, Davis School of Medicine, 
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Sacramento, CA, USA.
(2)MIND Institute, Genome Center, UC Davis School of Medicine, Department of 
Medical Microbiology and Immunology, Davis, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Institute for Genomic Medicine, New York, NY, 
USA.
(4)MIND Institute, University of California, Davis School of Medicine, 
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Sacramento, CA, USA. 
Electronic address: jsilverman@ucdavis.edu.

Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) is an imprinted neurodevelopmental disease caused by 
a loss of paternal genes on chromosome 15q11-q13. It is characterized by 
cognitive impairments, developmental delay, sleep abnormalities, and hyperphagia 
often leading to obesity. Clinical research has shown that a lack of expression 
of SNORD116, a paternally expressed imprinted gene cluster that encodes multiple 
copies of a small nucleolar RNA (snoRNA) in both humans and mice, is most likely 
responsible for many PWS symptoms seen in humans. The majority of previous 
research using PWS preclinical models focused on characterization of the 
hyperphagic and metabolic phenotypes. However, a crucial understudied clinical 
phenotype is cognitive impairments and thus we investigated the learning and 
memory abilities using a model of PWS, with a heterozygous deletion in Snord116. 
We utilized the novel object recognition task, which doesn't require external 
motivation, or exhaustive swim training. Automated findings were further 
confirmed with manual scoring by a highly trained blinded investigator. We 
discovered deficits in Snord116+/- mutant mice in the novel object recognition, 
location memory and tone cue fear conditioning assays when compared to age-, 
sex- matched, littermate control Snord116+/+ mice. Further, we confirmed that 
despite physical neo-natal developmental delays, Snord116+/- mice had normal 
exploratory and motor abilities. These results show that the Snord116+/- 
deletion murine model is a valuable preclinical model for investigating learning 
and memory impairments in individuals with PWS without common confounding 
phenotypes.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nlm.2018.05.011
PMCID: PMC6520209
PMID: 29800646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]