---
reference_id: "PMID:10700184"
title: Mutations in a new gene in Ellis-van Creveld syndrome and Weyers acrodental dysostosis.
authors:
- Ruiz-Perez VL
- Ide SE
- Strom TM
- Lorenz B
- Wilson D
- Woods K
- King L
- Francomano C
- Freisinger P
- Spranger S
- Marino B
- Dallapiccola B
- Wright M
- Meitinger T
- Polymeropoulos MH
- Goodship J
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1038/73508
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in a new gene in Ellis-van Creveld syndrome and Weyers acrodental dysostosis.
**Authors:** Ruiz-Perez VL, Ide SE, Strom TM, Lorenz B, Wilson D, Woods K, King L, Francomano C, Freisinger P, Spranger S, Marino B, Dallapiccola B, Wright M, Meitinger T, Polymeropoulos MH, Goodship J
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1038/73508](https://doi.org/10.1038/73508)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2000 Mar;24(3):283-6. doi: 10.1038/73508.

Mutations in a new gene in Ellis-van Creveld syndrome and Weyers acrodental 
dysostosis.

Ruiz-Perez VL(1), Ide SE, Strom TM, Lorenz B, Wilson D, Woods K, King L, 
Francomano C, Freisinger P, Spranger S, Marino B, Dallapiccola B, Wright M, 
Meitinger T, Polymeropoulos MH, Goodship J.

Author information:
(1)Human Genetics Unit, School of Biochemistry and Genetics, Newcastle 
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet 2000 May;25(1):125.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2000 Mar;24(3):203-4. doi: 10.1038/73389.

Ellis-van Creveld syndrome (EvC, MIM 225500) is an autosomal recessive skeletal 
dysplasia characterized by short limbs, short ribs, postaxial polydactyly and 
dysplastic nails and teeth. Congenital cardiac defects, most commonly a defect 
of primary atrial septation producing a common atrium, occur in 60% of affected 
individuals. The disease was mapped to chromosome 4p16 in nine Amish 
subpedigrees and single pedigrees from Mexico, Ecuador and Brazil. Weyers 
acrodental dysostosis (MIM 193530), an autosomal dominant disorder with a 
similar but milder phenotype, has been mapped in a single pedigree to an area 
including the EvC critical region. We have identified a new gene (EVC), encoding 
a 992-amino-acid protein, that is mutated in individuals with EvC. We identified 
a splice-donor change in an Amish pedigree and six truncating mutations and a 
single amino acid deletion in seven pedigrees. The heterozygous carriers of 
these mutations did not manifest features of EvC. We found two heterozygous 
missense mutations associated with a phenotype, one in a man with Weyers 
acrodental dysostosis and another in a father and his daughter, who both have 
the heart defect characteristic of EvC and polydactyly, but not short stature. 
We suggest that EvC and Weyers acrodental dysostosis are allelic conditions.

DOI: 10.1038/73508
PMID: 10700184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]