---
reference_id: "PMID:10844935"
title: Chronic granulomatous disease. Report on a national registry of 368 patients.
authors:
- Winkelstein JA
- Marino MC
- Johnston RB Jr
- Boyle J
- Curnutte J
- Gallin JI
- Malech HL
- Holland SM
- Ochs H
- Quie P
- Buckley RH
- Foster CB
- Chanock SJ
- Dickler H
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1097/00005792-200005000-00003
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Cause of Death
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Communicable Diseases/epidemiology, etiology"
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- "Granulomatous Disease, Chronic/complications, epidemiology, genetics"
- Humans
- Incidence
- Infant
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Prevalence
- Racial Groups
- Registries
- Survival Analysis
- United States/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chronic granulomatous disease. Report on a national registry of 368 patients.
**Authors:** Winkelstein JA, Marino MC, Johnston RB Jr, Boyle J, Curnutte J, Gallin JI, Malech HL, Holland SM, Ochs H, Quie P, Buckley RH, Foster CB, Chanock SJ, Dickler H
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1097/00005792-200005000-00003](https://doi.org/10.1097/00005792-200005000-00003)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2000 May;79(3):155-69. doi: 
10.1097/00005792-200005000-00003.

Chronic granulomatous disease. Report on a national registry of 368 patients.

Winkelstein JA(1), Marino MC, Johnston RB Jr, Boyle J, Curnutte J, Gallin JI, 
Malech HL, Holland SM, Ochs H, Quie P, Buckley RH, Foster CB, Chanock SJ, 
Dickler H.

Author information:
(1)Immune Deficiency Foundation, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

A registry of United States residents with chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) 
was established in 1993 in order to estimate the minimum incidence of this 
uncommon primary immunodeficiency disease and characterize its epidemiologic and 
clinical features. To date, 368 patients have been registered; 259 have the 
X-linked recessive form of CGD, 81 have 1 of the autosomal recessive forms, and 
in 28 the mode of inheritance is unknown. The minimum estimate of birth rate is 
between 1/200,000 and 1/250,000 live births for the period 1980-1989. Pneumonia 
was the most prevalent infection (79% of patients; Aspergillus most prevalent 
cause), followed by suppurative adenitis (53% of patients; Staphylococcus most 
prevalent cause), subcutaneous abscess (42% of patients; Staphylococcus most 
prevalent cause), liver abscess (27% of patients; Staphylococcus most prevalent 
cause), osteomyelitis (25% of patients; Serratia most prevalent cause), and 
sepsis (18% of patients; Salmonella most prevalent cause). Fifteen percent of 
patients had gastric outlet obstruction, 10% urinary tract obstruction, and 17% 
colitis/enteritis. Ten percent of X-linked recessive kindreds and 3% of 
autosomal recessive kindreds had family members with lupus. Eighteen percent of 
patients either were deceased when registered or died after being registered. 
The most common causes of death were pneumonia and/or sepsis due to Aspergillus 
(23 patients) or Burkholderia cepacia (12 patients). Patients with the X-linked 
recessive form of the disease appear to have a more serious clinical phenotype 
than patients with the autosomal recessive forms of the disease, based on the 
fact that they are diagnosed significantly earlier (mean, 3.01 years of age 
versus 7.81 years of age, respectively), have a significantly higher prevalence 
of perirectal abscess (17% versus 7%), suppurative adenitis (59% versus 32%), 
bacteremia/fungemia (21% versus 10%), gastric obstruction (19% versus 5%), and 
urinary tract obstruction (11% versus 3%), and a higher mortality (21.2% versus 
8.6%).

DOI: 10.1097/00005792-200005000-00003
PMID: 10844935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]