---
reference_id: "PMID:34453539"
title: Clinical Cholera Surveillance Sensitivity in Bangladesh and Implications for Large-Scale Disease Control.
authors:
- Hegde ST
- Lee EC
- Islam Khan A
- Lauer SA
- Islam MT
- Rahman Bhuiyan T
- Lessler J
- Azman AS
- Qadri F
- Gurley ES
journal: J Infect Dis
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/infdis/jiab418
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Cholera Surveillance Sensitivity in Bangladesh and Implications for Large-Scale Disease Control.
**Authors:** Hegde ST, Lee EC, Islam Khan A, Lauer SA, Islam MT, Rahman Bhuiyan T, Lessler J, Azman AS, Qadri F, Gurley ES
**Journal:** J Infect Dis (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/infdis/jiab418](https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiab418)

## Content

1. J Infect Dis. 2021 Dec 20;224(12 Suppl 2):S725-S731. doi: 
10.1093/infdis/jiab418.

Clinical Cholera Surveillance Sensitivity in Bangladesh and Implications for 
Large-Scale Disease Control.

Hegde ST(1), Lee EC(1), Islam Khan A(2), Lauer SA(1), Islam MT(2), Rahman 
Bhuiyan T(2), Lessler J(1), Azman AS(1), Qadri F(2), Gurley ES(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(2)Infectious Disease Division, icddr,b, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

BACKGROUND: A surveillance system that is sensitive to detecting high burden 
areas is critical for achieving widespread disease control. In 2014, Bangladesh 
established a nationwide, facility-based cholera surveillance system for Vibrio 
cholerae infection. We sought to measure the sensitivity of this surveillance 
system to detect cases to assess whether cholera elimination targets outlined by 
the Bangladesh national control plan can be adequately measured.
METHODS: We overlaid maps of nationally representative annual V cholerae 
seroincidence onto maps of the catchment areas of facilities where confirmatory 
laboratory testing for cholera was conducted, and we identified its spatial 
complement as surveillance greyspots, areas where cases likely occur but go 
undetected. We assessed surveillance system sensitivity and changes to 
sensitivity given alternate surveillance site selection strategies.
RESULTS: We estimated that 69% of Bangladeshis (111.7 million individuals) live 
in surveillance greyspots and that 23% (25.5 million) of these individuals live 
in areas with the highest V cholerae infection rates.
CONCLUSIONS: The cholera surveillance system in Bangladesh has the ability to 
monitor progress towards cholera elimination goals among 31% of the country's 
population, which may be insufficient for accurately measuring progress. 
Increasing surveillance coverage, particularly in the highest risk areas, should 
be considered.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious 
Diseases Society of America.

DOI: 10.1093/infdis/jiab418
PMCID: PMC8687068
PMID: 34453539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]