---
reference_id: "PMID:33569653"
title: Clinical Approach to Diagnosis and Therapy of Polyarteritis Nodosa.
authors:
- Hočevar A
- Tomšič M
- Perdan Pirkmajer K
journal: Curr Rheumatol Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s11926-021-00983-2
keywords:
- Cyclophosphamide/therapeutic use
- Glucocorticoids/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Immunosuppressive Agents/therapeutic use
- "Polyarteritis Nodosa/diagnosis, therapy"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Approach to Diagnosis and Therapy of Polyarteritis Nodosa.
**Authors:** Hočevar A, Tomšič M, Perdan Pirkmajer K
**Journal:** Curr Rheumatol Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11926-021-00983-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11926-021-00983-2)

## Content

1. Curr Rheumatol Rep. 2021 Feb 10;23(3):14. doi: 10.1007/s11926-021-00983-2.

Clinical Approach to Diagnosis and Therapy of Polyarteritis Nodosa.

Hočevar A(1)(2), Tomšič M(3)(4), Perdan Pirkmajer K(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Vodnikova 
cesta, 62 1000, Ljubljana, Slovenia. alojzija.hocevar@gmail.com.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia. 
alojzija.hocevar@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Vodnikova 
cesta, 62 1000, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.

PURPOSE OF THE REVIEW: Polyarteritis nodosa is a rare disease characterized by 
the necrotizing inflammation of medium-sized arteries. Different 
etiopathogenetic and clinical variants of the disease have been recognized over 
the past decades. In the present paper, we review the clinical features, 
diagnosis, and treatment of the different subtypes of the disease.
RECENT FINDINGS: The diagnosis of polyarteritis nodosa is primarily based on 
clinical findings, imaging, and histopathological investigations. 
Microbiological and genetic investigations complement the diagnostic work-up. 
Idiopathic and hereditary variants of polyarteritis nodosa are treated with 
immunomodulatory medications such as glucocorticoids, conventional 
immunomodulatory drugs (e.g., cyclophosphamide) and biologic agents (e.g., tumor 
necrosis factor inhibitors, interleukin 6 inhibitor), while hepatitis B 
virus-associated polyarteritis nodosa primarily requires antiviral therapy 
combined with plasma exchange. PAN is a disease with heterogeneous 
presentations, severity, and therapeutic approaches. The overall prognosis of 
this disease is improving, mainly due to early diagnosis and more effective 
treatments. Treatment choices are guided mainly by the disease subtype and 
severity. In this review, we have presented the current knowledge on PAN 
clinical variants, their classification, diagnosis, and treatment approaches.

DOI: 10.1007/s11926-021-00983-2
PMID: 33569653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]