---
reference_id: "PMID:32843441"
title: COVID-19 Inflammatory Syndrome With Clinical Features Resembling Kawasaki Disease.
authors:
- Spencer R
- Closson RC
- Gorelik M
- Boneparth AD
- Hough RF
- Acker KP
- Krishnan U
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1542/peds.2020-1845
content_type: abstract_only
---

# COVID-19 Inflammatory Syndrome With Clinical Features Resembling Kawasaki Disease.
**Authors:** Spencer R, Closson RC, Gorelik M, Boneparth AD, Hough RF, Acker KP, Krishnan U
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.2020-1845](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2020-1845)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2020 Sep;146(3):e20201845. doi: 10.1542/peds.2020-1845.

COVID-19 Inflammatory Syndrome With Clinical Features Resembling Kawasaki 
Disease.

Spencer R(1), Closson RC(2), Gorelik M(3), Boneparth AD(3), Hough RF(4), Acker 
KP(5), Krishnan U(2).

Author information:
(1)Divisions of Pediatric Cardiology, ros9225@nyp.org.
(2)Divisions of Pediatric Cardiology.
(3)Allergy, Immunology, and Rheumatology, and.
(4)Pediatric Critical Care Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Columbia 
University Irving Medical Center and Morgan Stanley Children's Hospital, New 
York, New York; and.
(5)Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, Weill 
Cornell Medicine, New York, New York.

We describe 2 patients with coronavirus disease who had multiple clinical 
features suggestive of Kawasaki disease (KD). Both patients presented with fever 
lasting >5 days and were found to have rash, conjunctival injection, and swollen 
lips. One patient also had extremity swelling, whereas the other developed 
desquamation of the fingers. In both cases, laboratory results were similar to 
those seen in KD. These patients had highly unusual but similar features, and 
both appeared to respond favorably to treatment. It remains unclear whether 
these patients had true KD or manifestations of coronavirus disease that 
resembled KD.

Copyright © 2020 by the American Academy of Pediatrics.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2020-1845
PMID: 32843441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: POTENTIAL CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The authors have 
indicated they have no potential conflicts of interest to disclose.