---
reference_id: "PMID:40274430"
title: Dietary patterns of patients with acute coronary syndrome in the multi-ethnic New Zealand study of acute coronary syndromes (MENZACS).
authors:
- Bradbury KE
- Earle NJ
- Rolleston A
- Fyfe C
- Grey C
- Korohina E
- Mehta S
- Cameron V
- Choi Y
- Devlin G
- Gladding PA
- Harrison W
- Henare K
- Kerr AJ
- Logue G
- Lumley T
- Pera V
- Pilbrow AP
- Porter G
- Stewart R
- Troughton R
- Wihongi H
- Legget ME
- Doughty RN
- Wall C
journal: Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.numecd.2025.104037
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dietary patterns of patients with acute coronary syndrome in the multi-ethnic New Zealand study of acute coronary syndromes (MENZACS).
**Authors:** Bradbury KE, Earle NJ, Rolleston A, Fyfe C, Grey C, Korohina E, Mehta S, Cameron V, Choi Y, Devlin G, Gladding PA, Harrison W, Henare K, Kerr AJ, Logue G, Lumley T, Pera V, Pilbrow AP, Porter G, Stewart R, Troughton R, Wihongi H, Legget ME, Doughty RN, Wall C
**Journal:** Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.numecd.2025.104037](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.numecd.2025.104037)

## Content

1. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2025 Sep;35(9):104037. doi: 
10.1016/j.numecd.2025.104037. Epub 2025 Apr 10.

Dietary patterns of patients with acute coronary syndrome in the multi-ethnic 
New Zealand study of acute coronary syndromes (MENZACS).

Bradbury KE(1), Earle NJ(2), Rolleston A(3), Fyfe C(2), Grey C(4), Korohina 
E(3), Mehta S(5), Cameron V(6), Choi Y(5), Devlin G(7), Gladding PA(8), Harrison 
W(9), Henare K(10), Kerr AJ(11), Logue G(2), Lumley T(12), Pera V(13), Pilbrow 
AP(6), Porter G(14), Stewart R(15), Troughton R(6), Wihongi H(16), Legget ME(2), 
Doughty RN(17), Wall C(18).

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Population Health, 
University of Auckland, New Zealand. Electronic address: 
k.bradbury@auckland.ac.nz.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(3)The Centre for Health, Tauranga, New Zealand.
(4)Public Health Agency, New Zealand.
(5)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Population Health, 
University of Auckland, New Zealand.
(6)Christchurch Heart Institute, Department of Medicine, University of Otago, 
Christchurch, New Zealand.
(7)Gisborne Hospital, Gisborne, New Zealand.
(8)Department of Cardiology, Waitematā District Health Board, Auckland, New 
Zealand.
(9)Middlemore Hospital, Counties Manukau District Health Board, Auckland, New 
Zealand.
(10)Auckland Cancer Society Research Centre, University of Auckland, Auckland, 
New Zealand.
(11)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Population Health, 
University of Auckland, New Zealand; Middlemore Hospital, Counties Manukau 
District Health Board, Auckland, New Zealand.
(12)Department of Statistics, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
(13)Waikato Hospital, Waikato District Health Board, Hamilton, New Zealand.
(14)Tauranga Hospital, Bay of Plenty District Health Board, Tauranga, New 
Zealand.
(15)Green Lane Cardiovascular Service, Te Toka Tumai Auckland Hospital, 
Auckland, New Zealand.
(16)He Kamaka Waiora, Waitematā and Auckland District Health Boards, Auckland, 
New Zealand.
(17)Department of Medicine, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand; Green 
Lane Cardiovascular Service, Te Toka Tumai Auckland Hospital, Auckland, New 
Zealand.
(18)Department of Nutrition and Dietetics, University of Auckland, Auckland, New 
Zealand.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: In Aotearoa-New Zealand (NZ) approximately 8000 people are 
admitted with a first-time acute coronary syndrome (ACS) annually. In this 
cross-sectional analysis, we describe the dietary patterns of patients who 
present with their first ACS and examine their associations with 
socio-demographic and clinical characteristics.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The Multi-Ethnic NZ study of Acute Coronary Syndromes 
(MENZACS) is a multi-centre, longitudinal cohort study of patients with 
first-time ACS. At study enrolment, patients (n = 1914) completed a validated 
short food frequency questionnaire asking about dietary intakes in the 12 months 
preceding their ACS. Three dietary patterns were identified using Principal 
Component Analysis. The Convenience pattern was characterised by high intakes of 
take-aways, and participants with higher scores were on average younger, more 
likely to be male, live in the most deprived areas, and current smokers (all p 
for trend<0.001). The Harvest pattern was characterised by high intakes of 
vegetables and fruit, and participants with higher scores were on average older, 
less likely to be male, more likely to live in the least deprived areas, and 
have a history of hypertension, and less likely to be current smokers (all p for 
trend<0.05). The Comfort pattern was characterised by high intakes of potatoes, 
biscuits, tea/coffee, meat, and jam, and participants with higher scores were on 
average older and more likely to be male (both p for trend<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Three distinct dietary patterns were found in patients presenting 
with first-time ACS in NZ and these patterns were associated with various 
socio-demographic and clinical factors.

Copyright © 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.numecd.2025.104037
PMID: 40274430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]