---
reference_id: "PMID:40471666"
title: "Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease: a paradigm of diagnosis and therapeutic challenges in pulmonary hypertension."
authors:
- Aguado B
- Grynblat J
- Budhram B
- Ghigna MR
- Boucly A
- Antigny F
- Jaïs X
- Sitbon O
- Savale L
- Humbert M
- Montani D
journal: Curr Opin Pulm Med
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000001184
keywords:
- Humans
- "Pulmonary Veno-Occlusive Disease/diagnosis, therapy, genetics"
- "Hypertension, Pulmonary/diagnosis, therapy, etiology"
- Lung Transplantation
- Risk Factors
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- Mutation
- Genetic Testing
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease: a paradigm of diagnosis and therapeutic challenges in pulmonary hypertension.
**Authors:** Aguado B, Grynblat J, Budhram B, Ghigna MR, Boucly A, Antigny F, Jaïs X, Sitbon O, Savale L, Humbert M, Montani D
**Journal:** Curr Opin Pulm Med (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MCP.0000000000001184](https://doi.org/10.1097/MCP.0000000000001184)

## Content

1. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2025 Sep 1;31(5):443-455. doi:
10.1097/MCP.0000000000001184.  Epub 2025 Jun 5.

Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease: a paradigm of diagnosis and therapeutic 
challenges in pulmonary hypertension.

Aguado B(1), Grynblat J(1)(2), Budhram B(1)(3), Ghigna MR(1)(4), Boucly A(1), 
Antigny F(1), Jaïs X(1), Sitbon O(1), Savale L(1), Humbert M(1), Montani D(1).

Author information:
(1)Université Paris-Saclay, INSERM, UMR_S 999, Hypertension Pulmonaire: 
Physiopathologie and Innovation Therapeutique (HPPIT); Assistance Publique 
Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Bicêtre, ERN-LUNG, FHU André Cournand, Le 
Kremlin-Bicêtre.
(2)M3C-Necker, Hôpital Necker-Enfants malades, AP-HP Université de Paris Cité, 
Cardiologie Congénitale et Pédiatrique, Paris, France.
(3)Division of Respirology, Department of Medicine, University of Calgary, 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(4)Biopathology Department Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif, France.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease (PVOD) is a rare and 
life-threatening form of precapillary pulmonary hypertension. This review aims 
to outline its genetic and environmental risk factors, highlight key diagnostic 
challenges, and discuss current treatment options.
RECENT FINDINGS: PVOD can occur sporadically or as a hereditary autosomal 
recessive condition with biallelic eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 
alpha kinase 4 ( EIF2AK4) mutations, leading to nearly complete disease 
penetrance. Known risk factors include specific drug/toxin and environmental 
exposures, such as mitomycin C and trichloroethylene, respectively. PVOD is 
characterized by progressive pulmonary venous and capillary remodelling, severe 
hypoxemia, and right ventricular failure. Diagnosis remains difficult due to 
overlapping features with pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH), but 
high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) findings, low lung diffusion capacity 
for carbon monoxide (DLCO), and genetic testing can aid differentiation. 
Initiation of PAH-approved drugs in patients with PVOD requires careful 
consideration due to limited evidence of long-term clinical benefits and the 
high risk of developing pulmonary oedema in this population. Lung 
transplantation remains the only curative treatment, with posttransplant 
survival rates comparable to idiopathic PAH.
SUMMARY: PVOD is a progressive and fatal disease requiring early recognition and 
specific management. Due to its poor prognosis and lack of effective medical 
therapies, early referral for lung transplantation is crucial. Advances in 
genetic and molecular research may lead to novel treatment strategies.

Copyright © 2025 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/MCP.0000000000001184
PMID: 40471666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]