---
reference_id: "PMID:32579499"
title: "Risk Reduction and Prevention of Alzheimer's Disease: Biological Mechanisms of Diet."
authors:
- McGurran H
- Glenn J
- Madero E
- Bott N
journal: Curr Alzheimer Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.2174/1567205017666200624200651
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Risk Reduction and Prevention of Alzheimer's Disease: Biological Mechanisms of Diet.
**Authors:** McGurran H, Glenn J, Madero E, Bott N
**Journal:** Curr Alzheimer Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1567205017666200624200651](https://doi.org/10.2174/1567205017666200624200651)

## Content

1. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2020;17(5):407-427. doi:
10.2174/1567205017666200624200651.

Risk Reduction and Prevention of Alzheimer's Disease: Biological Mechanisms of 
Diet.

McGurran H(1), Glenn J(2), Madero E(2), Bott N(2).

Author information:
(1)Research Master's Programme Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(2)Neurotrack Technologies Inc., Redwood City, CA 94059, United States.

Alzheimer's Disease (AD) incidence is increasing and with no disease modifying 
agents available, preventative measures through lifestyle factors are being 
investigated. Combined with the prevention of AD risk factors such as heart 
disease, diabetes, and with more recent evidence, microbiome dysfunction, there 
is a substantial foundation for diet as a modifiable risk factor and 
preventative measure for AD. Recent evidence suggests AD associated pathologies, 
such as oxidative stress and inflammation, can be modulated by the lipids, 
vitamins, and polyphenols obtained through nutritional intake. Furthermore, 
epidemiological and preclinical evidence has uncovered certain compounds within 
foods that may have beneficial effects in the prevention of AD, including 
omega-3 fatty acids, vitamin E, and resveratrol among others. However, clinical 
data examining specific compounds are often inconsistent and fail to replicate 
the preclinical data. On the other hand, dietary patterns such as the 
Mediterranean or MIND diet have shown promise in terms of clinical outcomes for 
patients, indicating a reductionist approach to diet is not as effective as a 
holistic dietary pattern. In this review, we summarize some of the biological 
mechanisms of key compounds in their relation to AD and how they fit into a 
dietary pattern that supports the role of diet as a risk reducing factor for AD.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1567205017666200624200651
PMID: 32579499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]