---
reference_id: "PMID:29620054"
title: Haemochromatosis.
authors:
- Brissot P
- Pietrangelo A
- Adams PC
- de Graaff B
- McLaren CE
- Loréal O
journal: Nat Rev Dis Primers
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2018.16
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Haemochromatosis.
**Authors:** Brissot P, Pietrangelo A, Adams PC, de Graaff B, McLaren CE, Loréal O
**Journal:** Nat Rev Dis Primers (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrdp.2018.16](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrdp.2018.16)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Dis Primers. 2018 Apr 5;4:18016. doi: 10.1038/nrdp.2018.16.

Haemochromatosis.

Brissot P(1), Pietrangelo A(2), Adams PC(3), de Graaff B(4), McLaren CE(5), 
Loréal O(1).

Author information:
(1)INSERM, Univ. Rennes, INRA, Institut NUMECAN (Nutrition Metabolisms and 
Cancer) UMR_A 1341, UMR_S 1241, F-35000 Rennes, France.
(2)Division of Internal Medicine 2 and Center for Haemochromatosis, University 
Hospital of Modena, Modena, Italy.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, 
Canada.
(4)Menzies Institute for Medical Research, University of Tasmania, Tasmania, 
Australia.
(5)Department of Epidemiology, University of California, Irvine, CA, USA.

Haemochromatosis is defined as systemic iron overload of genetic origin, caused 
by a reduction in the concentration of the iron regulatory hormone hepcidin, or 
a reduction in hepcidin-ferroportin binding. Hepcidin regulates the activity of 
ferroportin, which is the only identified cellular iron exporter. The most 
common form of haemochromatosis is due to homozygous mutations (specifically, 
the C282Y mutation) in HFE, which encodes hereditary haemochromatosis protein. 
Non-HFE forms of haemochromatosis due to mutations in HAMP, HJV or TFR2 are much 
rarer. Mutations in SLC40A1 (also known as FPN1; encoding ferroportin) that 
prevent hepcidin-ferroportin binding also cause haemochromatosis. Cellular iron 
excess in HFE and non-HFE forms of haemochromatosis is caused by increased 
concentrations of plasma iron, which can lead to the accumulation of iron in 
parenchymal cells, particularly hepatocytes, pancreatic cells and 
cardiomyocytes. Diagnosis is noninvasive and includes clinical examination, 
assessment of plasma iron parameters, imaging and genetic testing. The mainstay 
therapy is phlebotomy, although iron chelation can be used in some patients. 
Hepcidin supplementation might be an innovative future approach.

DOI: 10.1038/nrdp.2018.16
PMCID: PMC7775623
PMID: 29620054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests P.B. has received lecture 
fees from Novartis and consulting fees from Novartis and La Jolla Pharmaceutical 
Company. A.P. has received lecture fees from Novartis, and consulting fees from 
Novartis, La Jolla Pharmaceutical Company and Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma 
Corporation. O.L. has received a research grant from Novartis. All other authors 
declare no competing interests.