---
reference_id: "PMID:23737174"
title: "Smooth muscle cell hypertrophy, proliferation, migration and apoptosis in pulmonary hypertension."
authors:
- Tajsic T
- Morrell NW
journal: Compr Physiol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/cphy.c100026
keywords:
- Apoptosis/physiology
- Cell Movement/physiology
- Cell Proliferation
- Endothelial Cells/physiology
- Humans
- "Hypertension, Pulmonary/etiology, pathology"
- Hypertrophy/pathology
- Hypoxia/complications
- Inflammation/complications
- Intercellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins/physiology
- Ion Channels/physiology
- "Myocytes, Smooth Muscle/pathology"
- PPAR gamma/physiology
- Pulmonary Artery/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Smooth muscle cell hypertrophy, proliferation, migration and apoptosis in pulmonary hypertension.
**Authors:** Tajsic T, Morrell NW
**Journal:** Compr Physiol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/cphy.c100026](https://doi.org/10.1002/cphy.c100026)

## Content

1. Compr Physiol. 2011 Jan;1(1):295-317. doi: 10.1002/cphy.c100026.

Smooth muscle cell hypertrophy, proliferation, migration and apoptosis in 
pulmonary hypertension.

Tajsic T(1), Morrell NW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Pulmonary hypertension is a multifactorial disease characterized by sustained 
elevation of pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) and pulmonary arterial pressure 
(PAP). Central to the pathobiology of this disease is the process of vascular 
remodelling. This process involves structural and functional changes to the 
normal architecture of the walls of pulmonary arteries (PAs) that lead to 
increased muscularization of the muscular PAs, muscularization of the 
peripheral, previously nonmuscular, arteries of the respiratory acinus, 
formation of neointima, and formation of plexiform lesions. Underlying or 
contributing to the development of these lesions is hypertrophy, proliferation, 
migration, and resistance to apoptosis of medial cells and this article is 
concerned with the cellular and molecular mechanisms of these processes. In the 
first part of the article we focus on the concept of smooth muscle cell 
phenotype and the difficulties surrounding the identification and 
characterization of the cell/cells involved in the remodelling of the vessel 
media and we review the general mechanisms of cell hypertrophy, proliferation, 
migration and apoptosis. Then, in the larger part of the article, we review the 
factors identified thus far to be involved in PH intiation and/or progression 
and review and discuss their effects on pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells 
(PASMCs) the predominant cells in the tunica media of PAs.

© 2011 American Physiological Society.

DOI: 10.1002/cphy.c100026
PMID: 23737174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]