---
reference_id: "PMID:40153748"
title: Parasite load as a marker of pathogenicity in Dientamoeba fragilis infections.
authors:
- Burgaña Agoües A
- Abellana Sangra R
- Ballestero-Téllez M
- Rajadell-Guiu M
- Garreta-Esteban M
- Perez-Porcuna TM
- Dienta-Know Study Group
journal: Medicine (Baltimore)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000041963
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Parasite load as a marker of pathogenicity in Dientamoeba fragilis infections.
**Authors:** Burgaña Agoües A, Abellana Sangra R, Ballestero-Téllez M, Rajadell-Guiu M, Garreta-Esteban M, Perez-Porcuna TM, Dienta-Know Study Group
**Journal:** Medicine (Baltimore) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MD.0000000000041963](https://doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000041963)

## Content

1. Medicine (Baltimore). 2025 Mar 28;104(13):e41963. doi: 
10.1097/MD.0000000000041963.

Parasite load as a marker of pathogenicity in Dientamoeba fragilis infections.

Burgaña Agoües A(1), Abellana Sangra R(2), Ballestero-Téllez M(3), Rajadell-Guiu 
M(3), Garreta-Esteban M(3), Perez-Porcuna TM(1); Dienta-Know Study Group.

Collaborators: Abugatas A, Aguilar I, Alba C, Arroyo E, Artigas G, Barriendos N, 
Benasco E, Camps À, Carreras G, Casado O, Luca M, Dodino G, Galdámez A, Garavito 
C, García M, Ginné R, Hernández R, Joven B, Karaki M, Kazan R, Lorenzo B, Martí 
L, Martínez X, Martin-Urda S, Mate À, Mercado S, Molina F, Muñiz M, Ortiz J, 
Pérez M, Pérez J, Pozuelo M, Rivera L, Robert M, Rubio E, Sabarich S, Salvia X, 
Serrano N, Torrabadella A, Urraca S, Varderi O, Zurdo E.

Author information:
(1)Atenció Primària, Fundació Assitencial Mútua Terrassa, Terrassa. Spain. 
Fundació Docència i Recerca Mútua de Terrassa, Terrassa, Spain.
(2)Departament Fonaments Clínics, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Centre Analítiques Terrassa, Catlab AIE, Clinical Microbiology Department, 
Terrassa, Spain.

Dientamoeba fragilis is a globally widespread intestinal parasite and one of the 
most frequent in humans, often leading to primary care consultations. The 
pathogenic potential of this parasite remains unclear due to limited evidence 
and contradictory study results. This study investigated the pathogenicity of D 
fragilis, focusing on the critical knowledge gap regarding the relationship 
between parasite load and associated symptomatology. A prospective case-control 
study matched by household unit was conducted, considering individuals with 
gastrointestinal symptoms and D fragilis in stool as cases, and their 
asymptomatic household members with D fragilis in stools as controls. D fragilis 
detection was performed in parallel using light microscopy and real 
time-polymerase chain reaction. The study was carried out in 7 primary care 
centers over 12 months. Parasite load was measured as the number of trophozoites 
per field at a magnification of 40x by microscopy and by cycle threshold values 
in RT-PCR. A total of 218 individuals were recruited: 74 symptomatic cases and 
144 household members, of whom 57 (39.6%) were D fragilis-positive asymptomatic 
controls. The proportion of individuals with D fragilis and a parasite load less 
than 1 trophozoite per field was higher in asymptomatic individuals (controls) 
than in symptomatic cases (47.7% vs 3.1%, respectively) (P < .001). Parasite 
load is associated with the presence of gastrointestinal symptoms, supporting 
the pathogenicity of D fragilis. Any diagnostic approach for D fragilis should 
incorporate or be complemented by quantitative information to accurately 
estimate parasite load and enhance treatment decision-making.

Copyright © 2025 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MD.0000000000041963
PMCID: PMC11957650
PMID: 40153748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.