---
reference_id: "PMID:37981638"
title: "Prenatal Coffin-Siris Syndrome: Expanding the Phenotypic and Genotypic Spectrum of the Disease."
authors:
- Keskinen S
- Paakkola T
- Mattila M
- Hietala M
- Koillinen H
- Laine J
- Haanpää MK
journal: Pediatr Dev Pathol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1177/10935266231210155
keywords:
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Face/abnormalities, pathology"
- Phenotype
- "Hand Deformities, Congenital"
- Micrognathism
- Neck/abnormalities
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prenatal Coffin-Siris Syndrome: Expanding the Phenotypic and Genotypic Spectrum of the Disease.
**Authors:** Keskinen S, Paakkola T, Mattila M, Hietala M, Koillinen H, Laine J, Haanpää MK
**Journal:** Pediatr Dev Pathol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1177/10935266231210155](https://doi.org/10.1177/10935266231210155)

## Content

1. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2024 Mar-Apr;27(2):181-186. doi:
10.1177/10935266231210155.  Epub 2023 Nov 19.

Prenatal Coffin-Siris Syndrome: Expanding the Phenotypic and Genotypic Spectrum 
of the Disease.

Keskinen S(1), Paakkola T(1)(2), Mattila M(3), Hietala M(4), Koillinen H(4)(5), 
Laine J(6), Haanpää MK(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Tyks Laboratories, Genomics, Clinical Genetics, Turku University Hospital, 
Turku, Finland.
(2)Northern Finland Laboratory Centre NordLab and Oulu University Hospital, 
Oulu, Finland.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Turku University Hospital, Turku, 
Finland.
(4)Department of Clinical Genetics, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland.
(5)Institute of Biomedicine, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.
(6)Department of Pathology, Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland.

Coffin-Siris syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder with neurological, 
cardiovascular, and gastrointestinal symptoms. Patients with Coffin-Siris 
syndrome typically have variable degree of developmental delay or intellectual 
disability, muscular hypotonia, dysmorphic facial features, sparse scalp hair, 
but otherwise hirsutism and fifth digit nail or distal phalanx hypoplasia or 
aplasia. Coffin-Siris syndrome is caused by pathogenic variants in 12 different 
genes including SMARCB1 and ARID1A. Pathogenic SMARCB1 gene variants cause 
Coffin-Siris syndrome 3 whereas pathogenic ARID1A gene variants cause 
Coffin-Siris syndrome 2. Here, we present two prenatal Coffin-Siris syndrome 
cases with autosomal dominant pathogenic variants: SMARCB1 gene c.1066_1067del, 
p.(Leu356AspfsTer4) variant, and a novel ARID1A gene c.1920+3_1920+6del variant. 
The prenatal phenotype in Coffin-Siris syndrome has been rarely described. This 
article widens the phenotypic spectrum of prenatal Coffin-Siris syndrome with 
severely hypoplastic right ventricle with VSD and truncus arteriosus type III, 
persisting left superior and inferior caval vein, bilateral olfactory nerve 
aplasia, and hypoplastic thymus. A detailed clinical description of the patients 
with ultrasound, MRI, and post mortem pictures of the affected fetuses showing 
the wide phenotypic spectrum of the disease is presented.

DOI: 10.1177/10935266231210155
PMCID: PMC11015708
PMID: 37981638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting InterestsThe authors 
declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, 
authorship, and/or publication of this article.