---
reference_id: "PMID:11154276"
title: Akt phosphorylates and negatively regulates apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1.
authors:
- Kim AH
- Khursigara G
- Sun X
- Franke TF
- Chao MV
journal: Mol Cell Biol
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1128/MCB.21.3.893-901.2001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Akt phosphorylates and negatively regulates apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 1.
**Authors:** Kim AH, Khursigara G, Sun X, Franke TF, Chao MV
**Journal:** Mol Cell Biol (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1128/MCB.21.3.893-901.2001](https://doi.org/10.1128/MCB.21.3.893-901.2001)

## Content

1. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Feb;21(3):893-901. doi: 10.1128/MCB.21.3.893-901.2001.

Akt phosphorylates and negatively regulates apoptosis signal-regulating kinase 
1.

Kim AH(1), Khursigara G, Sun X, Franke TF, Chao MV.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Program, Skirball Institute for Biomolecular Medicine, 
New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016, USA.

The Akt family of serine/threonine-directed kinases promotes cellular survival 
in part by phosphorylating and inhibiting death-inducing proteins. Here we 
describe a novel functional interaction between Akt and apoptosis 
signal-regulating kinase 1 (ASK1), a mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 
kinase. Akt decreased ASK1 kinase activity stimulated by both oxidative stress 
and overexpression in 293 cells by phosphorylating a consensus Akt site at 
serine 83 of ASK1. Activation of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3-K)/Akt 
pathway also inhibited the serum deprivation-induced activity of endogenous ASK1 
in L929 cells. An association between Akt and ASK1 was detected in cells by 
coimmunoprecipitation. Phosphorylation by Akt inhibited ASK1-mediated c-Jun 
N-terminal kinase and activating transcription factor 2 activities in intact 
cells. Finally, activation of the PI3-K/Akt pathway reduced apoptosis induced by 
ASK1 in a manner dependent on phosphorylation of serine 83 of ASK1. These 
results provide the first direct link between Akt and the family of 
stress-activated kinases.

DOI: 10.1128/MCB.21.3.893-901.2001
PMCID: PMC86680
PMID: 11154276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]