---
reference_id: "PMID:29091570"
title: Nusinersen versus Sham Control in Infantile-Onset Spinal Muscular Atrophy.
authors:
- Finkel RS
- Mercuri E
- Darras BT
- Connolly AM
- Kuntz NL
- Kirschner J
- Chiriboga CA
- Saito K
- Servais L
- Tizzano E
- Topaloglu H
- Tulinius M
- Montes J
- Glanzman AM
- Bishop K
- Zhong ZJ
- Gheuens S
- Bennett CF
- Schneider E
- Farwell W
- De Vivo DC
- ENDEAR Study Group
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1702752
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nusinersen versus Sham Control in Infantile-Onset Spinal Muscular Atrophy.
**Authors:** Finkel RS, Mercuri E, Darras BT, Connolly AM, Kuntz NL, Kirschner J, Chiriboga CA, Saito K, Servais L, Tizzano E, Topaloglu H, Tulinius M, Montes J, Glanzman AM, Bishop K, Zhong ZJ, Gheuens S, Bennett CF, Schneider E, Farwell W, De Vivo DC, ENDEAR Study Group
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1702752](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1702752)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2017 Nov 2;377(18):1723-1732. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1702752.

Nusinersen versus Sham Control in Infantile-Onset Spinal Muscular Atrophy.

Finkel RS(1), Mercuri E(1), Darras BT(1), Connolly AM(1), Kuntz NL(1), Kirschner 
J(1), Chiriboga CA(1), Saito K(1), Servais L(1), Tizzano E(1), Topaloglu H(1), 
Tulinius M(1), Montes J(1), Glanzman AM(1), Bishop K(1), Zhong ZJ(1), Gheuens 
S(1), Bennett CF(1), Schneider E(1), Farwell W(1), De Vivo DC(1); ENDEAR Study 
Group.

Collaborators: Bradley WG, Schroth MK, Bodensteriner JB, Davis CS, Shell R, Hen 
J, Austin ED, Aziz-Zaman S, Cappell J, Constantinescu A, Cruz R, Dastgir J, 
Dunaway S, Engelstad K, Gormley M, Holuba La Marca N, Khandji A, Kramer S, Marra 
J, Ortiz-Miller C, Popolizio M, Salazar R, Sanabria L, Weimer L, Anand P, 
Gadeken R, Golumbek PT, Siener C, Zaidman CM, Al-Ghamdi F, Berde C, Ghosh P, 
Graham R, Harrington T, Koka A, Laine R, Liew W, Mirek E, Ordonez G, Pasternak 
A, Quigley J, Sethna N, Souris M, Szelag H, Wand L, Day JW, D'Souza G, Duong TT, 
Gee R, Kitsuwa-Lowe J, McFall D, Patnaik S, Paulose S, Perez J, Proud C, Purse 
B, Ramamurthi RJ, Sakamuri S, Sampson J, Sanjanwala B, Tesi Rocha AC, Watson K, 
Welsh L, Pena LDM, Case L, Coates J, DeArmey S, Homi MM, Milleson C, Nelson N, 
Ross A, Smith E, Taicher B, Wootton J, Finanger E, Benjamin D, Frank A, Roberts 
C, Russman B, Zilke K, Berry D, Civitello M, Cook D, Endsley JD, Johnson C, 
Kasper M, Leon W, Lim A, O'Reardon K, Sigurdardottir LY, Turner J, Weber-Guzman 
F, Zinn M, Iannaccone ST, Castro D, Cowie M, Farrow-Gillespie A, Herbert A, Kauk 
M, McElroy D, Miller N, Nelson L, Smith L, Spain T Jr, Trest S, Johnson N, 
Butterfield R, DiBella D, Mayne K, Newcomb TM, Rausch N, Blomgren C, Choi HW, 
Epstein L, Goldman S, Krosschell K, Krueger J, Kurz J, Rao V, Parsons J, Allen 
V, Bielsky A, Booker K, Camuto A, Carry T, Fuhr P, Gibbons M, Janas J, Johnson 
H, Kelly C, Lord-Halvorson LS, Nicolarsen S, Shea S, Tran V, VanderVeen G, Yang 
M, Zimmerman C, Shieh P, Parziale N, Rao L, Said JW, Shu F, Skura C, Staudt L, 
Tennekoon G, Adang L, Brandsema J, Chadehumbe M, Flickinger J, Kichula E, 
Stanford D, Toms M, Zigmont J, Oskoui M, Arpin S, Dinunzio P, Ingelmo PM, Poulin 
C, Rivera G, Sabapathy C, Srour M, Turgeon-Desilet S, Zielinski D, Selby K, King 
C, Lee J, Michoulas A, Roland E, Vajsar J, Chau V, Dowling J, Haldenby R, Miki 
M, So S, Pascual Pascual SI, Martinez Bermejo A, Epinosa Garcia S, Garcia Guixot 
S, Martinez Moreno MM, del Pilar Tirado Requero M, del Mar Garcia Romero M, 
Aguilar C, Munell Casadesus F, Gomez Garcia de la Banda MB, Gallardo M, Gili G, 
Alavarez Molinero M, de Los Angeles Tormos Munoz M, Palacios NJ, Planas Pascual 
B, del Mar Melendez Plumed M, Rucian AF, Toro Tamargo E, Gratacos Vinola M, 
Borell S, Eckenweiler M, Krüger M, Pechmann A, Rippberger B, Stein S, Vogt S, 
Wider S, Schara U, Andres B, Della Marina A, Ganfuss A, Jachertz P, Koelbel H, 
Rupprich K, Schroers ES, Sponemann N, Bruno C, Fiorillo C, Garaventa A, Lanteri 
P, Lanzillotta V, Manzitti C, Pedermonte M, Tacchetti P, Trucco F, Zuffi A, De 
Sanctis R, Fanelli L, Luigetti M, Palermo C, Pane M, Piastra M, Sivo S, Gargaun 
E, Gidaro T, Gilabert S, Léger PL, Le Moing AG, Lilien C, Mayer M, Ollievier Q, 
Rambaud J, Taytard J, Vialle R, Voit T, Muntoni F, D'Argenzio L, Lister PH, 
Manzur A, Pisco Domingos J, Ramsey D, Ricotti V, Schottlaender L, Scoto M, 
Scuplak SM, Selby V, Straub V, Baily S, Bertoli M, Mayhew AG, Lofra RM, Murphy 
A, Wood C, Darin N, Eldblom J, Kimber E, Kroksmark AK, Lindstedt A, Michael E, 
Sofou K, Deconinck N, Christiaens A, Coppens S, DeCock K, De Vos voor E, Dorban 
F, Gilbert G, Rooze S, Tahon V, Van Coster R, Van Der Looven R, Vanlander A, 
Vens D, Verhelst H, Wenderickx B, Wittevrongel S, Farrar M, Berthon-Jones N, 
Doumit MA, Herbert KJ, Kandula T, Morrison M, O’Brien J, Richardson S, Ferreira 
Sampaio HA, Teoh HL, Ryan M, Carroll KM, De Valle KL, Villano D, Woodcock I, Yiu 
EM, Ardicli D, Gunbey C, Haliloglu VG, Karaduman AA, Konuskan B, Yildiz Sarikaya 
FG, Serdaroglu E, Tanyildiz M, Temucin CM, Yildirim M, Yilmaz OT, Arakawa R, 
Chiba Y, Eto K, Hirasawa K, Ikai T, Ito S, Ito Y, Kaburagi Y, Kaneko H, 
Matsumaru S, Matsushima N, Mizuochi K, Nagata S, Nakatsukasa H, Nishikawa A, 
Otani Y, Sato T, Shichiji M, Sugimoto K, Takeshita A, Yanagishita T, Yamauchi A, 
Takeshima Y, Fujino T, Fukuda N, Lee T, Oriyama K, Shibano T, Shimomura H, 
Tachikawa T, Tanaka Y, Taniguchi N, Chae JH, Choi SA, Chun SM, Jo H, Kim H, Kim 
SY, Lee JS, Lim BC, Shin HI, Son WS, Chan S, Chung AC, Yan CS, Stella C, Joseph 
CKW, Ng CS, Alvin HCC, Janice IJK, Wendy LWM, Chui-San MN, Ki NY, Shun TN, 
Connie WY, Virginia WC, Yvonne Y, Jong YJ, Chen TH, Chou PC, Chou YH, Chung HW, 
Hsu JH, Ju YH, Liang WC, Shih HH, Wang HY, Wu YC, Zeng YS.

Author information:
(1)From the Division of Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, Nemours Children's 
Hospital, Orlando, FL (R.S.F.); the Department of Pediatric Neurology, Catholic 
University, Rome (E.M.); the Department of Neurology, Boston Children's 
Hospital, Boston (B.T.D.), and Biogen, Cambridge (Z.J.Z., S.G., W.F.) - both in 
Massachusetts; the Department of Neurology, St. Louis Children's Hospital, St. 
Louis (A.M.C.); the Department of Pediatrics, Ann and Robert H. Lurie Children's 
Hospital, Chicago (N.L.K.); the Department of Neuropediatrics and Muscle 
Disorders, Medical Center-University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, Freiburg, 
Germany (J.K.); the Departments of Neurology (C.A.C., J.M.) and Rehabilitation 
and Regenerative Medicine (J.M.), Columbia University, and the Departments of 
Neurology and Pediatrics, Columbia University Medical Center (D.C.D.V.), New 
York; the Institute of Medical Genetics and Department of Pediatrics, Tokyo 
Women's Medical University, Tokyo (K.S.); the Institute of Motion, Paris (L.S.); 
the Department of Clinical and Molecular Genetics and Rare Diseases Unit, 
Hospital Vall d'Hebron, and Centro de Investigacíon Biomédica en Red 
Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona (E.T.); the Department of Pediatrics, 
Hacettepe University School of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey (H.T.); the Department 
of Pediatrics, Gothenburg University, Queen Silvia Children's Hospital, 
Gothenburg, Sweden (M.T.); the Department of Physical Therapy, Children's 
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia (A.M.G.); and Ionis Pharmaceuticals, 
Carlsbad, CA (K.B., C.F.B., E.S.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2017 Nov 2;377(18):1786-1787. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1712106.
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2018 Jan;14(1):1. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2017.163.
    Lancet Neurol. 2018 Feb;17(2):111-112. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(17)30436-2.
    N Engl J Med. 2018 Feb 01;378(5):487. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1715769.
    Ir Med J. 2018 Mar 14;111(3):705.

BACKGROUND: Spinal muscular atrophy is an autosomal recessive neuromuscular 
disorder that is caused by an insufficient level of survival motor neuron (SMN) 
protein. Nusinersen is an antisense oligonucleotide drug that modifies 
pre-messenger RNA splicing of the SMN2 gene and thus promotes increased 
production of full-length SMN protein.
METHODS: We conducted a randomized, double-blind, sham-controlled, phase 3 
efficacy and safety trial of nusinersen in infants with spinal muscular atrophy. 
The primary end points were a motor-milestone response (defined according to 
results on the Hammersmith Infant Neurological Examination) and event-free 
survival (time to death or the use of permanent assisted ventilation). Secondary 
end points included overall survival and subgroup analyses of event-free 
survival according to disease duration at screening. Only the first primary end 
point was tested in a prespecified interim analysis. To control the overall type 
I error rate at 0.05, a hierarchical testing strategy was used for the second 
primary end point and the secondary end points in the final analysis.
RESULTS: In the interim analysis, a significantly higher percentage of infants 
in the nusinersen group than in the control group had a motor-milestone response 
(21 of 51 infants [41%] vs. 0 of 27 [0%], P<0.001), and this result prompted 
early termination of the trial. In the final analysis, a significantly higher 
percentage of infants in the nusinersen group than in the control group had a 
motor-milestone response (37 of 73 infants [51%] vs. 0 of 37 [0%]), and the 
likelihood of event-free survival was higher in the nusinersen group than in the 
control group (hazard ratio for death or the use of permanent assisted 
ventilation, 0.53; P=0.005). The likelihood of overall survival was higher in 
the nusinersen group than in the control group (hazard ratio for death, 0.37; 
P=0.004), and infants with a shorter disease duration at screening were more 
likely than those with a longer disease duration to benefit from nusinersen. The 
incidence and severity of adverse events were similar in the two groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Among infants with spinal muscular atrophy, those who received 
nusinersen were more likely to be alive and have improvements in motor function 
than those in the control group. Early treatment may be necessary to maximize 
the benefit of the drug. (Funded by Biogen and Ionis Pharmaceuticals; ENDEAR 
ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT02193074 .).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1702752
PMID: 29091570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]