---
reference_id: "PMID:22587682"
title: "A mutation in KIF7 is responsible for the autosomal recessive syndrome of macrocephaly, multiple epiphyseal dysplasia and distinctive facial appearance."
authors:
- Ali BR
- Silhavy JL
- Akawi NA
- Gleeson JG
- Al-Gazali L
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-27
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/genetics"
- Consanguinity
- Facies
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- Kinesins/genetics
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Megalencephaly/genetics
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics
- Phenotype
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A mutation in KIF7 is responsible for the autosomal recessive syndrome of macrocephaly, multiple epiphyseal dysplasia and distinctive facial appearance.
**Authors:** Ali BR, Silhavy JL, Akawi NA, Gleeson JG, Al-Gazali L
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-7-27](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-7-27)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2012 May 15;7:27. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-27.

A mutation in KIF7 is responsible for the autosomal recessive syndrome of 
macrocephaly, multiple epiphyseal dysplasia and distinctive facial appearance.

Ali BR(1), Silhavy JL, Akawi NA, Gleeson JG, Al-Gazali L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, United Arab 
Emirates University, P,O, Box 17666, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates.

BACKGROUND: We previously reported the existence of a unique autosomal recessive 
syndrome consisting of macrocephaly, multiple epiphyseal dysplasia and 
distinctive facial appearance mapping to chromosome 15q26.
METHODS: In this manuscript, we have used whole exome sequencing on two affected 
members of a consanguineous family with this condition and carried out detailed 
bioinformatics analysis to elucidate the causative mutation.
RESULTS: Our analysis resulted in the identification of a homozygous p.N1060S 
missense mutation in a highly conserved residue in KIF7, a regulator of Hedgehog 
signaling that has been recently found to be causing Joubert syndrome, fetal 
hydrolethalus and acrocallosal syndromes. The phenotype in our patients 
partially overlaps with the phenotypes associated with those syndromes but they 
also exhibit some distinctive features including multiple epiphyseal dysplasia.
CONCLUSIONS: We report the first missense homozygous disease-causing mutation in 
KIF7 and expand the clinical spectrum associated with mutations in this gene to 
include multiple epiphyseal dysplasia. The missense nature of the mutation might 
account for the unique presentation in our patients.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-7-27
PMCID: PMC3492204
PMID: 22587682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]