---
reference_id: "PMID:37469057"
title: Ocular Complications Associated With Diabetes And The Risk Of Sustainable Blindness; A Real World Analysis.
authors:
- Mahmood T
- Fahim MF
- Ahsan S
- Qidwai U
- Memon MS
journal: J Pak Med Assoc
year: '2023'
doi: 10.47391/JPMA.8001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ocular Complications Associated With Diabetes And The Risk Of Sustainable Blindness; A Real World Analysis.
**Authors:** Mahmood T, Fahim MF, Ahsan S, Qidwai U, Memon MS
**Journal:** J Pak Med Assoc (2023)
**DOI:** [10.47391/JPMA.8001](https://doi.org/10.47391/JPMA.8001)

## Content

1. J Pak Med Assoc. 2023 Jul;73(7):1453-1456. doi: 10.47391/JPMA.8001.

Ocular Complications Associated With Diabetes And The Risk Of Sustainable 
Blindness; A Real World Analysis.

Mahmood T(1), Fahim MF(2), Ahsan S(3), Qidwai U(1), Memon MS(1).

Author information:
(1)Al Ibrahim Eye Hospital, Isra Postgraduate Institute of Ophthalmology, 
Karachi, Pakistan.
(2)Bahria University Medical and Dental College, Karachi, Pakistan.
(3)Jinnah Medical and Dental College, Karachi, Pakistan.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the frequencies of ocular comorbidities among patients 
with type II diabetes, and the association with multiple systemic factors.
METHODS: The retrospective, cross-sectional study was conducted at the Al 
Ibrahim Eye Hospital, Karachi, and comprised diabetic eye clinic data from April 
2014 to February 2022. Demographic, biochemical and ophthalmic findings of the 
patients were recorded. Ocular findings analysed were best-corrected visual 
acuity, lens status, corneal changes, optic disc assessment, intraocular 
pressure and signs of retinopathy and its grading. Data was analysed using SPSS 
22.
RESULTS: Of the 43,723 subjects, 22,677(51.86%) were males and 21,046(48.13%). 
The overall mean age was 54.14±10.68 years. There were 21,680(49.58%) patients 
with diabetes duration 5-10 years. Overall, 33,876(77.5%), had some ocular 
morbidity, while 9,847(22.5%) had no such complaints. The commonest morbidity 
was cataract12,607(28.8%), followed by refractive errors 8,508(19.5%), 
vision-threatening diabetic retinopathy 2,553(5.83%) and suspected glaucoma 
1,211(2.76%). Vision 28 threatening diabetic retinopathy and suspected glaucoma 
represented sustained blindness risk 3,764(8.6%). Increasing levels of 
low-density lipoprotein were significantly associated with advanced diabetic eye 
disease and clinically significant macular oedema (p<0.05), while glycated 
haemoglobin >6.4 was associated significantly with diabetic retinopathy and 
suspected glaucoma (p<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Diabetes caused some or the other ocular morbidity that needed 
intervention. Poor control of biochemical parameters was seen to increase 
frequency of ocular complications.

DOI: 10.47391/JPMA.8001
PMID: 37469057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]