---
reference_id: "PMID:11040002"
title: "Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: the interrelation of disarray, fibrosis, and small vessel disease."
authors:
- Varnava AM
- Elliott PM
- Sharma S
- McKenna WJ
- Davies MJ
journal: Heart
year: '2000'
doi: 10.1136/heart.84.5.476
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: the interrelation of disarray, fibrosis, and small vessel disease.
**Authors:** Varnava AM, Elliott PM, Sharma S, McKenna WJ, Davies MJ
**Journal:** Heart (2000)
**DOI:** [10.1136/heart.84.5.476](https://doi.org/10.1136/heart.84.5.476)

## Content

1. Heart. 2000 Nov;84(5):476-82. doi: 10.1136/heart.84.5.476.

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: the interrelation of disarray, fibrosis, and small 
vessel disease.

Varnava AM(1), Elliott PM, Sharma S, McKenna WJ, Davies MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Pathology, St George's Hospital Medical School, 
Cranmer Terrace, London SW17 0RE, UK. avarnava@sghms.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: To make a quantitative assessment of the relation between disarray, 
fibrosis, and small vessel disease in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
DESIGN: Detailed macroscopic and histological examination at 19 segments of the 
left and right ventricle and the left atrial free wall.
PATIENTS: 72 patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy who had suffered sudden 
death or progression to end stage cardiac failure (resulting in death or heart 
transplantation).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The presence of scarring, atrial dilatation, and a mitral 
valve impact lesion were noted, and heart weight, wall thickness, per cent 
disarray, per cent fibrosis, and per cent small vessel disease quantitated for 
each heart.
RESULTS: Within an individual heart the magnitude of hypertrophy correlated with 
the severity of fibrosis (p = 0.006) and disarray (p = 0.0002). Overall, 
however, total heart weight related weakly but significantly to fibrosis (r = 
0.4, p = 0.0001) and small vessel disease (r = 0.3, p = 0.03), but not to 
disarray. Disarray was greater in hearts with mild left ventricular hypertrophy 
(maximum wall thickness < 20 mm) and preserved systolic function (60.9 (26)% v 
43 (20.4)% respectively, p = 0.02) and hearts without a mitral valve impact 
lesion (26.3% v 18.9%, p = 0.04), but was uninfluenced by sex. Fibrosis was 
influenced by sex (7% in male patients and 4% in female, p = 0.04), but not by 
the presence of an impact lesion. No relation was found between disarray, 
fibrosis, and small vessel disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Myocyte disarray is probably a direct response to functional or 
structural abnormalities of the mutated sarcomeric protein, while fibrosis and 
small vessel disease are secondary phenomena unrelated to disarray, but modified 
by factors such as left ventricular mass, sex, and perhaps local autocrine 
factors.

DOI: 10.1136/heart.84.5.476
PMCID: PMC1729476
PMID: 11040002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]