---
reference_id: "PMID:31103816"
title: "A humanized mouse model, demonstrating progressive hearing loss caused by MYO6 p.C442Y, is inherited in a semi-dominant pattern."
authors:
- Wang J
- Shen J
- Guo L
- Cheng C
- Chai R
- Shu Y
- Li H
journal: Hear Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2019.04.014
keywords:
- Age Factors
- Animals
- Auditory Threshold/physiology
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Gene Knock-In Techniques
- "Genes, Dominant"
- "Hair Cells, Auditory/pathology"
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/genetics, pathology, physiopathology"
- Heterozygote
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- "Mice, Inbred CBA"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Microscopy, Electron, Scanning"
- "Mutant Proteins/genetics, physiology"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- "Myosin Heavy Chains/genetics, physiology"
- Stereocilia/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A humanized mouse model, demonstrating progressive hearing loss caused by MYO6 p.C442Y, is inherited in a semi-dominant pattern.
**Authors:** Wang J, Shen J, Guo L, Cheng C, Chai R, Shu Y, Li H
**Journal:** Hear Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.heares.2019.04.014](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heares.2019.04.014)

## Content

1. Hear Res. 2019 Aug;379:79-88. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2019.04.014. Epub 2019 Apr
 26.

A humanized mouse model, demonstrating progressive hearing loss caused by MYO6
p.C442Y, is inherited in a semi-dominant pattern.

Wang J(1), Shen J(2), Guo L(1), Cheng C(3), Chai R(4), Shu Y(5), Li H(6).

Author information:
(1)ENT Institute and Otorhinolaryngology Department, Affiliated Eye and ENT
Hospital, State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, Fudan University,
Shanghai, 200031, China; NHC Key Laboratory of Hearing Medicine (Fudan
University), Shanghai, 200031, China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
(3)Key Laboratory for Developmental Genes and Human Disease, Ministry of
Education, Institute of Life Sciences, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210096,
China; Jiangsu Province High-Tech Key Laboratory for Bio-Medical Research,
Southeast University, Nanjing, 210096, China.
(4)Key Laboratory for Developmental Genes and Human Disease, Ministry of
Education, Institute of Life Sciences, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210096,
China; Jiangsu Province High-Tech Key Laboratory for Bio-Medical Research,
Southeast University, Nanjing, 210096, China; Co-innovation Center of
Neuroregeneration, Nantong University, Nantong, 226001, China.
(5)ENT Institute and Otorhinolaryngology Department, Affiliated Eye and ENT
Hospital, State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, Fudan University,
Shanghai, 200031, China; NHC Key Laboratory of Hearing Medicine (Fudan
University), Shanghai, 200031, China. Electronic address:
yilai_shu@fudan.edu.cn.
(6)ENT Institute and Otorhinolaryngology Department, Affiliated Eye and ENT
Hospital, State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, Fudan University,
Shanghai, 200031, China; NHC Key Laboratory of Hearing Medicine (Fudan
University), Shanghai, 200031, China; Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan
University, Shanghai, 200032, China; The Institutes of Brain Science and the
Collaborative Innovation Center for Brain Science, Fudan University, Shanghai,
200032, China; Shanghai Engineering Research Centre of Cochlear Implant,
Shanghai, 200031, China. Electronic address: hwli@shmu.edu.cn.

Myosin VI is an actin-associated molecular motor vital for auditory and
vestibular function. It is encoded by MYO6 located on chromosome 6q13 in human.
Pathogenic variants in MYO6 have been associated with both dominant and
recessive forms of hearing loss. However, the molecular mechanisms remain
unclear. We established a humanized knock-in mouse model, Myo6-C442Y, to mimic
the p.C442Y missense variant identified in human patients with autosomal
dominant nonsyndromic hearing loss designated as DFNA22. We characterized
hearing and inner ear morphologies of Myo6-C442Y and wild-type control mice. We
found that both homozygous and heterozygous Myo6-C442Y mice exhibited hearing
loss from three weeks after birth that rapidly progressed to profound deafness
by six to nine weeks of age. The hearing loss corresponded to the degeneration
of hair cells in the organ of Corti. We also observed disorganized stereocilia
with irregular morphological features by immunohistochemistry and scanning
electron microscopy. Additionally, hearing loss and inner-ear morphological
anomalies were more pronounced and deteriorated more drastically in homozygous
than in heterozygous Myo6-C442Y mice, indicating a semi-dominant inheritance
pattern. Heterozygous Myo6-C442Y mice recapitulated the progressive postlingual
sensorineural deafness in human, thus providing a useful model for elucidating
the role myosin VI plays in the mammalian auditory system. Furthermore, the
late-onset hearing loss of this mouse model may provide a therapeutic window for
the emerging gene therapy, a promising strategy to treat certain forms of
genetic deafness.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.heares.2019.04.014
PMID: 31103816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
