---
reference_id: "PMID:26454315"
title: Immunoglobulin Replacement Therapy for Primary Immunodeficiency.
authors:
- Sriaroon P
- Ballow M
journal: Immunol Allergy Clin North Am
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.iac.2015.07.006
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunoglobulin Replacement Therapy for Primary Immunodeficiency.
**Authors:** Sriaroon P, Ballow M
**Journal:** Immunol Allergy Clin North Am (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.iac.2015.07.006](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iac.2015.07.006)

## Content

1. Immunol Allergy Clin North Am. 2015 Nov;35(4):713-30. doi: 
10.1016/j.iac.2015.07.006. Epub 2015 Sep 4.

Immunoglobulin Replacement Therapy for Primary Immunodeficiency.

Sriaroon P(1), Ballow M(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
South Florida, 140 7th Avenue South, CRI 4008, Saint Petersburg, FL 33701, USA. 
Electronic address: psriaroo@health.usf.edu.
(2)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Department of Pediatrics, University of 
South Florida, 140 7th Avenue South, CRI 4008, Saint Petersburg, FL 33701, USA.

Immunoglobulin replacement therapy has been standard treatment in patients with 
primary immunodeficiency diseases for the past 3 decades. The goal of therapy is 
to reduce serious bacterial infections in individuals with antibody function 
defects. Approximately one-third of patients receiving intravenous 
immunoglobulin treatment experience adverse reactions. Recent advances in 
manufacturing processes have resulted in products that are safer and better 
tolerated. Self-infusion by the subcutaneous route has become popular and 
resulted in better quality of life. This review summarizes the use of 
immunoglobulin therapy in primary immunodeficiency diseases including its 
properties, dosing, adverse effects, and different routes of administration.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.iac.2015.07.006
PMID: 26454315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]