---
reference_id: "PMID:16525032"
title: A mutation in the hair matrix and cuticle keratin KRTHB5 gene causes ectodermal dysplasia of hair and nail type.
authors:
- Naeem M
- Wajid M
- Lee K
- Leal SM
- Ahmad W
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2005.033381
keywords:
- Arginine
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 16"
- Conserved Sequence
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/classification, genetics"
- Hair Diseases/genetics
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Keratins/genetics
- "Keratins, Hair-Specific"
- "Keratins, Type II"
- Microsatellite Repeats
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Nail Diseases/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A mutation in the hair matrix and cuticle keratin KRTHB5 gene causes ectodermal dysplasia of hair and nail type.
**Authors:** Naeem M, Wajid M, Lee K, Leal SM, Ahmad W
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2005.033381](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2005.033381)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2006 Mar;43(3):274-9. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2005.033381.

A mutation in the hair matrix and cuticle keratin KRTHB5 gene causes ectodermal 
dysplasia of hair and nail type.

Naeem M, Wajid M, Lee K, Leal SM, Ahmad W.

BACKGROUND: Ectodermal dysplasias are developmental disorders affecting tissues 
of ectodermal origin. To date, four different types of ectodermal dysplasia 
involving only hair and nails have been described. In an effort to understand 
the molecular bases of this form of ectodermal dysplasia, large Pakistani 
consanguineous kindred with multiple affected individuals has been ascertained 
from a remote region in Pakistan.
OBJECTIVE: To identify the gene underlying the phenotype.
METHODS: Microsatellite markers were genotyped in candidate regions and two 
point and multipoint parametric linkage analysis carried out.
RESULTS: The disease locus was mapped to a 16.6 centimorgan region on chromosome 
12q12-q14.1 (Zmax = 8.2), which harbours six type II hair keratin genes. DNA 
sequence analysis revealed a homozygous missense mutation in the hair matrix and 
cuticle keratin KRTHB5, leading to histidine substitution of a conserved 
arginine residue (R78H) located in the head domain.
CONCLUSIONS: This report provides the first direct evidence relating to the 
molecular pathogenesis of pure hair-nail ectodermal dysplasias.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2005.033381
PMCID: PMC2563238
PMID: 16525032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: none declared