---
reference_id: "PMID:23370522"
title: "[Molecular pathogenesis and therapeutic approach of GM2 gangliosidosis]."
authors:
- Tsuji D
journal: Yakugaku Zasshi
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1248/yakushi.12-00199
keywords:
- Animals
- Astrocytes/pathology
- Brain/metabolism
- Chemokines/metabolism
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Enzyme Replacement Therapy
- "Gangliosidoses, GM2/genetics, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- Humans
- Microglia/pathology
- Molecular Targeted Therapy
- Mutation
- "Receptor, IGF Type 2"
- "Recombinant Proteins/administration & dosage"
- "Sandhoff Disease/genetics, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- "Tay-Sachs Disease/genetics, metabolism, pathology, therapy"
- "beta-Hexosaminidase alpha Chain/administration & dosage, genetics"
- beta-Hexosaminidase beta Chain/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Molecular pathogenesis and therapeutic approach of GM2 gangliosidosis].
**Authors:** Tsuji D
**Journal:** Yakugaku Zasshi (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1248/yakushi.12-00199](https://doi.org/10.1248/yakushi.12-00199)

## Content

1. Yakugaku Zasshi. 2013;133(2):269-74. doi: 10.1248/yakushi.12-00199.

[Molecular pathogenesis and therapeutic approach of GM2 gangliosidosis].

[Article in Japanese]

Tsuji D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Biotechnology, Institute of Medicinal Resources,
Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The University of Tokushima,
Tokushima, Japan. dtsuji@ph.tokushima-u.ac.jp

Tay-Sachs and Sandhoff diseases (GM2 gangliosidoses) are autosomal recessive
lysosomal storage diseases caused by gene mutations in HEXA and HEXB, each
encoding human lysosomal β-hexosaminidase α-subunits and β-subunits,
respectively. In Tay-Sachs disease, excessive accumulation of GM2 ganglioside
(GM2), mainly in the central nervous system, is caused by a deficiency of the
HexA isozyme (αβ heterodimer), resulting in progressive neurologic disorders. In
Sandhoff disease, combined deficiencies of HexA and HexB (ββ homodimer) cause
not only the accumulation of GM2 but also of oligosaccharides carrying terminal
N-acetylhexosamine residues (GlcNAc-oligosaccharides), resulting in systemic
manifestations including hepatosplenomegaly as well as neurologic symptoms.
Hence there is little clinically effective treatment for these GM2
gangliosidoses. Recent studies on the molecular pathogenesis in Sandhoff disease
patients and disease model mice have shown the involvement of microglial
activation and chemokine induction in neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration in
this disease. Experimental and therapeutic approaches, including recombinant
enzyme replacement, have been performed using Sandhoff disease model mice,
suggesting the future application of novel techniques to treat GM2
gangliosidoses (Hex deficiencies), including Sandhoff disease as well as
Tay-Sachs disease. In this study, we isolated astrocytes and microglia from the
neonatal brain of Sandhoff disease model mice and demonstrated abnormalities of
glial cells. Moreover, we demonstrated the therapeutic effect of an
intracerebroventricular administration of novel recombinant human HexA carrying
a high content of M6P residue in Sandhoff disease model mice.

DOI: 10.1248/yakushi.12-00199
PMID: 23370522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
