---
reference_id: "PMID:21768377"
title: "G protein-coupled receptor 56 and collagen III, a receptor-ligand pair, regulates cortical development and lamination."
authors:
- Luo R
- Jeong SJ
- Jin Z
- Strokes N
- Li S
- Piao X
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1104821108
keywords:
- Animals
- "Basement Membrane/embryology, metabolism, ultrastructure"
- "Brain/embryology, metabolism"
- Cell Movement/drug effects
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Cerebral Cortex/embryology, metabolism"
- "Cobblestone Lissencephaly/genetics, metabolism"
- "Collagen Type III/genetics, metabolism"
- "GTP-Binding Protein alpha Subunits, G12-G13/metabolism"
- Humans
- Immunoblotting
- Immunohistochemistry
- Immunoprecipitation
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Microscopy, Immunoelectron"
- NIH 3T3 Cells
- "Neurons/cytology, drug effects, metabolism"
- Protein Binding
- "Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled/genetics, metabolism"
- Recombinant Proteins/pharmacology
- "rhoA GTP-Binding Protein/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# G protein-coupled receptor 56 and collagen III, a receptor-ligand pair, regulates cortical development and lamination.
**Authors:** Luo R, Jeong SJ, Jin Z, Strokes N, Li S, Piao X
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1104821108](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1104821108)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Aug 2;108(31):12925-30. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1104821108. Epub 2011 Jul 18.

G protein-coupled receptor 56 and collagen III, a receptor-ligand pair,
regulates cortical development and lamination.

Luo R(1), Jeong SJ, Jin Z, Strokes N, Li S, Piao X.

Author information:
(1)Division of Newborn Medicine, Department of Medicine, Children's Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

GPR56, an orphan G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) from the family of adhesion
GPCRs, plays an indispensable role in cortical development and lamination.
Mutations in the GPR56 gene cause a malformed cerebral cortex in both humans and
mice that resembles cobblestone lissencephaly, which is characterized by
overmigration of neurons beyond the pial basement membrane. However, the
molecular mechanisms through which GPR56 regulates cortical development remain
elusive due to the unknown status of its ligand. Here we identify collagen, type
III, alpha-1 (gene symbol Col3a1) as the ligand of GPR56 through an in vitro
biotinylation/proteomics approach. Further studies demonstrated that Col3a1 null
mutant mice exhibit overmigration of neurons beyond the pial basement membrane
and a cobblestone-like cortical malformation similar to the phenotype seen in
Gpr56 null mutant mice. Functional studies suggest that the interaction of
collagen III with its receptor GPR56 inhibits neural migration in vitro. As for
intracellular signaling, GPR56 couples to the Gα(12/13) family of G proteins and
activates RhoA pathway upon ligand binding. Thus, collagen III regulates the
proper lamination of the cerebral cortex by acting as the major ligand of GPR56
in the developing brain.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1104821108
PMCID: PMC3150909
PMID: 21768377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
