---
reference_id: "PMID:36511208"
title: "Abdominal Manifestations of Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children: A Single-Center Experience."
authors:
- Unny AK
- Rajashree P
- Sundararajan L
- Sankar J
journal: Indian Pediatr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s13312-022-2667-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Abdominal Manifestations of Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children: A Single-Center Experience.
**Authors:** Unny AK, Rajashree P, Sundararajan L, Sankar J
**Journal:** Indian Pediatr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s13312-022-2667-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s13312-022-2667-2)

## Content

1. Indian Pediatr. 2022 Dec 15;59(12):936-938. doi: 10.1007/s13312-022-2667-2.

Abdominal Manifestations of Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children: A 
Single-Center Experience.

Unny AK(1), Rajashree P(2), Sundararajan L(1), Sankar J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, CHILDS Trust Medical Research Foundation, 
Kanchi Kamakoti Childs Trust Hospital, Chennai, Tamil Nadu.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, CHILDS Trust Medical Research Foundation, Kanchi 
Kamakoti Childs Trust Hospital, Chennai, Tamil Nadu.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, CHILDS Trust Medical Research Foundation, Kanchi 
Kamakoti Childs Trust Hospital, Chennai, Tamil Nadu. Correspondence to: Dr 
Ashitha K Unny, Department of Pediatric Surgery, Kanchi Kamakoti Childs Trust 
Hospital, Chennai, Tamil Nadu 600 034. ashitha.aku@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVES: We reviewed the cases of probable multisystem inflammatory syndrome 
in children (MIS-C) to identify those cases that mimicked surgical emergencies.
METHODS: Records of children managed for MIS-C during a 15-month period between 
March, 2020 and April, 2021 were retrieved. Data on clinical presentation, 
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) RT-PCR report, 
SARS-CoV-2 antibody status, blood investigations, radiological investigations 
and management were collected.
RESULTS: A total of 28 out of 83 children with probable MIS-C had acute 
abdominal symptoms and signs. Fifteen children had mild features like diffuse 
abdominal pain or non-bilious vomiting, and the remaining 13 (46.2%) had severe 
abdominal signs or bilious vomiting. Four children worsened with conservative 
treatment for MIS-C and were detected with perforated appendicitis. Two more 
children developed recurrent appendicitis on follow up. One child with 
appendicitis who underwent laparoscopic appendectomy, later manifested with 
MIS-C.
CONCLUSION: Surgical abdominal emergencies may be confused with or occur 
concurrently in children with MIS-C that should be identified with a high index 
of suspicion.

DOI: 10.1007/s13312-022-2667-2
PMCID: PMC9798947
PMID: 36511208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]