---
reference_id: "PMID:37914688"
title: Prph2 knock-in mice recapitulate human central areolar choroidal dystrophy retinal degeneration and exhibit aberrant synaptic remodeling and microglial activation.
authors:
- Ruiz-Pastor MJ
- Sánchez-Sáez X
- Kutsyr O
- Albertos-Arranz H
- Sánchez-Castillo C
- Ortuño-Lizarán I
- Martínez-Gil N
- Vidal-Gil L
- Méndez L
- Sánchez-Martín M
- Maneu V
- Lax P
- Cuenca N
journal: Cell Death Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1038/s41419-023-06243-8
keywords:
- Animals
- Humans
- Infant
- Mice
- Electroretinography
- Microglia
- Mutation/genetics
- Peripherins/genetics
- Retina
- Retinal Degeneration/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prph2 knock-in mice recapitulate human central areolar choroidal dystrophy retinal degeneration and exhibit aberrant synaptic remodeling and microglial activation.
**Authors:** Ruiz-Pastor MJ, Sánchez-Sáez X, Kutsyr O, Albertos-Arranz H, Sánchez-Castillo C, Ortuño-Lizarán I, Martínez-Gil N, Vidal-Gil L, Méndez L, Sánchez-Martín M, Maneu V, Lax P, Cuenca N
**Journal:** Cell Death Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41419-023-06243-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41419-023-06243-8)

## Content

1. Cell Death Dis. 2023 Nov 1;14(11):711. doi: 10.1038/s41419-023-06243-8.

Prph2 knock-in mice recapitulate human central areolar choroidal dystrophy 
retinal degeneration and exhibit aberrant synaptic remodeling and microglial 
activation.

Ruiz-Pastor MJ(#)(1), Sánchez-Sáez X(#)(1), Kutsyr O(2), Albertos-Arranz H(1), 
Sánchez-Castillo C(1), Ortuño-Lizarán I(1), Martínez-Gil N(1), Vidal-Gil L(1), 
Méndez L(3), Sánchez-Martín M(3)(4), Maneu V(2)(5), Lax P(6)(7), Cuenca N(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Physiology, Genetics, and Microbiology, University of Alicante, Alicante, 
Spain.
(2)Optics, Pharmacology, and Anatomy, University of Alicante, Alicante, Spain.
(3)Transgenic Facility and Department of Medicine, University of Salamanca, 
Salamanca, Spain.
(4)Institute for Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca, Spain.
(5)Alicante Institute for Health and Biomedical Research (ISABIAL), Alicante, 
Spain.
(6)Physiology, Genetics, and Microbiology, University of Alicante, Alicante, 
Spain. pedro.lax@ua.es.
(7)Alicante Institute for Health and Biomedical Research (ISABIAL), Alicante, 
Spain. pedro.lax@ua.es.
(8)Physiology, Genetics, and Microbiology, University of Alicante, Alicante, 
Spain. cuenca@ua.es.
(9)Alicante Institute for Health and Biomedical Research (ISABIAL), Alicante, 
Spain. cuenca@ua.es.
(#)Contributed equally

Central areolar choroidal dystrophy is an inherited disorder characterized by 
progressive choriocapillaris atrophy and retinal degeneration and is usually 
associated with mutations in the PRPH2 gene. We aimed to generate and 
characterize a mouse model with the p.Arg195Leu mutation previously described in 
patients. Heterozygous (Prph2WT/KI) and homozygous (Prph2KI/KI) mice were 
generated using the CRISPR/Cas9 system to introduce the p.Arg195Leu mutation. 
Retinal function was assessed by electroretinography and optomotor tests at 1, 
3, 6, 9, 12, and 20 months of age. The structural integrity of the retinas was 
evaluated at the same ages using optical coherence tomography. 
Immunofluorescence and transmission electron microscopy images of the retina 
were also analyzed. Genetic sequencing confirmed that both Prph2WT/KI and 
Prph2KI/KI mice presented the p.Arg195Leu mutation. A progressive loss of 
retinal function was found in both mutant groups, with significantly reduced 
visual acuity from 3 months of age in Prph2KI/KI mice and from 6 months of age 
in Prph2WT/KI mice. Decreased amplitudes in the electroretinography responses 
were observed from 1 month of age in Prph2KI/KI mice and from 6 months of age in 
Prph2WT/KI mice. Morphological analysis of the retinas correlated with 
functional findings, showing a progressive decrease in retinal thickness of 
mutant mice, with earlier and more severe changes in the homozygous mutant mice. 
We corroborated the alteration of the outer segment structure, and we found 
changes in the synaptic connectivity in the outer plexiform layer as well as 
gliosis and signs of microglial activation. The new Prph2WT/KI and Prph2KI/KI 
murine models show a pattern of retinal degeneration similar to that described 
in human patients with central areolar choroidal dystrophy and appear to be good 
models to study the mechanisms involved in the onset and progression of the 
disease, as well as to test the efficacy of new therapeutic strategies.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41419-023-06243-8
PMCID: PMC10620171
PMID: 37914688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.