---
reference_id: "PMID:36776909"
title: "Mutations and clinical characteristics of dRTA caused by SLC4A1 mutations: Analysis based on published patients."
authors:
- Yang M
- Sheng Q
- Ge S
- Song X
- Dong J
- Guo C
- Liao L
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2023.1077120
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations and clinical characteristics of dRTA caused by SLC4A1 mutations: Analysis based on published patients.
**Authors:** Yang M, Sheng Q, Ge S, Song X, Dong J, Guo C, Liao L
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2023.1077120](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2023.1077120)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2023 Jan 26;11:1077120. doi: 10.3389/fped.2023.1077120. 
eCollection 2023.

Mutations and clinical characteristics of dRTA caused by SLC4A1 mutations: 
Analysis based on published patients.

Yang M(1)(2), Sheng Q(3), Ge S(1), Song X(4), Dong J(3), Guo C(1)(4), Liao 
L(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabology, The First Affiliated Hospital of 
Shandong First Medical University & Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, 
Ji-nan, China.
(2)Cheeloo College of Medicine, Shandong University, Department of Endocrinology 
and Metabology, Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital, Shandong Key Laboratory 
of Rheumatic Disease and Translational Medicine, Shandong Institute of 
Nephrology, Ji-nan, China.
(3)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, Qilu Hospital of 
Shandong University, Ji-nan, China.
(4)College of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shandong University of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, Ji-nan, China.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The genetic and clinical characteristics of patients with 
distal renal tubular acidosis (dRTA) caused by SLC4A1 mutations have not been 
systematically recorded before. Here, we summarized the SLC4A1 mutations and 
clinical characteristics associated with dRTA.
METHODS: Database was searched, and the mutations and clinical manifestations of 
patients were summarized from the relevant articles.
RESULTS: Fifty-three eligible articles involving 169 patients were included and 
41 mutations were identified totally. Fifteen mutations involving 100 patients 
were autosomal dominant inheritance, 21 mutations involving 61 patients were 
autosomal recessive inheritance. Nephrocalcinosis or kidney stones were found in 
72.27%, impairment in renal function in 14.29%, developmental disorders in 
61.16%, hematological abnormalities in 33.88%, and muscle weakness in 13.45% of 
patients. The age of onset was younger (P < 0.01), urine pH was higher 
(P < 0.01), and serum potassium was lower (P < 0.001) in recessive patients than 
patients with dominant SLC4A1 mutations. Autosomal recessive inheritance was 
more often found in Asian patients (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The children present with metabolic acidosis with high urinary pH, 
accompanying hypokalemia, hyperchloremia, nephrocalcinosis, growth retardation 
and hematological abnormalities should be suspected as dRTA and suggested a 
genetic testing. The patients with recessive dRTA are generally more severely 
affected than that with dominant SLC4A1 mutations. Autosomal recessive 
inheritance was more often found in Asian patients, and more attentions should 
be paid to the Asian patients.

© 2023 Yang, Sheng, Ge, Song, Dong, Guo and Liao.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2023.1077120
PMCID: PMC9910804
PMID: 36776909

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.