---
reference_id: "PMID:36356613"
title: "Efficacy and safety of setmelanotide, a melanocortin-4 receptor agonist, in patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome and Alström syndrome: a multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial with an open-label period."
authors:
- Haqq AM
- Chung WK
- Dollfus H
- Haws RM
- Martos-Moreno GÁ
- Poitou C
- Yanovski JA
- Mittleman RS
- Yuan G
- Forsythe E
- Clément K
- Argente J
journal: Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/S2213-8587(22)00277-7
keywords:
- Humans
- "Receptor, Melanocortin, Type 4"
- Alstrom Syndrome
- Bardet-Biedl Syndrome
- Treatment Outcome
- "Obesity/complications, drug therapy"
- "alpha-MSH/analogs & derivatives"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy and safety of setmelanotide, a melanocortin-4 receptor agonist, in patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome and Alström syndrome: a multicentre, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial with an open-label period.
**Authors:** Haqq AM, Chung WK, Dollfus H, Haws RM, Martos-Moreno GÁ, Poitou C, Yanovski JA, Mittleman RS, Yuan G, Forsythe E, Clément K, Argente J
**Journal:** Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S2213-8587(22)00277-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-8587(22)00277-7)

## Content

1. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2022 Dec;10(12):859-868. doi:
10.1016/S2213-8587(22)00277-7. Epub 2022 Nov 7.

Efficacy and safety of setmelanotide, a melanocortin-4 receptor agonist, in
patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome and Alström syndrome: a multicentre,
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial with an open-label
period.

Haqq AM(1), Chung WK(2), Dollfus H(3), Haws RM(4), Martos-Moreno GÁ(5), Poitou
C(6), Yanovski JA(7), Mittleman RS(8), Yuan G(8), Forsythe E(9), Clément K(6),
Argente J(10).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB,
Canada.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Molecular Genetics, Columbia
University, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, CARGO, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg,
Strasbourg, France.
(4)Marshfield Clinic Research Institute, Marshfield, WI, USA.
(5)Department of Pediatrics and Pediatric Endocrinology, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, Hospital Infantil Universitario Niño Jesús, CIBER Fisiopatología de la
Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBEROBN), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Department of Nutrition, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris,
Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France; Sorbonne Université, INSERM,
NutriOmics Research Unit, Paris, France.
(7)Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(8)Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, Boston, MA, USA.
(9)University College London, Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health,
London, UK.
(10)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB,
Canada; IMDEA Food Institute, Madrid, Spain. Electronic address:
jesus.argente@fundacionendo.org.

Erratum in
    Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2023 Feb;11(2):e2. doi:
10.1016/S2213-8587(22)00360-6.

Comment in
    Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2022 Dec;10(12):829-830. doi:
10.1016/S2213-8587(22)00309-6.

BACKGROUND: Impaired cilial signalling in the melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R)
pathway might contribute to obesity in patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome and
Alström syndrome, rare genetic diseases associated with hyperphagia and
early-onset severe obesity. We aimed to evaluate the effect of setmelanotide on
bodyweight in these patients.
METHODS: This multicentre, randomised, 14-week double-blind, placebo-controlled,
phase 3 trial followed by a 52-week open-label period, was performed at 12 sites
(hospitals, clinics, and universities) in the USA, Canada, the UK, France, and
Spain. Patients aged 6 years or older were included if they had a clinical
diagnosis of Bardet-Biedl syndrome or Alström syndrome and obesity (defined as
BMI >97th percentile for age and sex for those aged 6-15 years and ≥30 kg/m2 for
those aged ≥16 years). Patients were randomly assigned (1:1) using a numerical
randomisation code to receive up to 3·0 mg of subcutaneous setmelanotide or
placebo once per day during the 14-week double-blind period, followed by
open-label setmelanotide for 52 weeks. The primary endpoint, measured in the
full analysis set, was the proportion of patients aged 12 years or older who
reached at least a 10% reduction in bodyweight from baseline after 52 weeks of
setmelanotide treatment. This study is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov,
NCT03746522.
FINDINGS: Between Dec 10, 2018, and Nov 25, 2019, 38 patients were enrolled and
randomly assigned to receive setmelanotide (n=19) or placebo (n=19; 16 with
Bardet-Biedl syndrome and three with Alström syndrome in each group). In terms
of the primary endpoint, 32·3% (95% CI 16·7 to 51·4; p=0·0006) of patients aged
12 years or older with Bardet-Biedl syndrome reached at least a 10% reduction in
bodyweight after 52 weeks of setmelanotide. The most commonly reported
treatment-emergent adverse events were skin hyperpigmentation (23 [61%] of 38)
and injection site erythema (18 [48%]). Two patients had four serious adverse
events (blindness, anaphylactic reaction, and suicidal ideation); none were
considered related to setmelanotide treatment.
INTERPRETATION: Setmelanotide resulted in significant bodyweight reductions in
patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome; however, these results were inconclusive in
patients with Alström syndrome. These results support the use of setmelanotide
and provided the necessary evidence for approval of this drug as the first
treatment for obesity in patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
FUNDING: Rhythm Pharmaceuticals.

Copyright © 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S2213-8587(22)00277-7
PMCID: PMC9847480
PMID: 36356613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests RMH received study
medication, grant support for clinical trials of setmelanotide, payments for
lectures and expert testimony, and support for attending meetings from Rhythm
Pharmaceuticals; consulting fees from Rhythm Pharmaceuticals and Axovia
Therapeutics; participated in the data safety monitoring board for Rhythm
Pharmaceuticals; and is a stockholder in Rhythm Pharmaceuticals. AMH received
grants from the Weston Family Microbiome Initiative and Canadian Institutes of
Health Research, payment as a speaker for Pfizer Canada, is a member of the
Bardet-Biedl syndrome advisory board for Rhythm Pharmaceuticals and the 2021
Somatrogon advisory board for Pfizer, and head of the scientific advisory board
for the Prader-Willi Syndrome Association USA. WKC received study funding,
consulting fees, and payment for speaker bureaus from Rhythm Pharmaceuticals. HD
received consulting fees and participated in the Bardet-Biedl syndrome advisory
board for Rhythm Pharmaceuticals. GÁM-M received payment for lectures and
participated in the Bardet-Biedl syndrome advisory board for Rhythm
Pharmaceuticals. CP received support for attending meetings and grant funding
for clinical trials of setmelanotide from Rhythm Pharmaceuticals; clinical
trials of Prader-Willi syndrome from Millendo; and clinical trials of obesity
from Novo Nordisk. JAY received grant support for clinical trials of
setmelanotide from Rhythm Pharmaceuticals, grant support for clinical trials of
diazoxide choline-controlled release in Prader-Willi syndrome from Soleno
Therapeutics, and study medication for clinical trials from Hikma
Pharmaceuticals and Versanis Bio. RSM and GY are employees and stockholders of
Rhythm Pharmaceuticals. EF received consulting fees and participated in the
Bardet-Biedl syndrome advisory board for Rhythm Pharmaceuticals and is a
clinical investigator for clinical trials of setmelanotide in Bardet-Biedl
syndrome for Rhythm Pharmaceuticals. KC received grant funding from Ysopia,
Integrative Phenomics, and Confo Therapeutics; and is a clinical investigator
for clinical trials of setmelanotide in Bardet-Biedl syndrome for Rhythm
Pharmaceuticals. JA received payment for lectures and participated in the
Bardet-Biedl syndrome advisory board for Rhythm Pharmaceuticals.
