---
reference_id: "PMID:40764536"
title: Demographics and baseline disease characteristics of UK patients within the global aHUS registry.
authors:
- Gilbert RD
- Al-Dakkak I
- Boothe C
- Cobb TE
- Gale DP
- Griffin S
- Marks SD
- Scully M
- Shenoy M
- Waters A
- Sheerin NS
journal: BMC Nephrol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1186/s12882-025-04321-x
keywords:
- Humans
- Registries
- "Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome/epidemiology, genetics, diagnosis"
- United Kingdom/epidemiology
- Male
- Female
- Adult
- Child
- Adolescent
- "Child, Preschool"
- Young Adult
- Middle Aged
- "Kidney Failure, Chronic/epidemiology"
- Infant
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Demographics and baseline disease characteristics of UK patients within the global aHUS registry.
**Authors:** Gilbert RD, Al-Dakkak I, Boothe C, Cobb TE, Gale DP, Griffin S, Marks SD, Scully M, Shenoy M, Waters A, Sheerin NS
**Journal:** BMC Nephrol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12882-025-04321-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12882-025-04321-x)

## Content

1. BMC Nephrol. 2025 Aug 5;26(1):434. doi: 10.1186/s12882-025-04321-x.

Demographics and baseline disease characteristics of UK patients within the
global aHUS registry.

Gilbert RD(1), Al-Dakkak I(2), Boothe C(3), Cobb TE(3), Gale DP(4), Griffin
S(5), Marks SD(6)(7), Scully M(8), Shenoy M(9), Waters A(10), Sheerin NS(11).

Author information:
(1)Southampton Children's Hospital, Southampton, UK. rodney.gilbert@uhs.nhs.uk.
(2)Alexion AstraZeneca Rare Disease, Boston, USA.
(3)Alexion Pharma UK, London, UK.
(4)Centre for Kidney and Bladder Health, University College London, London, UK.
(5)University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, UK.
(6)Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(7)NIHR Great Ormond Street Hospital Biomedical Research Centre, University
College London, Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, UK.
(8)University College London Hospital, London, UK.
(9)Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, Manchester, UK.
(10)University College Cork, Cork, Republic of Ireland.
(11)Newcastle University and Freeman Hospital, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK.

Atypical haemolytic uraemic syndrome (aHUS) is a rare kidney disease
characterized by thrombotic microangiopathy. This study presents the first
analysis of UK patients enrolled in the Global aHUS Registry, focusing on
patient characteristics and disease natural history prior to treatment
initiation (n = 172; 74 paediatric, 98 adult). Mean age at first aHUS
manifestation was 23.6 years overall (4.9 years for paediatric patients, 37.8
years for adults). Additional thrombotic microangiopathy events occurred in
57.0% of patients between initial clinical suspicion and registry enrolment.
Potential precipitating factors were recorded in 14.0% of patients. Of 115
patients at active sites, 90.4% had genetic data recorded, with 73.8% undergoing
"complete" genetic testing (results entered for C3, CD46, CFH, CFB and CFI, as a
minimum). Of those with genetic data available, 52.9% had an identified
pathogenic variant. Gastrointestinal involvement was the most common extra-renal
manifestation, presenting in 22.2% of patients. End-stage kidney disease (ESKD)
was present in 8.7% at baseline. ESKD-free survival probability at five years
was 0.80 for paediatric patients and 0.57 for adults. ESKD-free survival was
negatively influenced by CFH, C3, or CFI variants. This study highlights the
historically poor prognosis for untreated patients with aHUS. The UK population
of the Global aHUS Registry represents a valuable research cohort with
comprehensive demographic data and high genetic characterization. These findings
underscore the importance of early aHUS identification and intervention to
prevent ESKD and improve patient outcomes.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s12882-025-04321-x
PMCID: PMC12323274
PMID: 40764536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Human ethics and consent to
participate: The aHUS Registry is approved through the Research Ethics Committee
(REC) North East; Newcastle and North Tyneside 2, chaired by Professor Barry
Hirst. The REC approvals are provided to the individual participating sites in
the Registry. The Registry is conducted in accordance with International
Conference on Harmonisation Good Clinical Practice Guidelines and the
Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent was provided by patients or
their parents or guardians, as deemed applicable by institutional review boards
or the ethics committee. Consent for publication: Not Applicable. Competing
interests: RDG has received several honoraria from Alexion for lectures on aHUS
and serving on advisory boards. SDM and AW have no disclosures relating to this
manuscript. MSc has received honoraria and a research grant from Alexion. DPG,
SG, MSh and NSS have received honoraria from Alexion. CB and TEC are current
employees of Alexion, AstraZeneca Rare Disease. IAD, at the time of writing and
reviewing, was an employee of AstraZeneca Rare Disease.
