---
reference_id: "PMID:22305526"
title: RAD51 haploinsufficiency causes congenital mirror movements in humans.
authors:
- Depienne C
- Bouteiller D
- Méneret A
- Billot S
- Groppa S
- Klebe S
- Charbonnier-Beaupel F
- Corvol JC
- Saraiva JP
- Brueggemann N
- Bhatia K
- Cincotta M
- Brochard V
- Flamand-Roze C
- Carpentier W
- Meunier S
- Marie Y
- Gaussen M
- Stevanin G
- Wehrle R
- Vidailhet M
- Klein C
- Dusart I
- Brice A
- Roze E
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.12.002
keywords:
- Axons
- Congenital Abnormalities/genetics
- DCC Receptor
- "DNA Breaks, Double-Stranded"
- DNA Repair
- Down-Regulation
- Dyskinesias/genetics
- Exome/genetics
- Family Health
- Genetic Heterogeneity
- Genome-Wide Association Study/methods
- Haploinsufficiency
- Heterozygote
- Homologous Recombination/genetics
- Humans
- Motor Cortex/abnormalities
- Movement Disorders/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Nerve Growth Factors/genetics
- Netrin-1
- Pedigree
- "RNA, Messenger/genetics"
- Rad51 Recombinase/genetics
- "Receptors, Cell Surface/genetics"
- Tumor Suppressor Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# RAD51 haploinsufficiency causes congenital mirror movements in humans.
**Authors:** Depienne C, Bouteiller D, Méneret A, Billot S, Groppa S, Klebe S, Charbonnier-Beaupel F, Corvol JC, Saraiva JP, Brueggemann N, Bhatia K, Cincotta M, Brochard V, Flamand-Roze C, Carpentier W, Meunier S, Marie Y, Gaussen M, Stevanin G, Wehrle R, Vidailhet M, Klein C, Dusart I, Brice A, Roze E
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.12.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.12.002)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Feb 10;90(2):301-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.12.002. Epub
 2012 Feb 2.

RAD51 haploinsufficiency causes congenital mirror movements in humans.

Depienne C(1), Bouteiller D, Méneret A, Billot S, Groppa S, Klebe S, 
Charbonnier-Beaupel F, Corvol JC, Saraiva JP, Brueggemann N, Bhatia K, Cincotta 
M, Brochard V, Flamand-Roze C, Carpentier W, Meunier S, Marie Y, Gaussen M, 
Stevanin G, Wehrle R, Vidailhet M, Klein C, Dusart I, Brice A, Roze E.

Author information:
(1)INSERM, U- CRICM, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.

Congenital mirror movements (CMM) are characterized by involuntary movements of 
one side of the body that mirror intentional movements on the opposite side. CMM 
reflect dysfunctions and structural abnormalities of the motor network and are 
mainly inherited in an autosomal-dominant fashion. Recently, heterozygous 
mutations in DCC, the gene encoding the receptor for netrin 1 and involved in 
the guidance of developing axons toward the midline, have been identified but 
CMM are genetically heterogeneous. By combining genome-wide linkage analysis and 
exome sequencing, we identified heterozygous mutations introducing premature 
termination codons in RAD51 in two families with CMM. RAD51 mRNA was 
significantly downregulated in individuals with CMM resulting from the 
degradation of the mutated mRNA by nonsense-mediated decay. RAD51 was 
specifically present in the developing mouse cortex and, more particularly, in a 
subpopulation of corticospinal axons at the pyramidal decussation. The 
identification of mutations in RAD51, known for its key role in the repair of 
DNA double-strand breaks through homologous recombination, in individuals with 
CMM reveals a totally unexpected role of RAD51 in neurodevelopment. These 
findings open a new field of investigation for researchers attempting to unravel 
the molecular pathways underlying bimanual motor control in humans.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.12.002
PMCID: PMC3276668
PMID: 22305526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]