---
reference_id: "PMID:22696221"
title: Protein kinase Cα phosphorylates a novel argininosuccinate synthase site at serine 328 during calcium-dependent stimulation of endothelial nitric-oxide synthase in vascular endothelial cells.
authors:
- Haines RJ
- Corbin KD
- Pendleton LC
- Eichler DC
journal: J Biol Chem
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.378794
keywords:
- Acetophenones/pharmacology
- Amino Acid Substitution
- Animals
- Aorta/cytology
- "Argininosuccinate Synthase/genetics, metabolism"
- Benzopyrans/pharmacology
- Bradykinin/pharmacology
- "Calcium/metabolism, physiology"
- Calcium Signaling
- Cattle
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Endothelial Cells/enzymology
- Enzyme Activation
- Gene Knockdown Techniques
- Indoles/pharmacology
- Isoenzymes/metabolism
- Maleimides/pharmacology
- "Mutagenesis, Site-Directed"
- Nitric Oxide/metabolism
- Nitric Oxide Synthase Type III/metabolism
- Okadaic Acid/pharmacology
- Phosphorylation
- "Protein Kinase C-alpha/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- "Protein Phosphatase 1/antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Protein Phosphatase 2/antagonists & inhibitors"
- "Protein Processing, Post-Translational"
- RNA Interference
- Serine/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Protein kinase Cα phosphorylates a novel argininosuccinate synthase site at serine 328 during calcium-dependent stimulation of endothelial nitric-oxide synthase in vascular endothelial cells.
**Authors:** Haines RJ, Corbin KD, Pendleton LC, Eichler DC
**Journal:** J Biol Chem (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1074/jbc.M112.378794](https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.M112.378794)

## Content

1. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jul 27;287(31):26168-76. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.378794. Epub
2012 Jun 13.

Protein kinase Cα phosphorylates a novel argininosuccinate synthase site at
serine 328 during calcium-dependent stimulation of endothelial nitric-oxide
synthase in vascular endothelial cells.

Haines RJ(1), Corbin KD, Pendleton LC, Eichler DC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Morsani College of Medicine, University of
South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33612, USA.

Endothelial nitric-oxide synthase (eNOS) utilizes l-arginine as its principal
substrate, converting it to l-citrulline and nitric oxide (NO). l-Citrulline is
recycled to l-arginine by two enzymes, argininosuccinate synthase (AS) and
argininosuccinate lyase, providing the substrate arginine for eNOS and NO
production in endothelial cells. Together, these three enzymes, eNOS, AS, and
argininosuccinate lyase, make up the citrulline-NO cycle. Although AS catalyzes
the rate-limiting step in NO production, little is known about the regulation of
AS in endothelial cells beyond the level of transcription. In this study, we
showed that AS Ser-328 phosphorylation was coordinately regulated with eNOS
Ser-1179 phosphorylation when bovine aortic endothelial cells were stimulated by
either a calcium ionophore or thapsigargin to produce NO. Furthermore, using in
vitro kinase assay, kinase inhibition studies, as well as protein kinase Cα
(PKCα) knockdown experiments, we demonstrate that the calcium-dependent
phosphorylation of AS Ser-328 is mediated by PKCα. Collectively, these findings
suggest that phosphorylation of AS at Ser-328 is regulated in accordance with
the calcium-dependent regulation of eNOS under conditions that promote NO
production and are in keeping with the rate-limiting role of AS in the
citrulline-NO cycle of vascular endothelial cells.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M112.378794
PMCID: PMC3406701
PMID: 22696221 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
