---
reference_id: "PMID:37113646"
title: Siderophore-Mediated Mobilization of Manganese Limits Iron Solubility in Mixed Mineral Systems.
authors:
- Kang K
- Peña J
journal: ACS Earth Space Chem
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1021/acsearthspacechem.2c00271
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Siderophore-Mediated Mobilization of Manganese Limits Iron Solubility in Mixed Mineral Systems.
**Authors:** Kang K, Peña J
**Journal:** ACS Earth Space Chem (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1021/acsearthspacechem.2c00271](https://doi.org/10.1021/acsearthspacechem.2c00271)

## Content

1. ACS Earth Space Chem. 2023 Mar 9;7(4):662-675. doi: 
10.1021/acsearthspacechem.2c00271. eCollection 2023 Apr 20.

Siderophore-Mediated Mobilization of Manganese Limits Iron Solubility in Mixed 
Mineral Systems.

Kang K(1), Peña J(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of California, 
Davis, California 95616, United States.
(2)Energy Geosciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, 
California 94720, United States.

Recent laboratory and field studies show the need to consider the formation of 
aqueous Mn(III)-siderophore complexes in manganese (Mn) and iron (Fe) 
geochemical cycling, a shift from the historical view that aqueous Mn(III) 
species are unstable and thus unimportant. In this study, we quantified Mn and 
Fe mobilization by desferrioxamine B (DFOB), a terrestrial bacterial 
siderophore, in single (Mn or Fe) and mixed (Mn and Fe) mineral systems. We 
selected manganite (γ-MnOOH), δ-MnO2, lepidocrocite (γ-FeOOH), and 2-line 
ferrihydrite (Fe2O3·0.5H2O) as relevant mineral phases. We found that DFOB 
mobilized Mn(III) as Mn(III)-DFOB complexes to varying extents from both 
Mn(III,IV) oxyhydroxides but reduction of Mn(IV) to Mn(III) was required for the 
mobilization of Mn(III) from δ-MnO2. The initial rates of Mn(III)-DFOB 
mobilization from manganite and δ-MnO2 were not affected by the presence of 
lepidocrocite but decreased by a factor of 5 and 10 for manganite and δ-MnO2, 
respectively, in the presence of 2-line ferrihydrite. Additionally, the 
decomposition of Mn(III)-DFOB complexes through Mn-for-Fe ligand exchange and/or 
ligand oxidation led to Mn(II) mobilization and Mn(III) precipitation in the 
mixed-mineral systems (∼10% (mol Mn/mol Fe)). As a result, the concentration of 
Fe(III) mobilized as Fe(III)-DFOB decreased by up to 50% and 80% in the presence 
of manganite and δ-MnO2, respectively, compared to the single mineral systems. 
Our results demonstrate that siderophores, through their complexation of 
Mn(III), reduction of Mn(III,IV), and mobilization of Mn(II), can redistribute 
Mn to other soil minerals and limit the bioavailability of Fe in natural 
systems.

© 2023 The Authors. Published by American Chemical Society.

DOI: 10.1021/acsearthspacechem.2c00271
PMCID: PMC10123812
PMID: 37113646

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing financial 
interest.