---
reference_id: PMID:33750909
title: "Natural products: potential treatments for cisplatin-induced nephrotoxicity."
authors:
- Fang CY
- Lou DY
- Zhou LQ
- Wang JC
- Yang B
- He QJ
- Wang JJ
- Weng QJ
journal: Acta Pharmacol Sin
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41401-021-00620-9
keywords:
- "Acute Kidney Injury/chemically induced, drug therapy, etiology, prevention & control"
- Animals
- Antineoplastic Agents/toxicity
- Apoptosis/drug effects
- Biological Products/therapeutic use
- Cisplatin/toxicity
- Humans
- Inflammation/drug therapy
- Kidney/drug effects
- Oxidative Stress/drug effects
- Protective Agents/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Natural products: potential treatments for cisplatin-induced nephrotoxicity.
**Authors:** Fang CY, Lou DY, Zhou LQ, Wang JC, Yang B, He QJ, Wang JJ, Weng QJ
**Journal:** Acta Pharmacol Sin (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41401-021-00620-9](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41401-021-00620-9)

## Content

1. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2021 Dec;42(12):1951-1969. doi:
10.1038/s41401-021-00620-9.  Epub 2021 Mar 9.

Natural products: potential treatments for cisplatin-induced nephrotoxicity.

Fang CY(#)(1), Lou DY(#)(2), Zhou LQ(2), Wang JC(1), Yang B(1), He QJ(1), Wang 
JJ(3), Weng QJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Center for Drug Safety Evaluation and Research, College of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310058, China.
(2)Medication Department, Zhuji People's Hospital of Zhejiang Province, Zhuji, 
311800, China.
(3)Center for Drug Safety Evaluation and Research, College of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310058, China. 
wangjiajia3301@zju.edu.cn.
(4)Center for Drug Safety Evaluation and Research, College of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310058, China. wengqinjie@zju.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2023 Feb;44(2):488. doi: 10.1038/s41401-022-01012-3.

Cisplatin is a clinically advanced and highly effective anticancer drug used in 
the treatment of a wide variety of malignancies, such as head and neck, lung, 
testis, ovary, breast cancer, etc. However, it has only a limited use in 
clinical practice due to its severe adverse effects, particularly 
nephrotoxicity; 20%-35% of patients develop acute kidney injury (AKI) after 
cisplatin administration. The nephrotoxic effect of cisplatin is cumulative and 
dose dependent and often necessitates dose reduction or withdrawal. Recurrent 
episodes of AKI result in impaired renal tubular function and acute renal 
failure, chronic kidney disease, uremia, and hypertensive nephropathy. The 
pathophysiology of cisplatin-induced AKI involves proximal tubular injury, 
apoptosis, oxidative stress, inflammation, and vascular injury in the kidneys. 
At present, there are no effective drugs or methods for cisplatin-induced kidney 
injury. Recent in vitro and in vivo studies show that numerous natural products 
(flavonoids, saponins, alkaloids, polysaccharide, phenylpropanoids, etc.) have 
specific antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and anti-apoptotic properties that 
regulate the pathways associated with cisplatin-induced kidney damage. In this 
review we describe the molecular mechanisms of cisplatin-induced nephrotoxicity 
and summarize recent findings in the field of natural products that undermine 
these mechanisms to protect against cisplatin-induced kidney damage and provide 
potential strategies for AKI treatment.

© 2021. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41401-021-00620-9
PMCID: PMC8633358
PMID: 33750909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.