---
reference_id: "PMID:10225329"
title: "From predisposition to psychosis: progression of symptoms in schizophrenia."
authors:
- Parnas J
journal: Acta Psychiatr Scand Suppl
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0447.1999.tb05979.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# From predisposition to psychosis: progression of symptoms in schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Parnas J
**Journal:** Acta Psychiatr Scand Suppl (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1600-0447.1999.tb05979.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-0447.1999.tb05979.x)

## Content

1. Acta Psychiatr Scand Suppl. 1999;395:20-9. doi: 
10.1111/j.1600-0447.1999.tb05979.x.

From predisposition to psychosis: progression of symptoms in schizophrenia.

Parnas J(1).

Author information:
(1)University Department of Psychiatry, Hvidovre Hospital, Hvidovre and 
Institute of Preventive Medicine, Kommunehospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark. 
parnas@ipm.hosp.dk

Schizophrenia is increasingly viewed as a neurodevelopmental process caused by 
an interaction between genetic factors and environmental stressors. Prospective 
studies and retrospective research using objective data indicate that 
behavioural deviations can be dated to early infancy and cut across multiple 
behavioural domains. In adolescence, preschizophrenics exhibit subtle changes in 
cognition and affect as well as a variety of anomalous subjective experiences 
(so-called 'basic symptoms'), suggesting 'trait' status of these features. 
Prodromal symptoms occur in a substantial proportion of preschizophrenics, 
followed by a short prepsychotic phase with the crystallization of a psychotic 
syndrome. Clinical, phenomenological and conceptual aspects of these early 
preschizophrenic phases are reviewed, and their neurobiological implications are 
briefly addressed. It is concluded that there is an urgent need for detailed and 
multidisciplinary prospective studies, but that the evidence accumulated to date 
is sufficient to justify research-based secondary prevention programmes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0447.1999.tb05979.x
PMID: 10225329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]