---
reference_id: "PMID:28125198"
title: Primary Coenzyme Q(10) Deficiency Overview.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Salviati L
- Trevisson E
- Agosto C
- Doimo M
- Navas P
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Primary Coenzyme Q(10) Deficiency Overview.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Salviati L, Trevisson E, Agosto C, Doimo M, Navas P

## Content

1. Primary Coenzyme Q(10) Deficiency Overview.

Salviati L(1), Trevisson E(1), Agosto C(2), Doimo M(1), Navas P(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2017 Jan 26 [updated 2023 Jun 8].

Author information:
(1)Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Women and Children's Health, University 
of Padova, Padua, Italy
(2)Pediatric Pain and Palliative Care Service, Department of Women's and 
Children's Health, Padua University Hospital, Padua, Italy
(3)Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo, Universidad Pablo de Olavide, 
Sevilla, Spain

The purpose of this overview is to: 1.. Briefly describe the clinical 
characteristics of primary coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10) deficiency. 2.. Increase the 
awareness of clinicians regarding genetic causes of primary CoQ10 deficiency. 
3.. Review the differential diagnosis of primary CoQ10 deficiency with a focus 
on genetic conditions. 4.. Provide an evaluation strategy to identify the 
genetic cause of primary CoQ10 deficiency in a proband. 5.. Review management of 
primary CoQ10 deficiency, including targeted pharmacologic treatment with 
high-dose oral CoQ10 supplementation and supportive treatment. 6.. Inform 
genetic counseling of family members of an individual with primary CoQ10 
deficiency.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 28125198