---
reference_id: "PMID:38300391"
title: "Diuretic Treatment in Patients with Heart Failure: Current Evidence and Future Directions-Part II: Combination Therapy."
authors:
- J J C
- J G F C
- A L C
journal: Curr Heart Fail Rep
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s11897-024-00644-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diuretic Treatment in Patients with Heart Failure: Current Evidence and Future Directions-Part II: Combination Therapy.
**Authors:** J J C, J G F C, A L C
**Journal:** Curr Heart Fail Rep (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s11897-024-00644-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11897-024-00644-2)

## Content

1. Curr Heart Fail Rep. 2024 Apr;21(2):115-130. doi: 10.1007/s11897-024-00644-2. 
Epub 2024 Feb 1.

Diuretic Treatment in Patients with Heart Failure: Current Evidence and Future 
Directions-Part II: Combination Therapy.

J J C(1)(2), J G F C(3), A L C(4).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Clinical Sciences, Hull York Medical School, University of Hull, 
Cottingham Road, Kingston-Upon-Hull, East Yorkshire, UK. 
Joe.cuthbert@hyms.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Castle Hill Hospital, Hull University Teaching 
Hospitals Trust, Castle Road, Cottingham, East Yorkshire, UK. 
Joe.cuthbert@hyms.ac.uk.
(3)Robertson Centre for Biostatistics, Glasgow Clinical Trials Unit, University 
of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Castle Hill Hospital, Hull University Teaching 
Hospitals Trust, Castle Road, Cottingham, East Yorkshire, UK.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Fluid retention or congestion is a major cause of symptoms, 
poor quality of life, and adverse outcome in patients with heart failure (HF). 
Despite advances in disease-modifying therapy, the mainstay of treatment for 
congestion-loop diuretics-has remained largely unchanged for 50 years. In these 
two articles (part I: loop diuretics and part II: combination therapy), we will 
review the history of diuretic treatment and current trial evidence for 
different diuretic strategies and explore potential future directions of 
research.
RECENT FINDINGS: We will assess recent trials, including DOSE, TRANSFORM, ADVOR, 
CLOROTIC, OSPREY-AHF, and PUSH-AHF, and assess how these may influence current 
practice and future research. There are few data on which to base diuretic 
therapy in clinical practice. The most robust evidence is for high-dose loop 
diuretic treatment over low-dose treatment for patients admitted to hospital 
with HF, yet this is not reflected in guidelines. There is an urgent need for 
more and better research on different diuretic strategies in patients with HF.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s11897-024-00644-2
PMCID: PMC10923953
PMID: 38300391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.