---
reference_id: "PMID:38832974"
title: Prognostic value of genomic mutation signature associated with immune microenvironment in southern Chinese patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.
authors:
- Zhou Y
- Chu L
- Li S
- Chu X
- Ni J
- Jiang S
- Pang Y
- Zheng D
- Lu Y
- Lan F
- Cai X
- Yang X
- Zhu Z
journal: Cancer Immunol Immunother
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00262-024-03725-2
keywords:
- Humans
- "Tumor Microenvironment/immunology, genetics"
- Prognosis
- Male
- Female
- "Esophageal Squamous Cell Carcinoma/genetics, immunology, mortality, pathology"
- Mutation
- Middle Aged
- "Esophageal Neoplasms/genetics, immunology, mortality"
- "Biomarkers, Tumor/genetics"
- Aged
- China
- Adult
- Genomics/methods
- East Asian People
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prognostic value of genomic mutation signature associated with immune microenvironment in southern Chinese patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.
**Authors:** Zhou Y, Chu L, Li S, Chu X, Ni J, Jiang S, Pang Y, Zheng D, Lu Y, Lan F, Cai X, Yang X, Zhu Z
**Journal:** Cancer Immunol Immunother (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00262-024-03725-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00262-024-03725-2)

## Content

1. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2024 Jun 4;73(8):141. doi:
10.1007/s00262-024-03725-2.

Prognostic value of genomic mutation signature associated with immune
microenvironment in southern Chinese patients with esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma.

Zhou Y(#)(1)(2), Chu L(#)(1)(2), Li S(#)(3), Chu X(1)(2), Ni J(1)(2), Jiang
S(1)(2), Pang Y(1)(2), Zheng D(4), Lu Y(4), Lan F(4), Cai X(5), Yang X(6)(7),
Zhu Z(8)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center,
270 Dong An Road, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China.
(3)Department of Radiation Oncology, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of VIP Inpatient, Sun Yet-Sen University Cancer Center, State Key
Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Guangzhou, China.
(5)Department of VIP Inpatient, Sun Yet-Sen University Cancer Center, Guangdong
Provincial Clinical Research Center for Cancer, State Key Laboratory of Oncology
in South China, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, 651
Dongfeng Road East, Guangzhou, China. caixy@sysucc.org.cn.
(6)Department of Radiation Oncology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center,
270 Dong An Road, Shanghai, China. ntgeorge@qq.com.
(7)Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China. ntgeorge@qq.com.
(8)Department of Radiation Oncology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center,
270 Dong An Road, Shanghai, China. fuscczzf@163.com.
(9)Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China. fuscczzf@163.com.
(10)Institute of Thoracic Oncology, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
fuscczzf@163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

The genomic landscape of esophageal squamous cell cancer (ESCC), as well as its
impact on the regulation of immune microenvironment, is not well understood.
Thus, tumor samples from 92 patients were collected from two centers and
subjected to targeted-gene sequencing. We identified frequently mutated genes,
including TP53, KMT2C, KMT2D, LRP1B, and FAT1. The most frequent mutation sites
were ALOX12B (c.1565C > T), SLX4 (c.2786C > T), LRIG1 (c.746A > G), and SPEN
(c.6915_6917del) (6.5%). Pathway analysis revealed dysregulation of cell cycle
regulation, epigenetic regulation, PI3K/AKT signaling, and NOTCH signaling. A
17-mutated gene-related risk model was constructed using random survival forest
analysis and showed significant prognostic value in both our cohort and the
validation cohort. Based on the Estimation of Stromal and Immune cells in
Malignant Tumor tissues using Expression (ESTIMATE) algorithm, the Tumor Immune
Dysfunction and Exclusion (TIDE) algorithm, and the MCPcounter algorithm, we
found that the risk score calculated by the risk model was significantly
correlated with stimulatory immune checkpoints (TNFSF4, ITGB2, CXCL10, CXCL9,
and BTN3A1; p < 0.05). Additionally, it was significantly associated with
markers that are important in predicting response to immunotherapy (CD274, IFNG,
and TAMM2; p < 0.05). Furthermore, the results of immunofluorescence double
staining showed that patients with high risk scores had a significantly higher
level of M2 macrophage than those with low risk scores (p < 0.05). In
conclusion, our study provides insights into the genomic landscape of ESCC and
highlights the prognostic value of a genomic mutation signature associated with
the immune microenvironment in southern Chinese patients with ESCC.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00262-024-03725-2
PMCID: PMC11150228
PMID: 38832974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing
interests.
