---
reference_id: "PMID:33628554"
title: Lyme Disease Misinterpreted as Child Abuse.
authors:
- Pan T
- Nasreddine A
- Trivellas M
- Hennrikus WL
journal: Case Rep Orthop
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1155/2021/6665935
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lyme Disease Misinterpreted as Child Abuse.
**Authors:** Pan T, Nasreddine A, Trivellas M, Hennrikus WL
**Journal:** Case Rep Orthop (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1155/2021/6665935](https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/6665935)

## Content

1. Case Rep Orthop. 2021 Feb 1;2021:6665935. doi: 10.1155/2021/6665935.
eCollection  2021.

Lyme Disease Misinterpreted as Child Abuse.

Pan T(1), Nasreddine A(2), Trivellas M(3), Hennrikus WL(4).

Author information:
(1)Penn State College of Medicine, Hershey, PA 17033, USA.
(2)Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.
(3)UCLA College of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(4)Penn State Hershey Medical Center, Bone and Joint Institute, Hershey, PA 
17033, USA.

Child abuse is one of the most common causes for child fatality in the United 
States. Inaccurate reporting of child abuse combined with scarcity of resources 
for child abuse evaluations can lead to unintended consequences for children and 
their families. The differential diagnosis of child abuse is varied. To our 
knowledge, there are no reports in the literature on Lyme disease mimicking 
child abuse. The current study presents the case of a child from an endemic area 
for Lyme disease presenting with skin bruising, fracture, and swollen knee. The 
child was reported for child abuse by the pediatrician and then referred to the 
orthopaedic surgeon for fracture care.

Copyright © 2021 Tommy Pan et al.

DOI: 10.1155/2021/6665935
PMCID: PMC7880705
PMID: 33628554

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.