---
reference_id: PMID:27793968
title: Ciliopathies.
authors:
- Braun DA
- Hildebrandt F
journal: Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a028191
keywords:
- Animals
- Cilia/pathology
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Humans
- "Kidney Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- "Models, Biological"
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ciliopathies.
**Authors:** Braun DA, Hildebrandt F
**Journal:** Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1101/cshperspect.a028191](https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a028191)

## Content

1. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol. 2017 Mar 1;9(3):a028191. doi: 
10.1101/cshperspect.a028191.

Ciliopathies.

Braun DA(1), Hildebrandt F(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Nephrology, Harvard Medical School, Boston Children's Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02115.

Nephronophthisis-related ciliopathies (NPHP-RC) are a group of inherited 
diseases that affect genes encoding proteins that localize to primary cilia or 
centrosomes. With few exceptions, ciliopathies are inherited in an autosomal 
recessive manner, and affected individuals manifest early during childhood or 
adolescence. NPHP-RC are genetically very heterogeneous, and, currently, 
mutations in more than 90 genes have been described as single-gene causes. The 
phenotypes of NPHP-RC are very diverse, and include cystic-fibrotic kidney 
disease, brain developmental defects, retinal degeneration, skeletal 
deformities, facial dimorphism, and, in some cases, laterality defects, and 
congenital heart disease. Mutations in the same gene can give rise to diverse 
phenotypes depending on the mutated allele. At the same time, there is broad 
phenotypic overlap between different monogenic genes. The identification of 
monogenic causes of ciliopathies has furthered the understanding of molecular 
mechanism and cellular pathways involved in the pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2017 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1101/cshperspect.a028191
PMCID: PMC5334254
PMID: 27793968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]