---
reference_id: "PMID:15694184"
title: Update on MALT lymphomas.
authors:
- Isaacson PG
journal: Best Pract Res Clin Haematol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/j.beha.2004.08.003
keywords:
- Humans
- "Lymphoma, B-Cell, Marginal Zone/etiology, genetics"
- NF-kappa B/metabolism
- Signal Transduction
- "Translocation, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Update on MALT lymphomas.
**Authors:** Isaacson PG
**Journal:** Best Pract Res Clin Haematol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.beha.2004.08.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beha.2004.08.003)

## Content

1. Best Pract Res Clin Haematol. 2005 Mar;18(1):57-68. doi: 
10.1016/j.beha.2004.08.003.

Update on MALT lymphomas.

Isaacson PG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Histopathology, University College London, London WC1E 6JJ, UK. 
p.isaacson@ucl.ac.uk

Gastric mucosa associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma is a histologically 
distinct tumour derived from MALT acquired as a result of Helicobacter pylori 
infection. Eradication of H. pylori causes clinical regression of the lymphoma 
in 75% of cases. In seeking to identify those cases resistant to this therapy, 
and in the interests of further understanding the biology of MALT lymphoma, 
genetic alterations of MALT lymphomas have been investigated. Three 
translocations, t(11;18)(q21;q21), t(1;14)(p22;q32) and t(14;18)(q32;q21) are 
specifically associated with MALT lymphoma and the genes involved have been 
identified. T(11;18) results in a chimeric fusion between the API2 and MALT1 
genes and is specifically associated with gastric MALT lymphomas that do not 
respond to eradication of H. pylori. T(1;14) and t(14;18) deregulate BCL10 and 
MALT1 expression, respectively. These three chromosomal translocations that 
involve different genes appear to share common oncogenic properties by targeting 
the same nuclear factor kappa B (NF kappa B) oncogenic pathway.

DOI: 10.1016/j.beha.2004.08.003
PMID: 15694184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]