---
reference_id: "PMID:26427149"
title: "Association between Common Genetic Variants of α2A-, α2B-, and α2C-Adrenergic Receptors and Orthostatic Hypotension."
authors:
- Lu N
- Yuan Y
- Piao J
- Pei F
- Sun K
- Zheng Y
- Hui RT
journal: Clin Lab
year: '2015'
doi: 10.7754/clin.lab.2015.150107
keywords:
- Adult
- Asian People/genetics
- Blood Pressure/genetics
- Case-Control Studies
- Chi-Square Distribution
- China/epidemiology
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Female
- Gene Frequency
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- "Hypotension, Orthostatic/diagnosis, ethnology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Logistic Models
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Odds Ratio
- Phenotype
- "Polymorphism, Genetic"
- "Receptors, Adrenergic, alpha-2/genetics"
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Association between Common Genetic Variants of α2A-, α2B-, and α2C-Adrenergic Receptors and Orthostatic Hypotension.
**Authors:** Lu N, Yuan Y, Piao J, Pei F, Sun K, Zheng Y, Hui RT
**Journal:** Clin Lab (2015)
**DOI:** [10.7754/clin.lab.2015.150107](https://doi.org/10.7754/clin.lab.2015.150107)

## Content

1. Clin Lab. 2015;61(8):1033-41. doi: 10.7754/clin.lab.2015.150107.

Association between Common Genetic Variants of α2A-, α2B-, and α2C-Adrenergic
Receptors and Orthostatic Hypotension.

Lu N, Yuan Y, Piao J, Pei F, Sun K, Zheng Y, Hui RT.

BACKGROUND: The genetic background associated with the dysregulation of
orthostatic blood pressure remains poorly understood. The sympathetic nervous
system plays a pivotal role in the regulation of blood pressure, as well as in
response to positional changes. The essential role of adrenergic receptors in
the sympathetic nervous system prompted us to hypothesize that common genetic
variants of the α2-adrenergic receptor might contribute to the dysregulation of
orthostatic blood pressure in general populations. This study is to explore the
association between the polymorphisms of the α2-adrenergic receptor genes and
the occurrence of orthostatic hypotension in Chinese populations.
METHODS: The polymorphisms ADRA2A C-1291G (rs1800544), ADRA2B 301-303 I/D
(rs28365031), and ADRA2C 322-325 I/D (rs61767072) were genotyped in 317 patients
with orthostatic hypotension and 664 age- and gender-matched controls. Logistic
regression analyses, adjusted for multiple comparisons, were used to determine
the association between the allele/genotype of each ADRA2 gene and the risk of
orthostatic hypotension.
RESULTS: No significant association was found between the ADRA2A C-1291G, ADRA2B
301-303 I/D, and ADRA2C 322-325 I/D polymorphisms and orthostatic hypotension.
CONCLUSIONS: We concluded that the common polymorphisms in the alpha2-adrenergic
receptor gene is not associated with orthostatic hypotension risk in Chinese.

DOI: 10.7754/clin.lab.2015.150107
PMID: 26427149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
