---
reference_id: "PMID:28160419"
title: "Adams-Oliver syndrome review of the literature: Refining the diagnostic phenotype."
authors:
- Hassed S
- Li S
- Mulvihill J
- Aston C
- Palmer S
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37889
keywords:
- "Abnormalities, Multiple/diagnosis, genetics"
- Diagnostic Imaging
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Female
- Genetic Association Studies
- Humans
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Male
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Receptors, Notch/metabolism"
- "Scalp Dermatoses/congenital, diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction
- "cdc42 GTP-Binding Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- "rac1 GTP-Binding Protein/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adams-Oliver syndrome review of the literature: Refining the diagnostic phenotype.
**Authors:** Hassed S, Li S, Mulvihill J, Aston C, Palmer S
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.37889](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.37889)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2017 Mar;173(3):790-800. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37889. Epub
2017  Feb 4.

Adams-Oliver syndrome review of the literature: Refining the diagnostic 
phenotype.

Hassed S(1), Li S(1), Mulvihill J(1), Aston C(1), Palmer S(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma.

The Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS) is defined as aplasia cutis congenita (ACC) with 
transverse terminal limb defects (TTLD). Frequencies of associated anomalies are 
not well characterized. Six causative genes have been identified: ARHGAP31, 
DOCK6, EOGT, RBPJ, NOTCH1, and DLL4. We review 385 previously described 
individuals (139 non-familial and 246 familial probands and family members) and 
add clinical data on 13 previously unreported individuals with AOS. In addition 
to ACC and TTLD, the most commonly associated anomalies included a wide variety 
of central nervous system (CNS) anomalies and congenital heart defects each seen 
in 23%. CNS anomalies included structural anomalies, microcephaly, vascular 
defects, and vascular sequelae. CNS migration defects were common. Cutis 
marmorata telangiectasia congenita (CMTC) was found in 19% of the study 
population and other vascular anomalies were seen in 14%. Hemorrhage was listed 
as the cause of death for five of 25 deaths reported. A relatively large number 
of non-familial probands were reported to have hepatoportal sclerosis with 
portal hypertension and esophageal varices. Non-familial probands were more 
likely to have additional anomalies than were familial probands. The data 
reported herein provide a basis for refining the diagnostic features of AOS and 
suggest management recommendations for probands newly diagnosed with AOS. © 2017 
Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2017 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37889
PMID: 28160419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]