---
reference_id: "PMID:37601414"
title: Adeno-associated virus-mediated gene therapy in a patient with Canavan disease using dual routes of administration and immune modulation.
authors:
- Corti M
- Byrne BJ
- Gessler DJ
- Thompson G
- Norman S
- Lammers J
- Coleman KE
- Liberati C
- Elder ME
- Escolar ML
- Tuna IS
- Mesaros C
- Kleiner GI
- Barbouth DS
- Gray-Edwards HL
- Clement N
- Cleaver BD
- Gao G
journal: Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.omtm.2023.06.001
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adeno-associated virus-mediated gene therapy in a patient with Canavan disease using dual routes of administration and immune modulation.
**Authors:** Corti M, Byrne BJ, Gessler DJ, Thompson G, Norman S, Lammers J, Coleman KE, Liberati C, Elder ME, Escolar ML, Tuna IS, Mesaros C, Kleiner GI, Barbouth DS, Gray-Edwards HL, Clement N, Cleaver BD, Gao G
**Journal:** Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.omtm.2023.06.001](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.omtm.2023.06.001)

## Content

1. Mol Ther Methods Clin Dev. 2023 Jun 19;30:303-314. doi:
10.1016/j.omtm.2023.06.001. eCollection 2023 Sep 14.

Adeno-associated virus-mediated gene therapy in a patient with Canavan disease
using dual routes of administration and immune modulation.

Corti M(1), Byrne BJ(1), Gessler DJ(2)(3), Thompson G(4), Norman S(1), Lammers
J(1), Coleman KE(1), Liberati C(1), Elder ME(1)(5), Escolar ML(6), Tuna IS(7),
Mesaros C(8)(9), Kleiner GI(10), Barbouth DS(11), Gray-Edwards HL(2)(12),
Clement N(1), Cleaver BD(1), Gao G(2)(13)(14).

Author information:
(1)Powell Gene Therapy Center, Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine,
University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
(2)Horae Gene Therapy Center, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Minnesota Medical School,
Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatric Surgery, College of Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, USA.
(5)University of Florida Health Shands Children's Hospital, Gainesville, FL,
USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
(7)Department of Radiology, College of Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL, USA.
(8)Penn Medicine/Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Center of Excellence in
Friedreich's Ataxia, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(9)Center of Excellence in Environmental Toxicology, Department of Systems
Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(10)Department of Pediatrics, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami,
Miami, FL, USA.
(11)Division of Clinical and Translational Genetics, Department of Human
Genetics, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, USA.
(12)Department of Radiology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA, USA.
(13)Li Weibo Institute for Rare Diseases Research, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA.
(14)Department of Microbiology and Physiological Systems, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA.

Gene replacement therapy is a rational therapeutic strategy and clinical
intervention for neurodegenerative disorders like Canavan disease, a
leukodystrophy caused by biallelic mutations in the aspartoacylase (ASPA) gene.
We aimed to investigate whether simultaneous intravenous (i.v.) and
intracerebroventricular (i.c.v.) administration of rAAV9-CB6-ASPA provides a
safe and effective therapeutic strategy in an open-label, individual-patient,
expanded-access trial for Canavan disease. Immunomodulation was given
prophylactically prior to adeno-associated virus (AAV) treatment to prevent an
immune response to ASPA or the vector capsid. The patient served as his own
control, and change from baseline was assessed by clinical pathology tests,
vector genomes in the blood, antibodies against ASPA and AAV capsids, levels of
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) N-acetylaspartate (NAA), brain water content and
morphology, clinical status, and motor function tests. Two years post treatment,
the patient's white matter myelination had increased, motor function was
improved, and he remained free of typical severe epilepsy. NAA level was reduced
at 3 months and remained stable up to 4 years post treatment. Immunomodulation
prior to AAV exposure enables repeat dosing and has prevented an anti-transgene
immune response. Dual-route administration of gene therapy may improve treatment
outcomes.

© 2023.

DOI: 10.1016/j.omtm.2023.06.001
PMCID: PMC10432950
PMID: 37601414

Conflict of interest statement: G.G. and D.J.G. are co-founders of ASPA
Therapeutics.
