---
reference_id: "PMID:23153835"
title: Gait variability and disability in multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Socie MJ
- Motl RW
- Pula JH
- Sandroff BM
- Sosnoff JJ
journal: Gait Posture
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.gaitpost.2012.10.012
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gait variability and disability in multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Socie MJ, Motl RW, Pula JH, Sandroff BM, Sosnoff JJ
**Journal:** Gait Posture (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gaitpost.2012.10.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gaitpost.2012.10.012)

## Content

1. Gait Posture. 2013 May;38(1):51-5. doi: 10.1016/j.gaitpost.2012.10.012. Epub 
2012 Nov 13.

Gait variability and disability in multiple sclerosis.

Socie MJ(1), Motl RW, Pula JH, Sandroff BM, Sosnoff JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Mechanical Science and Engineering, University of Illinois, 
Urbana, IL, United States. msocie@gmail.com

Gait variability is clinically relevant in some populations, but there is 
limited documentation of gait variability in persons with multiple sclerosis 
(MS). This investigation examined average and variability of spatiotemporal gait 
parameters in persons with MS and healthy controls and subsequent associations 
with disability status. 88 individuals with MS (age 52.4±11.1) and 20 healthy 
controls (age 50.9±8.7) performed two self-paced walking trials on a 7.9-m 
electronic walkway to determine gait parameters. Disability was indexed by the 
Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) and ranged between 2.5 and 6.5. Gait 
variability was indexed by standard deviation (SD) and coefficient of variation 
(CV=SD/mean) of step time, step length, and step width. Average gait parameters 
were significantly correlated with EDSS (ρ=0.756-0.609) and were significantly 
different in individuals with MS compared to controls (p≤0.002). Also, step 
length (p<0.001) and step time (p<0.001) variability were both significantly 
greater in MS compared to controls. EDSS was positively correlated with step 
length variability and individuals with MS who used assistive devices to walk 
had significantly greater step length variability than those who walked 
independently (p's<.05). EDSS was correlated with step time and length 
variability even when age was taken into account. Additionally, Fisher's z test 
of partial correlations revealed that average gait parameters were more closely 
related to disability status than gait variability in individuals with MS. This 
suggests that focusing on average gait parameters may be more important than 
variability in therapeutic interventions in MS.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gaitpost.2012.10.012
PMID: 23153835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]