---
reference_id: "PMID:26135520"
title: "Nationwide survey of fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23)-related hypophosphatemic diseases in Japan: prevalence, biochemical data and treatment."
authors:
- Endo I
- Fukumoto S
- Ozono K
- Namba N
- Inoue D
- Okazaki R
- Yamauchi M
- Sugimoto T
- Minagawa M
- Michigami T
- Nagai M
- Matsumoto T
journal: Endocr J
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1507/endocrj.EJ15-0275
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Familial Hypophosphatemic Rickets/blood, epidemiology"
- Female
- Fibroblast Growth Factor-23
- Fibroblast Growth Factors/blood
- Health Surveys
- Humans
- "Hypophosphatemia/blood, epidemiology"
- Incidence
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Japan/epidemiology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Phosphorus/blood
- Prevalence
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nationwide survey of fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23)-related hypophosphatemic diseases in Japan: prevalence, biochemical data and treatment.
**Authors:** Endo I, Fukumoto S, Ozono K, Namba N, Inoue D, Okazaki R, Yamauchi M, Sugimoto T, Minagawa M, Michigami T, Nagai M, Matsumoto T
**Journal:** Endocr J (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1507/endocrj.EJ15-0275](https://doi.org/10.1507/endocrj.EJ15-0275)

## Content

1. Endocr J. 2015;62(9):811-6. doi: 10.1507/endocrj.EJ15-0275. Epub 2015 Jul 1.

Nationwide survey of fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23)-related 
hypophosphatemic diseases in Japan: prevalence, biochemical data and treatment.

Endo I(1), Fukumoto S, Ozono K, Namba N, Inoue D, Okazaki R, Yamauchi M, 
Sugimoto T, Minagawa M, Michigami T, Nagai M, Matsumoto T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Endocrinology & Metabolism Institute of Biomedical 
Sciences, Tokushima University Graduate School, Tokushima 770-8503 Japan.

A nationwide epidemiologic survey of fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23)-related 
hypophosphatemic diseases was conducted in 2010 to clarify the prevalence and 
the clinical presentations of the disorders. A questionnaire inquiring the 
experience of patients with these diseases was sent to randomly selected 
hospitals throughout Japan. The estimated annual incidence of the diseases was 
117 cases (95% CI 75 - 160), 55 males (95% CI 30 - 81) and 62 females (95% CI 40 
- 84). Tumor-induced osteomalacia (TIO) and X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets 
(XLH) were the most prevalent causes of acquired and genetic FGF23-related 
hypophosphatemic diseases, respectively. The estimated incidence of XLH was 
about 1 in 20,000. We have also collected clinical data of the patients by a 
secondary survey. These patients showed FGF23 levels of above 30 pg/mL by intact 
assay in the presence of hypophosphatemia. While complete resection of 
responsible tumors improved biochemical abnormalities in patients with TIO, 
treatment with phosphate and/or active vitamin D3 did not normalize serum 
phosphate and tubular maximum transport of phosphate in patients with XLH. Our 
results suggest that there is no racial difference in the incidence of XLH. 
While FGF23 measurement is useful for the diagnosis of FGF23-related 
hypophosphatemic diseases, the better management is necessary especially for 
patients with genetic hypophosphatemic rickets caused by excessive actions of 
FGF23.

DOI: 10.1507/endocrj.EJ15-0275
PMID: 26135520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]