---
reference_id: "PMID:39030910"
title: Clinical and functional studies of MTOR variants in Smith-Kingsmore syndrome reveal deficits of circadian rhythm and sleep-wake behavior.
authors:
- Liu AC
- Shen Y
- Serbinski CR
- He H
- Roman D
- Endale M
- Aschbacher-Smith L
- King KA
- Granadillo JL
- López I
- Krueger DA
- Dye TJ
- Smith DF
- Hogenesch JB
- Prada CE
journal: HGG Adv
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2024.100333
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and functional studies of MTOR variants in Smith-Kingsmore syndrome reveal deficits of circadian rhythm and sleep-wake behavior.
**Authors:** Liu AC, Shen Y, Serbinski CR, He H, Roman D, Endale M, Aschbacher-Smith L, King KA, Granadillo JL, López I, Krueger DA, Dye TJ, Smith DF, Hogenesch JB, Prada CE
**Journal:** HGG Adv (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.xhgg.2024.100333](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xhgg.2024.100333)

## Content

1. HGG Adv. 2024 Oct 10;5(4):100333. doi: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2024.100333. Epub 2024
Jul  17.

Clinical and functional studies of MTOR variants in Smith-Kingsmore syndrome 
reveal deficits of circadian rhythm and sleep-wake behavior.

Liu AC(1), Shen Y(2), Serbinski CR(3), He H(2), Roman D(2), Endale M(2), 
Aschbacher-Smith L(4), King KA(5), Granadillo JL(5), López I(6), Krueger DA(4), 
Dye TJ(4), Smith DF(7), Hogenesch JB(4), Prada CE(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Aging, University of Florida College of 
Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. Electronic address: andrew.liu@ufl.edu.
(2)Department of Physiology and Aging, University of Florida College of 
Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.
(3)Divisions of Human Genetics, Neurology, Immunobiology, Pediatric 
Otolaryngology, and Pulmonary Medicine, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA; Division of Genetics, Genomics & Metabolism, 
Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
(4)Divisions of Human Genetics, Neurology, Immunobiology, Pediatric 
Otolaryngology, and Pulmonary Medicine, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.
(5)Division of Genetics and Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, 
Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(6)Pediatric Neurology Unit, Department of Neurology, Clínica Las Condes, 
Santiago, Chile.
(7)Divisions of Pediatric Otolaryngology and Pulmonary Medicine, Cincinnati 
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA; The Sleep Center, 
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA; The 
Center for Circadian Medicine, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA; Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, 
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.
(8)Divisions of Human Genetics, Neurology, Immunobiology, Pediatric 
Otolaryngology, and Pulmonary Medicine, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical 
Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA; Division of Genetics, Genomics & Metabolism, 
Ann & Robert H. Lurie Children's Hospital of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60611, USA; 
Department of Pediatrics, Feinberg School of Medicine of Northwestern 
University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. Electronic address: 
cprada@luriechildrens.org.

Heterozygous de novo or inherited gain-of-function mutations in the MTOR gene 
cause Smith-Kingsmore syndrome (SKS). SKS is a rare autosomal dominant 
condition, and individuals with SKS display macrocephaly/megalencephaly, 
developmental delay, intellectual disability, and seizures. A few dozen 
individuals are reported in the literature. Here, we report a cohort of 28 
individuals with SKS that represent nine MTOR pathogenic variants. We conducted 
a detailed natural history study and found pathophysiological deficits among 
individuals with SKS in addition to the common neurodevelopmental symptoms. 
These symptoms include sleep-wake disturbance, hyperphagia, and hyperactivity, 
indicative of homeostatic imbalance. To characterize these variants, we 
developed cell models and characterized their functional consequences. We showed 
that these SKS variants display a range of mechanistic target of rapamycin 
(mTOR) activities and respond to the mTOR inhibitor, rapamycin, differently. For 
example, the R1480_C1483del variant we identified here and the previously known 
C1483F are more active than wild-type controls and less responsive to rapamycin. 
Further, we showed that SKS mutations dampened circadian rhythms and low-dose 
rapamycin improved the rhythm amplitude, suggesting that optimal mTOR activity 
is required for normal circadian function. As SKS is caused by gain-of-function 
mutations in MTOR, rapamycin was used to treat several patients. While higher 
doses of rapamycin caused delayed sleep-wake phase disorder in a subset of 
patients, optimized lower doses improved sleep. Our study expands the clinical 
and molecular spectrum of SKS and supports further studies for mechanism-guided 
treatment options to improve sleep-wake behavior and overall health.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.xhgg.2024.100333
PMCID: PMC11342114
PMID: 39030910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests The authors declare no 
competing interests.