---
reference_id: "PMID:23776152"
title: Hyperphagia among patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
authors:
- Sherafat-Kazemzadeh R
- Ivey L
- Kahn SR
- Sapp JC
- Hicks MD
- Kim RC
- Krause AJ
- Shomaker LB
- Biesecker LG
- Han JC
- Yanovski JA
journal: Pediatr Obes
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1111/j.2047-6310.2013.00182.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hyperphagia among patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
**Authors:** Sherafat-Kazemzadeh R, Ivey L, Kahn SR, Sapp JC, Hicks MD, Kim RC, Krause AJ, Shomaker LB, Biesecker LG, Han JC, Yanovski JA
**Journal:** Pediatr Obes (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.2047-6310.2013.00182.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2047-6310.2013.00182.x)

## Content

1. Pediatr Obes. 2013 Oct;8(5):e64-7. doi: 10.1111/j.2047-6310.2013.00182.x. Epub
 2013 Jun 18.

Hyperphagia among patients with Bardet-Biedl syndrome.

Sherafat-Kazemzadeh R(1), Ivey L, Kahn SR, Sapp JC, Hicks MD, Kim RC, Krause AJ, 
Shomaker LB, Biesecker LG, Han JC, Yanovski JA.

Author information:
(1)Section on Growth and Obesity (SGO), Program in Developmental Endocrinology 
and Genetics (PDEGEN), Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development (NICHD), National Institutes of Health (NIH), DHHS, 
Bethesda, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: The importance of hyperphagia as a cause for energy imbalance in 
humans with Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) has not been established. We therefore 
compared hyperphagic symptoms in patients with BBS vs. controls.
METHODS: We studied 13 patients with BBS and 23 non-syndromic controls with 
similar age, sex and body mass index (BMI) z-score. A 13-item hyperphagia 
questionnaire was completed by patients' parents/guardians.
RESULTS: Total hyperphagia questionnaire score was higher in BBS than controls 
(27.6 ± 9.0 vs. 19.1 ± 7.9, P = 0.005). Behaviour and drive subscales were 
higher for BBS than controls (12.5 ± 4.1 vs. 7.8 ± 3.2, P = 0.001, and 
11.2 ± 4.1 vs. 8.3 ± 3.8, P = 0.04, respectively); severity was not 
significantly different between groups (3.8 ± 1.5 vs. 3.0 ± 1.3, P = 0.072). 
After adjustment for demographic variables and BMI z-score, total and behaviour 
subscale scores remained significantly different between groups, suggesting 
food-seeking activity, rather than preoccupation with food may be the main 
hyperphagic feature among patients with BBS.
CONCLUSION: Appetite dysregulation may contribute to obesity in BBS.

© 2013 The Authors. Pediatric Obesity © 2013 International Association for the 
Study of Obesity.

DOI: 10.1111/j.2047-6310.2013.00182.x
PMCID: PMC3901011
PMID: 23776152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]