---
reference_id: "PMID:27530606"
title: "Clinicopathologic correlation of 282 leukocytoclastic vasculitis cases in a tertiary hospital: a focus on direct immunofluorescence findings at the blood vessel wall."
authors:
- Takatu CM
- Heringer APR
- Aoki V
- Valente NYS
- de Faria Sanchez PC
- de Carvalho JF
- Criado PR
journal: Immunol Res
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s12026-016-8850-6
keywords:
- Adult
- "Blood Vessels/immunology, pathology"
- Complement C3/immunology
- Female
- "Fluorescent Antibody Technique, Direct"
- Humans
- Immunoglobulins/immunology
- Male
- "Skin/immunology, pathology"
- Tertiary Care Centers
- "Vasculitis, Leukocytoclastic, Cutaneous/diagnosis, immunology, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinicopathologic correlation of 282 leukocytoclastic vasculitis cases in a tertiary hospital: a focus on direct immunofluorescence findings at the blood vessel wall.
**Authors:** Takatu CM, Heringer APR, Aoki V, Valente NYS, de Faria Sanchez PC, de Carvalho JF, Criado PR
**Journal:** Immunol Res (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12026-016-8850-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12026-016-8850-6)

## Content

1. Immunol Res. 2017 Feb;65(1):395-401. doi: 10.1007/s12026-016-8850-6.

Clinicopathologic correlation of 282 leukocytoclastic vasculitis cases in a
tertiary hospital: a focus on direct immunofluorescence findings at the blood
vessel wall.

Takatu CM(1), Heringer APR(2), Aoki V(1), Valente NYS(1), de Faria Sanchez
PC(1), de Carvalho JF(3), Criado PR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hospital das Clínicas, University of São Paulo
Medical School, Av. Dr. Enéas de Carvalho Aguiar, 255, São Paulo, SP, 05403-000,
Brazil.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Hospital das Clínicas, University of São Paulo
Medical School, Av. Dr. Enéas de Carvalho Aguiar, 255, São Paulo, SP, 05403-000,
Brazil. heringer@gmail.com.
(3)Health Science Institute, Federal University of Bahia, Salvador, Bahia,
Brazil.

This is the largest direct immunofluorescence (DIF) analysis of patients with
histology-proven cutaneous leukocytoclastic vasculitis (LCV). To establish the
correlation of deposition of immune complexes at the blood vessel walls with
underlying causes and prognosis of LCV, we performed a retrospective study from
January 2007 to December 2014. The patients are followed at the Department of
Dermatology, Hospital Das Clínicas da Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de
São Paulo, a tertiary hospital at São Paulo, Brazil. We reviewed the data of 282
biopsy-proven LCV cases with DIF performed. For the statistical analysis, we
included only patients with positive DIF exclusively in vessel walls (235/282
patients). We planned to find a correlation between the DIF profiles of LCV
patients and the epidemiology data, underlying causes and prognosis. Ages ranged
from five to 87 years old (yo), median age of 45 and 191/282 (67.73 %) were
female individuals. DIF analysis showed positivity in 70.21 % of the samples,
and C3 was the most frequent immunoreactant. Immunoglobulin A (IgA) deposition
at the blood vessel wall was related to age and absence of
autoimmune/inflammatory diseases. Immunoglobulin M (IgM) deposition at the blood
vessel wall was related to females, autoimmune/inflammatory disorders, C3 and C4
consumption and antinuclear antibody and anti-SSA/anti-SSB positivity.
Immunoglobulin G (IgG) deposition at the blood vessel wall was associated with
age and positive ANCA; finally, C3 deposition at the blood vessel wall was
associated with hematuria and renal involvement. Systemic involvement was
present in 12.5 % cases of LCV patients. C3 deposits, the most frequent finding
of this study, were related to renal involvement; IgA deposits to absence of
autoimmune or inflammatory diseases; IgM deposition to the presence of
autoimmune or inflammatory diseases and IgG deposits were associated with
positive ANCA. DIF seems to be an important method to establish the prognosis
and underlying etiology of LCV. Characterization of the immune complex at the
blood vessel wall by DIF is relevant to determine underlying conditions related
to LCV.

DOI: 10.1007/s12026-016-8850-6
PMID: 27530606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
