---
reference_id: "PMID:38136976"
title: A Case Report of SYNE1 Deficiency-Mimicking Mitochondrial Disease and the Value of Pangenomic Investigations.
authors:
- Serag M
- Plutino M
- Charles P
- Azulay JP
- Chaussenot A
- Paquis-Flucklinger V
- Ait-El-Mkadem Saadi S
- Rouzier C
journal: Genes (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/genes14122154
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Cerebellar Ataxia/diagnosis, genetics"
- Comparative Genomic Hybridization
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- Cytoskeletal Proteins/genetics
- "Mitochondrial Diseases/diagnosis, genetics"
- Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Case Report of SYNE1 Deficiency-Mimicking Mitochondrial Disease and the Value of Pangenomic Investigations.
**Authors:** Serag M, Plutino M, Charles P, Azulay JP, Chaussenot A, Paquis-Flucklinger V, Ait-El-Mkadem Saadi S, Rouzier C
**Journal:** Genes (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/genes14122154](https://doi.org/10.3390/genes14122154)

## Content

1. Genes (Basel). 2023 Nov 29;14(12):2154. doi: 10.3390/genes14122154.

A Case Report of SYNE1 Deficiency-Mimicking Mitochondrial Disease and the Value 
of Pangenomic Investigations.

Serag M(1)(2), Plutino M(1)(2), Charles P(3), Azulay JP(4), Chaussenot A(1)(2), 
Paquis-Flucklinger V(1)(2), Ait-El-Mkadem Saadi S(1)(2), Rouzier C(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital l'Archet 2, CHU de Nice, 151 Route 
Saint-Antoine de Ginestière, 06202 Nice, France.
(2)CNRS UMR7284/ INSERM U1081, Faculté de Médecine, Université Côte d'Azur, 
06107 Nice, France.
(3)Service de Génétique, La Pitié-Salpêtrière, AP-HP, 75610 Paris, France.
(4)Service de Neurologie, 13005 Marseille, France.

Mitochondrial disorders are characterized by a huge clinical, biochemical, and 
genetic heterogeneity, which poses significant diagnostic challenges. Several 
studies report that more than 50% of patients with suspected mitochondrial 
disease could have a non-mitochondrial disorder. Thus, only the identification 
of the causative pathogenic variant can confirm the diagnosis. Herein, we 
describe the diagnostic journey of a family suspected of having a mitochondrial 
disorder who were referred to our Genetics Department. The proband presented 
with the association of cerebellar ataxia, COX-negative fibers on muscle 
histology, and mtDNA deletions. Whole exome sequencing (WES), supplemented by a 
high-resolution array, comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH), allowed us 
to identify two pathogenic variants in the non-mitochondrial SYNE1 gene. The 
proband and her affected sister were found to be compound heterozygous for a 
known nonsense variant (c.13258C>T, p.(Arg4420Ter)), and a large intragenic 
deletion that was predicted to result in a loss of function. To our knowledge, 
this is the first report of a large intragenic deletion of SYNE1 in patients 
with cerebellar ataxia (ARCA1). This report highlights the interest in a 
pangenomic approach to identify the genetic basis in heterogeneous neuromuscular 
patients with the possible cause of mitochondrial disease. Moreover, even rare 
copy number variations should be considered in patients with a phenotype 
suggestive of SYNE1 deficiency.

DOI: 10.3390/genes14122154
PMCID: PMC10743207
PMID: 38136976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.