---
reference_id: "PMID:38366625"
title: "Intravenous gentamicin therapy induces functional type VII collagen in patients with recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa: an open-label clinical trial."
authors:
- Woodley DT
- Hao M
- Kwong A
- Levian B
- Cogan J
- Hou Y
- Mosallaei D
- Kleinman E
- Zheng K
- Chung C
- Kim G
- Peng D
- Chen M
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljae063
keywords:
- Humans
- "Gentamicins/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa Dystrophica/drug therapy, genetics"
- "Collagen Type VII/genetics, immunology"
- Pilot Projects
- Male
- Female
- "Codon, Nonsense"
- Adult
- Adolescent
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
- Wound Healing/drug effects
- "Skin/pathology, drug effects"
- "Anti-Bacterial Agents/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Drug Administration Schedule
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intravenous gentamicin therapy induces functional type VII collagen in patients with recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa: an open-label clinical trial.
**Authors:** Woodley DT, Hao M, Kwong A, Levian B, Cogan J, Hou Y, Mosallaei D, Kleinman E, Zheng K, Chung C, Kim G, Peng D, Chen M
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/bjd/ljae063](https://doi.org/10.1093/bjd/ljae063)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2024 Jul 16;191(2):267-274. doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljae063.

Intravenous gentamicin therapy induces functional type VII collagen in patients 
with recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa: an open-label clinical trial.

Woodley DT(1), Hao M(1), Kwong A(1), Levian B(1), Cogan J(1), Hou Y(1), 
Mosallaei D(1), Kleinman E(1), Zheng K(1), Chung C(1), Kim G(1), Peng D(1), Chen 
M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, The Keck School of Medicine, University of 
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Comment in
    Br J Dermatol. 2024 Jul 16;191(2):161-162. doi: 10.1093/bjd/ljae137.

BACKGROUND: Recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB) is an incurable 
widespread blistering skin disorder caused by mutations in the gene encoding for 
type VII collagen (C7), the major component of anchoring fibrils.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the efficacy and safety of intravenous (IV) gentamicin 
readthrough therapy in patients with RDEB harbouring nonsense mutations. The 
primary outcomes were increased expression of C7 in patients' skin and safety 
assessments (ototoxicity, nephrotoxicity, autoimmune response); secondary 
outcomes included measuring wound healing in target wounds and assessment by a 
validated Epidermolysis Bullosa Disease Activity and Scarring Index (EBDASI) 
scoring system.
METHODS: An open-label pilot trial to assess two different IV gentamicin 
regimens between August 2018 and March 2020 with follow-up through to 180 days 
post-treatment was carried out. Three patients with RDEB with confirmed nonsense 
mutations in COL7A1 in either one or two alleles and decreased baseline 
expression of C7 at the dermal-epidermal junction (DEJ) of their skin 
participated in the study. Three patients received gentamicin 7.5 mg kg-1 daily 
for 14 days and two of the three patients further received 7.5 mg kg-1 IV 
gentamicin twice weekly for 12 weeks. Patients who had pre-existing auditory or 
renal impairment, were currently using ototoxic or nephrotoxic medications, or 
had allergies to aminoglycosides or sulfate compounds were excluded.
RESULTS: After gentamicin treatment, skin biopsies from all three patients (age 
range 18-28 years) exhibited increased C7 in their DEJ. With both regimens, the 
new C7 persisted for at least 6 months post-treatment. At 1 and 3 months 
post-treatment, 100% of the monitored wounds exhibited > 85% closure. Both IV 
gentamicin infusion regimens decreased EBDASI total activity scores. Of the 
patients assessed with the EBDASI, all exhibited decreased total activity scores 
3 months post-treatment. All three patients completed the study; no adverse 
effects or anti-C7 antibodies were detected.
CONCLUSIONS: IV gentamicin induced the readthrough of nonsense mutations in 
patients with RDEB and restored functional C7 in their skin, enhanced wound 
healing and improved clinical parameters. IV gentamicin may be a safe, 
efficacious, low-cost and readily available treatment for this population of 
patients with RDEB.

Plain Language Summary: Recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB) is a 
rare and life-threatening inherited skin disease that causes widespread skin 
blisters that heal with scarring. RDEB affects around 1 in every 100,000 
individuals globally. The condition is caused by a mutation in the gene coding 
for type VII collagen (C7), resulting in a deficiency of C7. C7 is a vital 
component of the skin as it is responsible for holding the skin’s upper two 
layers together. To date, there are no approved systemic treatments that can 
cure RDEB. This study, from the United States, aimed to evaluate the 
effectiveness and safety of intravenous (medicine delivered directly into a 
patient’s vein) gentamicin (an antibiotic) for people with RDEB who have 
nonsense mutations in their genes (a type of mutation that prevents the 
production of complete proteins by introducing an inappropriate ‘stop signal’). 
We gave gentamicin to three patients with RDEB every day for 14 days, and two of 
the three patients further received intravenous gentamicin twice a week for 12 
weeks. After gentamicin treatment, all three patients showed increased 
expression of C7. With both regimens, the new C7 stayed for at least 6 months 
after the treatment. At 1 and 3 months after treatment, 100% of the wounds being 
monitored in the patients had closed by more than 85%. All three patients 
completed the study, and no side-effects were experienced. In conclusion, 
intravenous gentamicin increased the production of C7 and improved wound healing 
and quality of life in patients with RDEB carrying nonsense mutations. 
Intravenous gentamicin may offer a safe, effective, low-cost and readily 
available therapy in patients with RDEB.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of British 
Association of Dermatologists. All rights reserved. For commercial re-use, 
please contact reprints@oup.com for reprints and translation rights for 
reprints. All other permissions can be obtained through our RightsLink service 
via the Permissions link on the article page on our site—for further information 
please contact journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bjd/ljae063
PMCID: PMC11250489
PMID: 38366625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.