---
reference_id: "PMID:37175665"
title: "Autoimmune Neuroinflammatory Diseases: Role of Interleukins."
authors:
- Khan AW
- Farooq M
- Hwang MJ
- Haseeb M
- Choi S
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms24097960
keywords:
- Humans
- Neuroinflammatory Diseases
- Interleukin-17
- Interleukin-6
- Interleukins
- Inflammation/drug therapy
- Cytokines
- Th17 Cells
- Interleukin-1/therapeutic use
- Autoimmune Diseases
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Autoimmune Neuroinflammatory Diseases: Role of Interleukins.
**Authors:** Khan AW, Farooq M, Hwang MJ, Haseeb M, Choi S
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms24097960](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24097960)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Apr 27;24(9):7960. doi: 10.3390/ijms24097960.

Autoimmune Neuroinflammatory Diseases: Role of Interleukins.

Khan AW(1), Farooq M(1)(2), Hwang MJ(1), Haseeb M(2), Choi S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Science and Technology, Ajou University, Suwon 16499, 
Republic of Korea.
(2)S&K Therapeutics, Ajou University Campus Plaza 418, 199 Worldcup-ro, 
Yeongtong-gu, Suwon 16502, Republic of Korea.

Autoimmune neuroinflammatory diseases are a group of disorders resulting from 
abnormal immune responses in the nervous system, causing inflammation and tissue 
damage. The interleukin (IL) family of cytokines, especially IL-1, IL-6, and 
IL-17, plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of these diseases. IL-1 is 
involved in the activation of immune cells, production of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines, and promotion of blood-brain barrier breakdown. IL-6 is essential for 
the differentiation of T cells into Th17 cells and has been implicated in the 
initiation and progression of neuroinflammation. IL-17 is a potent 
pro-inflammatory cytokine produced by Th17 cells that plays a crucial role in 
recruiting immune cells to sites of inflammation. This review summarizes the 
current understanding of the roles of different interleukins in autoimmune 
neuroinflammatory diseases, including multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis, Alzheimer's disease, neuromyelitis optica, and autoimmune 
encephalitis, and discusses the potential of targeting ILs as a therapeutic 
strategy against these diseases. We also highlight the need for further research 
to better understand the roles of ILs in autoimmune neuroinflammatory diseases 
and to identify new targets for treating these debilitating diseases.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24097960
PMCID: PMC10178921
PMID: 37175665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.