---
reference_id: "PMID:36725780"
title: Apical fibrosis was the most common incidental pulmonary finding in a familial Mediterranean fever cohort.
authors:
- Şen N
- Acer Kasman S
- Baysal T
- Dizman R
- Yılmaz-Öner S
- Tezcan ME
journal: Clin Rheumatol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s10067-023-06526-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Apical fibrosis was the most common incidental pulmonary finding in a familial Mediterranean fever cohort.
**Authors:** Şen N, Acer Kasman S, Baysal T, Dizman R, Yılmaz-Öner S, Tezcan ME
**Journal:** Clin Rheumatol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10067-023-06526-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10067-023-06526-7)

## Content

1. Clin Rheumatol. 2023 May;42(5):1363-1370. doi: 10.1007/s10067-023-06526-7.
Epub  2023 Feb 1.

Apical fibrosis was the most common incidental pulmonary finding in a familial 
Mediterranean fever cohort.

Şen N(1), Acer Kasman S(2), Baysal T(3), Dizman R(3), Yılmaz-Öner S(1), Tezcan 
ME(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Kartal Dr. Lutfi Kirdar City Hospital, Kartal, 
34680, Istanbul, Turkey.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, Kartal Dr. Lutfi Kirdar City Hospital, Kartal, 
34680, Istanbul, Turkey. sevtap-acer@hotmail.com.
(3)Department of Radiology, Kartal Dr. Lutfi Kirdar City Hospital, Istanbul, 
Turkey.

Comment in
    Clin Rheumatol. 2023 May;42(5):1495. doi: 10.1007/s10067-023-06561-4.

INTRODUCTION: Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is one of the common 
autoinflammatory diseases with multisystemic manifestation. Pleuritis is the 
only known pulmonary involvement of FMF; however, as far as we know, thoracic 
involvements in pleural, parenchymal, bronchial, and vascular structures have 
not been evaluated yet.
METHOD: We included 243 consecutive FMF patients who applied to our clinic 
within the last 5 years and were requested to have a thorax CT for any reason 
and 122 trauma patients without any comorbidity. An experienced radiologist 
evaluated the thorax CT images blindly according to the relevant guidelines. We 
then presented the common incidental pulmonary and mediastinal findings on the 
thorax CT. Additionally, we compared patients with and without lung involvement 
according to demographic and disease-related parameters.
RESULTS: In our study, 167 of 243 patients (68.7%) had at least one of the 
pulmonary findings on their thorax CT. The most common pulmonary findings were 
apical fibrosis in 96 (39.5%) patients, parenchymal fibrotic changes in 48 
(19.8%) patients, and a solitary parenchymal nodule smaller than 4 mm in 33 
(13.6%) patients. All demographic, genetic, and disease-related characteristics, 
including the frequency of spondyloarthropathy, were similar in patients with 
and without pulmonary findings.
CONCLUSIONS: We showed that the most common incidental pulmonary finding in our 
FMF cohort was apical fibrosis on thoracic CT. Our data did not show causality 
between FMF and apical fibrosis; therefore, more studies are needed to evaluate 
the frequency and clinical significance of apical fibrosis in FMF. Key Points • 
More than two-thirds of familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) patients in our study 
group who underwent a thoracic scan for any reason had pulmonary and mediastinal 
findings on thorax computed tomography (CT). • In our FMF cohort, the most 
common incidental pulmonary finding on their thorax CT was apical fibrosis. • 
All demographic and disease-related characteristics, including the frequency of 
spondyloarthritis, were similar between patients with and without pulmonary and 
mediastinal findings.

© 2023. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to International League of 
Associations for Rheumatology (ILAR).

DOI: 10.1007/s10067-023-06526-7
PMCID: PMC9891658
PMID: 36725780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]