---
reference_id: "PMID:33674298"
title: Nephrotic syndrome secondary to alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.
authors:
- Santos GF
- Ellis P
- Farrugia D
- Turner AM
journal: BMJ Case Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1136/bcr-2020-240288
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nephrotic syndrome secondary to alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.
**Authors:** Santos GF, Ellis P, Farrugia D, Turner AM
**Journal:** BMJ Case Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1136/bcr-2020-240288](https://doi.org/10.1136/bcr-2020-240288)

## Content

1. BMJ Case Rep. 2021 Mar 5;14(3):e240288. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2020-240288.

Nephrotic syndrome secondary to alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency.

Santos GF(1), Ellis P(2)(3), Farrugia D(4), Turner AM(5)(3).

Author information:
(1)Pneumonology Department, Hospital Garcia de Orta EPE, Almada, Portugal.
(2)Respiratory Medicine, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, 
Birmingham, UK.
(3)Institute of Applied Health Research, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, 
UK.
(4)Kidney Unit, University Hospitals of North Midlands NHS Trust, 
Stoke-on-Trent, UK.
(5)Respiratory Medicine, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, 
Birmingham, UK a.m.turner@bham.ac.uk.

We report a 64-year-old caucasian woman diagnosed with membranous nephropathy 
secondary to alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency (AATD). AATD is a rare autosomal 
codominant genetic disorder. Its clinical manifestations are mostly observed in 
the lungs, with early-onset emphysema. Nephropathy due to AATD is still very 
rare and only a few cohort studies have been reported. It has been recognised 
that alpha-1 antitrypsin has a protective role in the kidneys which enhances the 
possibility of development of kidney failure, such as nephrotic syndrome, in 
cases of AATD. Further clinical investigation is needed to understand the 
relationship between the development of nephropathy, namely membranous 
nephropathy, and AATD.

© BMJ Publishing Group Limited 2021. No commercial re-use. See rights and 
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bcr-2020-240288
PMCID: PMC7938990
PMID: 33674298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.