---
reference_id: "PMID:33068675"
title: Genotypic analysis of SLC4A1 A858D mutation in Indian population associated with distal renal tubular Acidosis (dRTA) coupled with hemolytic anemia.
authors:
- More TA
- Kedar PS
journal: Gene
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2020.145241
keywords:
- "Acidosis, Renal Tubular/complications, genetics"
- Adolescent
- "Anion Exchange Protein 1, Erythrocyte/genetics"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- India
- Infant
- Male
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Pedigree
- "Spherocytosis, Hereditary/complications"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genotypic analysis of SLC4A1 A858D mutation in Indian population associated with distal renal tubular Acidosis (dRTA) coupled with hemolytic anemia.
**Authors:** More TA, Kedar PS
**Journal:** Gene (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.gene.2020.145241](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gene.2020.145241)

## Content

1. Gene. 2021 Feb 15;769:145241. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2020.145241. Epub 2020 Oct
15.

Genotypic analysis of SLC4A1 A858D mutation in Indian population associated with 
distal renal tubular Acidosis (dRTA) coupled with hemolytic anemia.

More TA(1), Kedar PS(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematogenetics, ICMR-National Institute of Immunohematology, 
KEM Hospital Campus, Parel, Mumbai 40012, India.
(2)Department of Hematogenetics, ICMR-National Institute of Immunohematology, 
KEM Hospital Campus, Parel, Mumbai 40012, India. Electronic address: 
kedarps2002@yahoo.com.

INTRODUCTION: Although distinctive, distal renal tubular acidosis (dRTA) and 
Hereditary Spherocytosis (HS) shares a common protein, the anion exchanger1 
(AE1) encoded by SLC4A1gene. In spite of this, the co-existence of dRTA and HS 
has rarely been observed. To date, 23 mutations have been identified in SLC4A1 
gene causing both autosomal recessive (AR) and autosomal dominant (AD) forms of 
dRTA.
METHODS: We have assessed the applicability of the High Resolution Melting curve 
(HRM) method for the detection of SLC4A1 (A858D) mutation in 12 Indian families 
having AR dRTA coupled with HS. The reliability of the HRM analysis was verified 
by comparing the results of the HRM method with those of conventional methods 
such as Polymerase Chain Reaction-Restriction Fragment-Length Polymorphism 
(PCR-RFLP) and Sanger sequencing thereby confirming the diagnosis.
RESULTS: We here described the clinical, hematological and genetic data of 16 
individuals from 12 families having AR dRTA coupled with HS. All patients 
carried homozygous SLC4A1 (A858D) mutation, whereas their family members had 
heterozygous A858D obtained by HRM analysis and confirmed by RFLP and Sanger 
sequencing.
CONCLUSION: Our data indicates that a missense mutation of A858D in SLC4A1 gene 
is the most common cause of dRTA coupled with HS in the Indian population. HRM 
analysis can be used as a rapid screening method for common SLC4A1 mutations 
that cause AR dRTA in the Indian population.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2020.145241
PMID: 33068675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]