---
reference_id: "PMID:34047397"
title: Local immune microenvironment of skin may play an important role in the development of pretibial myxedema.
authors:
- Chen X
- Dong J
- Zhang L
- Zhao X
- Shi R
- Pan M
- Zheng J
journal: Exp Dermatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/exd.14402
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Local immune microenvironment of skin may play an important role in the development of pretibial myxedema.
**Authors:** Chen X, Dong J, Zhang L, Zhao X, Shi R, Pan M, Zheng J
**Journal:** Exp Dermatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/exd.14402](https://doi.org/10.1111/exd.14402)

## Content

1. Exp Dermatol. 2021 Dec;30(12):1820-1824. doi: 10.1111/exd.14402. Epub 2021 Jun
 11.

Local immune microenvironment of skin may play an important role in the 
development of pretibial myxedema.

Chen X(1), Dong J(2), Zhang L(1), Zhao X(1), Shi R(1), Pan M(1), Zheng J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Rui Jin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of Burn, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of 
Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Pretibial myxedema (PTM), characterized by the accumulation of 
glycosaminoglycans in dermis is an autoimmune skin disorder, which is almost 
always associated with Graves' disease (GD). Although fibroblast stimulated by 
thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR) antibody, cytokines and growth 
factors have been postulated as target of the autoimmune process in the 
dermopathy, the pathogenesis of PTM remains unclear. We hypothesize that the 
local immune microenvironment of the skin including the antigens and antibodies, 
T cells, B cells, plasma cells and fibroblasts may play an important role in the 
development of PTM. Results obtained on PTM patients indicate increased 
thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor antibodies (TRAb) in the blood positively 
correlate with the dermal thickness of the lesions. Further analysis shows that 
there were more CD3+ T cells and CD20+ B cells in the skin lesions. These T and 
B cells are in close contact, indicating that inducible skin-associated lymphoid 
tissue (iSALT) may be formed in the area. In addition, we found that the 
infiltrating plasma cells can secrete TRAb, proving that B cells in the skin 
other than the thyroid are an additional source of TSHR antibodies. Meanwhile, 
the T and B cells in the skin or skin homogenate of patients can promote the 
proliferation of pretibial fibroblasts. In conclusion, our results provide 
evidence that the local immune microenvironment of the skin may play an 
important role in the development of PTM.

© 2021 The Authors. Experimental Dermatology published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/exd.14402
PMCID: PMC8597019
PMID: 34047397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.