---
reference_id: "PMID:38596912"
title: Stage B Heart Failure Is Ubiquitous in Emergency Patients with Asymptomatic Hypertension.
authors:
- Souffront K
- P Nelson B
- Lukas M
- Reyes Garay H
- Gordon L
- Matos T
- Hanesworth I
- Mantel R
- Shubeck C
- Bernstein C
- T Loo G
- Richardson LD
journal: West J Emerg Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.5811/westjem.17990
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stage B Heart Failure Is Ubiquitous in Emergency Patients with Asymptomatic Hypertension.
**Authors:** Souffront K, P Nelson B, Lukas M, Reyes Garay H, Gordon L, Matos T, Hanesworth I, Mantel R, Shubeck C, Bernstein C, T Loo G, Richardson LD
**Journal:** West J Emerg Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.5811/westjem.17990](https://doi.org/10.5811/westjem.17990)

## Content

1. West J Emerg Med. 2024 Mar;25(2):160-165. doi: 10.5811/westjem.17990.

Stage B Heart Failure Is Ubiquitous in Emergency Patients with Asymptomatic 
Hypertension.

Souffront K(1)(2)(3), P Nelson B(1), Lukas M(1), Reyes Garay H(4), Gordon 
L(1)(3)(5), Matos T(1), Hanesworth I(1), Mantel R(1), Shubeck C(1), Bernstein 
C(2), T Loo G(1)(5), Richardson LD(1)(3)(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Department of Emergency Medicine, 
New York.
(2)Center for Nursing Research and Innovation, Mount Sinai Health System, New 
York.
(3)Ichan School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Institute for Health Equity 
Research, New York.
(4)Mount Sinai Morningside, Department of Cardiology, New York.
(5)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Department of Population Health 
Science and Policy, New York.
(6)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Department of Artificial 
Intelligence and Human Health, New York.

INTRODUCTION: Hypertension is the leading risk factor for morbidity and 
mortality throughout the world and is pervasive in United States emergency 
departments (ED). This study documents the point prevalence of subclinical heart 
disease in emergency patients with asymptomatic hypertension.
METHOD: This was a prospective observational study of ED patients with 
asymptomatic hypertension conducted at two urban academic EDs that belong to an 
eight-hospital healthcare organization in New York. Adult (≥18 years of age) 
English- or Spanish-speaking patients who had an initial blood pressure (BP) 
≥160/100 millimeters of mercury (mmHg) and second BP ≥140/90 mm Hg, and pending 
discharge, were invited to participate in the study. We excluded patients with 
congestive heart failure, renal insufficiency, and atrial fibrillation, or who 
were pregnant, a prisoner, cognitively unable to provide informed consent, or 
experiencing symptoms of hypertension. We assessed echocardiographic evidence of 
subclinical heart disease (left ventricular hypertrophy, and diastolic and 
systolic dysfunction).
RESULTS: A total of 53 patients were included in the study; a majority were 
young (mean 49.5 years old, [SD 14-52]), self-identified as Black or Other 
(n = 39; 73.5%), and female (n = 30; 56.6%). Mean initial blood pressure was 
172/100 mm Hg, and 24 patients (45.3%) self-reported a history of hypertension. 
Fifty patients completed an echocardiogram. All (100%) had evidence of 
subclinical heart disease, with 41 (77.4%) displaying left ventricular 
hypertrophy and 31 (58.5%) diastolic dysfunction. There was a significant 
relationship between diastolic dysfunction and female gender [x2 (1, 
n = 53) = 3.98; P = 0.046]; Black or other race [x2 (3, n = 53) = 9.138; 
P = 0.03] and Hispanic or other ethnicity [x2 (2, n = 53) = 8.03; P = 0.02]. 
Less than one third of patients demonstrated systolic dysfunction on 
echocardiogram, and this was more likely to occur in patients with diabetes 
mellitus [x2 (1, n = 51) = 4.84; P = 0.02].
CONCLUSION: There is a high probability that Black, Hispanic, and female 
patients with asymptomatic hypertension are on the continuum for developing 
overt heart failure. Emergency clinicians should provide individualized care 
that considers their unique health needs, cultural backgrounds, and social 
determinants of health.

DOI: 10.5811/westjem.17990
PMCID: PMC11000548
PMID: 38596912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: By the WestJEM article 
submission agreement, all authors are required to disclose all affiliations, 
funding sources and financial or management relationships that could be 
perceived as potential sources of bias. This project was funded by the 
Department of Emergency Medicine at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, 
the Center for Nursing Research and Innovation at the Mount Sinai Health System, 
and the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation through the Betty Irene Moore 
Fellowship for Nurse Leaders and Innovators (GBMF9048). There are no other 
conflicts of interest or sources of funding to declare.