---
reference_id: "PMID:37138705"
title: Peroxisomal defects in microglial cells induce a disease-associated microglial signature.
authors:
- Raas Q
- Tawbeh A
- Tahri-Joutey M
- Gondcaille C
- Keime C
- Kaiser R
- Trompier D
- Nasser B
- Leoni V
- Bellanger E
- Boussand M
- Hamon Y
- Benani A
- Di Cara F
- Truntzer C
- Cherkaoui-Malki M
- Andreoletti P
- Savary S
journal: Front Mol Neurosci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2023.1170313
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peroxisomal defects in microglial cells induce a disease-associated microglial signature.
**Authors:** Raas Q, Tawbeh A, Tahri-Joutey M, Gondcaille C, Keime C, Kaiser R, Trompier D, Nasser B, Leoni V, Bellanger E, Boussand M, Hamon Y, Benani A, Di Cara F, Truntzer C, Cherkaoui-Malki M, Andreoletti P, Savary S
**Journal:** Front Mol Neurosci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fnmol.2023.1170313](https://doi.org/10.3389/fnmol.2023.1170313)

## Content

1. Front Mol Neurosci. 2023 Apr 17;16:1170313. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2023.1170313. 
eCollection 2023.

Peroxisomal defects in microglial cells induce a disease-associated microglial 
signature.

Raas Q(1), Tawbeh A(1), Tahri-Joutey M(1)(2), Gondcaille C(1), Keime C(3), 
Kaiser R(3), Trompier D(1), Nasser B(2), Leoni V(4), Bellanger E(5), Boussand 
M(5), Hamon Y(5), Benani A(6), Di Cara F(7), Truntzer C(8), Cherkaoui-Malki 
M(1), Andreoletti P(1), Savary S(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire Bio-PeroxIL EA7270, University of Bourgogne, Dijon, France.
(2)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Neurosciences, Natural Resources and Environment, 
Faculty of Sciences and Techniques, University Hassan I, Settat, Morocco.
(3)Plateforme GenomEast, IGBMC, CNRS UMR 7104, Inserm U1258, University of 
Strasbourg, Illkirch, France.
(4)Laboratory of Clinical Biochemistry, Hospital of Desio, ASST-Brianza and 
Department of Medicine and Surgery, University of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy.
(5)Aix Marseille Univ, CNRS, INSERM, CIML, Marseille, France.
(6)Centre des Sciences du Goût et de l'Alimentation, CNRS, INRAE, Institut Agro 
Dijon, University of Bourgogne Franche-Comté, Dijon, France.
(7)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, IWK Health Centre, Dalhousie 
University, Halifax, NS, Canada.
(8)Platform of Transfer in Biological Oncology, Georges François Leclerc Cancer 
Center-Unicancer, Dijon, France.

Microglial cells ensure essential roles in brain homeostasis. In pathological 
condition, microglia adopt a common signature, called disease-associated 
microglial (DAM) signature, characterized by the loss of homeostatic genes and 
the induction of disease-associated genes. In X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy 
(X-ALD), the most common peroxisomal disease, microglial defect has been shown 
to precede myelin degradation and may actively contribute to the 
neurodegenerative process. We previously established BV-2 microglial cell models 
bearing mutations in peroxisomal genes that recapitulate some of the hallmarks 
of the peroxisomal β-oxidation defects such as very long-chain fatty acid 
(VLCFA) accumulation. In these cell lines, we used RNA-sequencing and identified 
large-scale reprogramming for genes involved in lipid metabolism, immune 
response, cell signaling, lysosome and autophagy, as well as a DAM-like 
signature. We highlighted cholesterol accumulation in plasma membranes and 
observed autophagy patterns in the cell mutants. We confirmed the upregulation 
or downregulation at the protein level for a few selected genes that mostly 
corroborated our observations and clearly demonstrated increased expression and 
secretion of DAM proteins in the BV-2 mutant cells. In conclusion, the 
peroxisomal defects in microglial cells not only impact on VLCFA metabolism but 
also force microglial cells to adopt a pathological phenotype likely 
representing a key contributor to the pathogenesis of peroxisomal disorders.

Copyright © 2023 Raas, Tawbeh, Tahri-Joutey, Gondcaille, Keime, Kaiser, 
Trompier, Nasser, Leoni, Bellanger, Boussand, Hamon, Benani, Di Cara, Truntzer, 
Cherkaoui-Malki, Andreoletti and Savary.

DOI: 10.3389/fnmol.2023.1170313
PMCID: PMC10149961
PMID: 37138705

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.