---
reference_id: "PMID:15571235"
title: Adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency--first British case.
authors:
- Marinaki AM
- Champion M
- Kurian MA
- Simmonds HA
- Marie S
- Vincent MF
- van den Berghe G
- Duley JA
- Fairbanks LD
journal: Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1081/NCN-200027494
keywords:
- "Adenosine/analogs & derivatives, blood, cerebrospinal fluid, urine"
- "Adenylosuccinate Lyase/deficiency, genetics"
- "Aminoimidazole Carboxamide/analogs & derivatives, blood, cerebrospinal fluid, urine"
- Catalysis
- Exons
- Fatal Outcome
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Purine-Pyrimidine Metabolism, Inborn Errors/diagnosis, genetics"
- Purines/metabolism
- "Ribonucleotides/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, urine"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency--first British case.
**Authors:** Marinaki AM, Champion M, Kurian MA, Simmonds HA, Marie S, Vincent MF, van den Berghe G, Duley JA, Fairbanks LD
**Journal:** Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1081/NCN-200027494](https://doi.org/10.1081/NCN-200027494)

## Content

1. Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids. 2004 Oct;23(8-9):1231-3. doi:
10.1081/NCN-200027494.

Adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency--first British case.

Marinaki AM(1), Champion M, Kurian MA, Simmonds HA, Marie S, Vincent MF, van den
Berghe G, Duley JA, Fairbanks LD.

Author information:
(1)Purine Research Lab and Paediatric Department, Guy's Hospital, London, UK.

A deficiency of adenylosuccinate lyase (ASDL) is characterised by the
accumulation of SAICAriboside (SAICAr) and succinyladenosine (S-Ado) in body
fluids. The severity of the clinical presentation correlates with a low
S-Ado/SAICAr ratio in body fluids. We report the first British case of ADSL
deficiency. The patient presented at 14 days with a progressive neonatal
encephalopathy and seizures. There was marked axial and peripheral hypotonia.
Brain MRI showed widespread white matter changes. She died at 4 weeks of age.
Concentrations of SAICAr and SAdo were markedly elevated in urine, plasma and
CSF and the SAdo/SAICAr ratio was low, consistent with the severe phenotype. The
patient was compound heterozygous for 2 novel ADSL mutations; c.9 G>C (A3P) and
c.572 C>T (R190X).

DOI: 10.1081/NCN-200027494
PMID: 15571235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
