---
reference_id: "PMID:37455182"
title: "Treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer with BRAF V600E mutation: A multicenter real-world study in China."
authors:
- Xu Y
- Wang G
- Zheng X
- Chang W
- Fu J
- Zhang T
- Lin Q
- Lv Y
- Zhu Z
- Tang W
- Xu J
journal: Eur J Surg Oncol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejso.2023.07.007
keywords:
- Humans
- Bevacizumab/therapeutic use
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- "Colorectal Neoplasms/therapy, drug therapy"
- Irinotecan
- Colonic Neoplasms/drug therapy
- Rectal Neoplasms/drug therapy
- Cetuximab/therapeutic use
- Vemurafenib/therapeutic use
- Mutation
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols
- Fluorouracil
- Leucovorin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer with BRAF V600E mutation: A multicenter real-world study in China.
**Authors:** Xu Y, Wang G, Zheng X, Chang W, Fu J, Zhang T, Lin Q, Lv Y, Zhu Z, Tang W, Xu J
**Journal:** Eur J Surg Oncol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejso.2023.07.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejso.2023.07.007)

## Content

1. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2023 Nov;49(11):106981. doi: 10.1016/j.ejso.2023.07.007.
Epub  2023 Jul 10.

Treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer with BRAF V600E mutation: A
multicenter real-world study in China.

Xu Y(1), Wang G(2), Zheng X(3), Chang W(1), Fu J(4), Zhang T(5), Lin Q(1), Lv
Y(1), Zhu Z(1), Tang W(6), Xu J(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China.
(2)Department of General Surgery, The Second Hospital of Hebei Medical
University, Shijiazhuang, Hebei Province, China; The Second Department of
General Surgery, The Fourth Hospital of Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang,
Hebei Province, China.
(3)Department of Colorectal and Anal Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang Province, China.
(4)Department of Colorectal Surgery, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(5)Department of General Surgery, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.
(6)Department of General Surgery, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China. Electronic address: tangwt1988@163.com.
(7)Department of General Surgery, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China. Electronic address: xujmin@aliyun.com.

BACKGROUND: BRAF V600E mutant-metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) is
characterized by its short survival time. Treatment approaches vary depending on
whether or not the metastases are initially resectable. The benefit of
metastasectomy remains unclear, and the optimal first-line treatment is
controversial. This study aimed to describe the prognosis of BRAF V600E
mutant-mCRC, analyze the recurrence pattern in resectable patients, and explore
the optimal first-line treatment for unresectable patients.
METHODS: Patients diagnosed with BRAF V600E mutant-mCRC between February 2014
and January 2022 in five hospitals were enrolled. Date on clinical and
pathological characteristics, treatment features, and survival outcomes were
collected.
RESULTS: Of the 220 included patients, 64 initially resectable patients had a
significantly longer overall survival (OS) (37.07 vs. 20.20 months, P < 0.001)
than initially unresectable patients. Of 156 unresectable patients, 54 received
doublet (FOLFOX, XELOX or FOLFIRI) or triplet (FOLFOXIRI) chemotherapies
(Chemo), 55 received Chemo plus Bevacizumab (Chemo+Bev), and 33 received
vemurafenib plus cetuximab and irinotecan (VIC). The VIC regimen had a better
progression-free survival (PFS) (12.70 months) than the Chemo (6.70 months,
P < 0.001) and Chemo+Bev (8.8 months, P = 0.044) regimens. Patients treated with
VIC had the best overall response rate (60.16%, P < 0.001), disease control rate
(93.94%, P < 0.001) and conversional resection rate (24.24%, P = 0.003).
CONCLUSIONS: Metastasectomy is beneficial to the survival of patients with BRAF
V600E mutant-mCRC. For initially unresectable patients, VIC as first-line
therapy is associated with a better prognosis and efficacy than doublet and
triplet chemotherapy with or without bevacizumab.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd, BASO ~ The Association for Cancer Surgery, and
the European Society of Surgical Oncology. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejso.2023.07.007
PMID: 37455182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal
relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this
paper.
