---
reference_id: "PMID:10536782"
title: The natural history of the obese strain of chickens--an animal model for spontaneous autoimmune thyroiditis.
authors:
- Dietrich HM
- Cole RK
- Wick G
journal: Poult Sci
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1093/ps/78.10.1359
keywords:
- Animal Husbandry
- Animals
- "Chickens/genetics, physiology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- "Obesity/genetics, veterinary"
- "Selection, Genetic"
- "Thyroiditis, Autoimmune/genetics, veterinary"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The natural history of the obese strain of chickens--an animal model for spontaneous autoimmune thyroiditis.
**Authors:** Dietrich HM, Cole RK, Wick G
**Journal:** Poult Sci (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ps/78.10.1359](https://doi.org/10.1093/ps/78.10.1359)

## Content

1. Poult Sci. 1999 Oct;78(10):1359-71. doi: 10.1093/ps/78.10.1359.

The natural history of the obese strain of chickens--an animal model for 
spontaneous autoimmune thyroiditis.

Dietrich HM(1), Cole RK, Wick G.

Author information:
(1)Institute for General and Experimental Pathology, University of Innsbruck, 
Medical School, Austria. Hermann.Dietrich@uibk.ac.at

Chickens of the Obese strain (OS) are hereditarily affected with spontaneous 
autoimmune thyroiditis that resembles Hashimoto's thyroiditis of humans in 
clinical, histopathological, serological, and endocrinological aspects. In this 
review, the natural history of the OS, reflecting the development and 
maintenance of the stock and its improvement of productivity over many years at 
Cornell University, is summarized. To underline the value and usefulness of this 
animal model, the concept of the multifactorial pathogenesis of autoimmune 
diseases, which was mainly established at the University of Innsbruck, Austria, 
is briefly outlined. This detailed analysis on the natural history of the OS was 
only made feasible by the availability of four decades of records on this 
chicken line at Cornell University. The report starts with the initial 
occurrence of a few pullets within the Cornell C-strain (CS) flock that showed 
obesity, long and silky feathers, and small body size, which, therefore, caused 
these birds to look notably different than the other CS birds. Experimental 
findings indicated an autoimmune basis for these characteristics, and the 
objectives of matings were initially focused on increasing the number of obese 
individuals for studies on the etiopathology and the mode of inheritance. In 
subsequent years, matings were directed toward increasing the penetrance and 
severity of the obese trait in the population. In recent years, the reproductive 
capability of the obese stock was improved by mating only the best breeders of 
the population in terms of body weight, egg weight, egg production, fertility, 
hatchability, and the expression of the obese phenotype. Housing conditions for 
OS chickens at Cornell and the qualification standards and selection procedures 
for breeders are described in detail, and results of blood typings are shown. A 
specific recent finding in OS hens is the high incidence of residues of the 
right Mullerian duct with cyst formation.

DOI: 10.1093/ps/78.10.1359
PMID: 10536782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]