---
reference_id: "PMID:40956618"
title: In utero rescue of neurological dysfunction in a mouse model of Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome.
authors:
- Reynisdottir T
- Anderson KJ
- Möller K
- Pétursson S
- Brinn A
- Franklin KP
- Ouyang J
- Snorradottir AO
- Lutz CM
- Zuberi AR
- DeLeon VB
- Bjornsson HT
journal: JCI Insight
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.187039
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In utero rescue of neurological dysfunction in a mouse model of Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome.
**Authors:** Reynisdottir T, Anderson KJ, Möller K, Pétursson S, Brinn A, Franklin KP, Ouyang J, Snorradottir AO, Lutz CM, Zuberi AR, DeLeon VB, Bjornsson HT
**Journal:** JCI Insight (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1172/jci.insight.187039](https://doi.org/10.1172/jci.insight.187039)

## Content

1. JCI Insight. 2025 Sep 16;10(20):e187039. doi: 10.1172/jci.insight.187039. 
eCollection 2025 Oct 22.

In utero rescue of neurological dysfunction in a mouse model of 
Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome.

Reynisdottir T(1), Anderson KJ(1)(2), Möller K(1), Pétursson S(1), Brinn A(3), 
Franklin KP(3), Ouyang J(1), Snorradottir AO(4)(5), Lutz CM(6), Zuberi AR(6), 
DeLeon VB(3), Bjornsson HT(1)(2)(7).

Author information:
(1)Louma G. Laboratory of Epigenetic Research, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(2)Department of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Landspitali University 
Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(3)Department of Anthropology, University of Florida, Gainesville, USA.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(5)Department of Pathology, Landspitali University Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland.
(6)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine, USA.
(7)McKusick-Nathans Departments of Genetic Medicine and Pediatrics, Johns 
Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome (WDSTS) is a rare genetic cause of intellectual 
disability that is primarily caused by heterozygous loss-of-function variants in 
the gene encoding the histone lysine methyltransferase 2A (KMT2A). Prior studies 
have shown successful postnatal amelioration of disease phenotypes for Rett, 
Rubinstein-Taybi, and Kabuki syndromes, which are related Mendelian disorders of 
the epigenetic machinery. To explore whether the neurological phenotype in WDSTS 
is treatable in utero, we created a mouse model carrying a loss-of-function 
variant placed between 2 loxP sites. Kmt2a+/LSL mice demonstrated core features 
of WDSTS including growth retardation, craniofacial abnormalities, and 
hypertrichosis as well as hippocampal memory defects. The neurological 
phenotypes were rescued upon restoration of KMT2A in utero following breeding to 
a nestin-Cre. Together, our data provide a mouse model to explore the potential 
therapeutic window in WDSTS. Our work suggests that WDSTS has a window of 
opportunity extending at least until the midpoint of in utero development, 
making WDSTS an ideal candidate for future therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.1172/jci.insight.187039
PMCID: PMC12581663
PMID: 40956618 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: HTB is a consultant for 
Mahzi Therapeutics and founder of Kaldur Therapeutics. AOS is an employee of 
Arctic Therapeutics.