---
reference_id: "PMID:15994758"
title: Endoplasmic reticulum stress induces Wfs1 gene expression in pancreatic beta-cells via transcriptional activation.
authors:
- Ueda K
- Kawano J
- Takeda K
- Yujiri T
- Tanabe K
- Anno T
- Akiyama M
- Nozaki J
- Yoshinaga T
- Koizumi A
- Shinoda K
- Oka Y
- Tanizawa Y
journal: Eur J Endocrinol
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1530/eje.1.01945
keywords:
- Animals
- Anti-Bacterial Agents/pharmacology
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Endoplasmic Reticulum/physiology
- Enzyme Inhibitors/pharmacology
- Fibroblasts/cytology
- "Gene Expression/drug effects, physiology"
- Humans
- Insulinoma
- Ionophores/pharmacology
- "Islets of Langerhans/cytology, physiology"
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Mice
- Pancreatic Neoplasms
- "Promoter Regions, Genetic/physiology"
- "Stimulation, Chemical"
- Thapsigargin/pharmacology
- "Transcriptional Activation/drug effects, physiology"
- Tunicamycin/pharmacology
- "Up-Regulation/drug effects, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endoplasmic reticulum stress induces Wfs1 gene expression in pancreatic beta-cells via transcriptional activation.
**Authors:** Ueda K, Kawano J, Takeda K, Yujiri T, Tanabe K, Anno T, Akiyama M, Nozaki J, Yoshinaga T, Koizumi A, Shinoda K, Oka Y, Tanizawa Y
**Journal:** Eur J Endocrinol (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1530/eje.1.01945](https://doi.org/10.1530/eje.1.01945)

## Content

1. Eur J Endocrinol. 2005 Jul;153(1):167-76. doi: 10.1530/eje.1.01945.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress induces Wfs1 gene expression in pancreatic
beta-cells via transcriptional activation.

Ueda K(1), Kawano J, Takeda K, Yujiri T, Tanabe K, Anno T, Akiyama M, Nozaki J,
Yoshinaga T, Koizumi A, Shinoda K, Oka Y, Tanizawa Y.

Author information:
(1)Health Service Center, Organization for University Education, Yamaguchi
University, Yamaguchi, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: The WFS1 gene encodes an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane-embedded
protein. Homozygous WFS1 gene mutations cause Wolfram syndrome, characterized by
insulin-deficient diabetes mellitus and optic atropy. Pancreatic beta-cells are
selectively lost from the patient's islets. ER localization suggests that WFS1
protein has physiological functions in membrane trafficking, secretion,
processing and/or regulation of ER calcium homeostasis. Disturbances or
overloading of these functions induces ER stress responses, including apoptosis.
We speculated that WFS1 protein might be involved in these ER stress responses.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Islet expression of the Wfs1 protein was analyzed
immunohistochemically. Induction of Wfs1 upon ER stress was examined by Northern
and Western blot analyses using three different models: human skin fibroblasts,
mouse pancreatic beta-cell-derived MIN6 cells, and Akita mouse-derived Ins2
(96Y/Y) insulinoma cells. The human WFS1 gene promoter-luciferase reporter
analysis was also conducted.
RESULT: Islet beta-cells were the major site of Wfs1 expression. This expression
was also found in delta-cells, but not in alpha-cells. WFS1 expression was
transcriptionally up-regulated by ER stress-inducing chemical insults. Treatment
of fibroblasts and MIN6 cells with thapsigargin or tunicamycin increased WFS1
mRNA. WFS1 protein also increased in response to thapsigargin treatment in these
cells. WFS1 gene expression was also increased in Ins2 (96Y/Y) insulinoma cells.
In these cells, ER stress was intrinsically induced by mutant insulin
expression. The WFS1 gene promoter-luciferase reporter system revealed that the
human WFS1 promoter was activated by chemically induced ER stress in MIN6 cells,
and that the promoter was more active in Ins2 (96Y/Y) cells than Ins2
(wild/wild) cells.
CONCLUSION: Wfs1 expression, which is localized to beta- and delta-cells in
pancreatic islets, increases in response to ER stress, suggesting a functional
link between Wfs1 and ER stress.

DOI: 10.1530/eje.1.01945
PMID: 15994758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
