---
reference_id: "PMID:17105813"
title: A validated gene expression model of high-risk multiple myeloma is defined by deregulated expression of genes mapping to chromosome 1.
authors:
- Shaughnessy JD Jr
- Zhan F
- Burington BE
- Huang Y
- Colla S
- Hanamura I
- Stewart JP
- Kordsmeier B
- Randolph C
- Williams DR
- Xiao Y
- Xu H
- Epstein J
- Anaissie E
- Krishna SG
- Cottler-Fox M
- Hollmig K
- Mohiuddin A
- Pineda-Roman M
- Tricot G
- van Rhee F
- Sawyer J
- Alsayed Y
- Walker R
- Zangari M
- Crowley J
- Barlogie B
journal: Blood
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1182/blood-2006-07-038430
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A validated gene expression model of high-risk multiple myeloma is defined by deregulated expression of genes mapping to chromosome 1.
**Authors:** Shaughnessy JD Jr, Zhan F, Burington BE, Huang Y, Colla S, Hanamura I, Stewart JP, Kordsmeier B, Randolph C, Williams DR, Xiao Y, Xu H, Epstein J, Anaissie E, Krishna SG, Cottler-Fox M, Hollmig K, Mohiuddin A, Pineda-Roman M, Tricot G, van Rhee F, Sawyer J, Alsayed Y, Walker R, Zangari M, Crowley J, Barlogie B
**Journal:** Blood (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1182/blood-2006-07-038430](https://doi.org/10.1182/blood-2006-07-038430)

## Content

1. Blood. 2007 Mar 15;109(6):2276-84. doi: 10.1182/blood-2006-07-038430. Epub
2006  Nov 14.

A validated gene expression model of high-risk multiple myeloma is defined by 
deregulated expression of genes mapping to chromosome 1.

Shaughnessy JD Jr(1), Zhan F, Burington BE, Huang Y, Colla S, Hanamura I, 
Stewart JP, Kordsmeier B, Randolph C, Williams DR, Xiao Y, Xu H, Epstein J, 
Anaissie E, Krishna SG, Cottler-Fox M, Hollmig K, Mohiuddin A, Pineda-Roman M, 
Tricot G, van Rhee F, Sawyer J, Alsayed Y, Walker R, Zangari M, Crowley J, 
Barlogie B.

Author information:
(1)Donna D. and Donald M. Lambert Laboratory of Myeloma Genetics at the Myeloma 
Institute for Research and Therapy, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, 
Little Rock, AR 72205, USA. shaughnessyjohn@uams.edu

To molecularly define high-risk disease, we performed microarray analysis on 
tumor cells from 532 newly diagnosed patients with multiple myeloma (MM) treated 
on 2 separate protocols. Using log-rank tests of expression quartiles, 70 genes, 
30% mapping to chromosome 1 (P < .001), were linked to early disease-related 
death. Importantly, most up-regulated genes mapped to chromosome 1q, and 
down-regulated genes mapped to chromosome 1p. The ratio of mean expression 
levels of up-regulated to down-regulated genes defined a high-risk score present 
in 13% of patients with shorter durations of complete remission, event-free 
survival, and overall survival (training set: hazard ratio [HR], 5.16; P < .001; 
test cohort: HR, 4.75; P < .001). The high-risk score also was an independent 
predictor of outcome endpoints in multivariate analysis (P < .001) that included 
the International Staging System and high-risk translocations. In a comparison 
of paired baseline and relapse samples, the high-risk score frequency rose to 
76% at relapse and predicted short postrelapse survival (P < .05). Multivariate 
discriminant analysis revealed that a 17-gene subset could predict outcome as 
well as the 70-gene model. Our data suggest that altered transcriptional 
regulation of genes mapping to chromosome 1 may contribute to disease 
progression, and that expression profiling can be used to identify high-risk 
disease and guide therapeutic interventions.

DOI: 10.1182/blood-2006-07-038430
PMID: 17105813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]