---
reference_id: "PMID:7713188"
title: Trends and patterns in the transmission of bloodborne pathogens to health care workers.
authors:
- Lanphear BP
journal: Epidemiol Rev
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.epirev.a036162
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Trends and patterns in the transmission of bloodborne pathogens to health care workers.
**Authors:** Lanphear BP
**Journal:** Epidemiol Rev (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1093/oxfordjournals.epirev.a036162](https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordjournals.epirev.a036162)

## Content

1. Epidemiol Rev. 1994;16(2):437-50. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.epirev.a036162.

Trends and patterns in the transmission of bloodborne pathogens to health care 
workers.

Lanphear BP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Rochester, School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, NY, USA.

The key determinants of transmission of bloodborne pathogens are the dose and 
serum viral concentration of an exposure. This conclusion is supported by data 
showing that the rate of transmission of hepatitis B virus is elevated if the 
source patient's viral serum concentration is high and by a comparison of serum 
concentrations and rates of transmission for hepatitis B virus, HIV, and 
hepatitis C virus: As the mean serum viral concentration of each of these 
pathogens increases, the rate of transmission also increases. While there is 
evidence that the incidence of clinical hepatitis B has declined as a result of 
vaccine-induced immunity, the prevalence of hospital patients who are 
HBsAg-positive has actually increased. As the AIDS epidemic evolves and 
increasing numbers of patients with AIDS are hospitalized, the risk of exposure 
to HIV and hepatitis B virus can be expected to increase further. Thus, health 
care workers, many of whom work in an urban setting and are exposed to the blood 
and body fluids of patients, should be required to receive hepatitis B vaccine. 
Whereas hepatitis B virus transmission can be prevented by immunization of 
health care workers, controlling hepatitis C virus and HIV will require efforts 
to reduce the incidence and dosage of exposures to blood and body fluids. These 
strategies include the design and use of safe medical devices, targeted 
interventions based on occupation-specific hazards, the use of gloves and other 
barriers, and ongoing surveillance and analysis of exposures in the health care 
setting.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.epirev.a036162
PMID: 7713188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]