---
reference_id: "PMID:35677112"
title: Outcomes and genotype correlations in patients with mitochondrial trifunctional protein or isolated long chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency enrolled in the IBEM-IS database.
authors:
- Lim CC
- Vockley J
- Ujah O
- Kirby RS
- Edick MJ
- Berry SA
- Arnold GL
journal: Mol Genet Metab Rep
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2022.100884
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Outcomes and genotype correlations in patients with mitochondrial trifunctional protein or isolated long chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency enrolled in the IBEM-IS database.
**Authors:** Lim CC, Vockley J, Ujah O, Kirby RS, Edick MJ, Berry SA, Arnold GL
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab Rep (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgmr.2022.100884](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgmr.2022.100884)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab Rep. 2022 Jun 3;32:100884. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2022.100884. 
eCollection 2022 Sep.

Outcomes and genotype correlations in patients with mitochondrial trifunctional 
protein or isolated long chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency 
enrolled in the IBEM-IS database.

Lim CC(1), Vockley J(1)(2), Ujah O(3), Kirby RS(3), Edick MJ(4), Berry SA(5), 
Arnold GL(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, USA.
(2)UPMC Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, USA.
(3)University of South Florida College of Public Health, USA.
(4)Michigan Public Health Institute, USA.
(5)University of Minnesota School of Medicine, USA.

PURPOSE: Mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiency (TFPD) and isolated long 
chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (LCHADD) are two related 
defects of fatty acid β -oxidation. While NBS has decreased mortality, morbidity 
remains significant. Additionally, the relationship of genotype to clinical 
outcome remains unclear. To better understand these issues, we collected natural 
history data for these conditions by reviewing seven years of retrospective data 
from 45 cases of TFPD or LCHADD in the Inborn Errors of Metabolism - Information 
System.
METHODS: Available data included age at database entry, last datapoint, and 
development of various complications. Data were analyzed by clinical assigned 
diagnosis (LCHADD or TFPD), subdivided by method of ascertainment (newborn 
screening-NBS, or other than by newborn screening-NNBS), then re-analyzed based 
on four genotype groups: homozygous c.1528GC (p.E510Q) (common LCHAD variant); 
heterozygous c.1528GC (p.E510Q), other HADHA variants; and HADHB variants.
RESULTS: Forty-five patients from birth to 34 years of age were analyzed by 
assigned diagnosis (30 LCHADD and 15 TFPD) and method of ascertainment. Thirty 
had further analysis by genotype (22 biallelic HADHA variants and 8 biallelic 
HADHB variants). With regards to maternal complications, retinopathy, 
cardiomyopathy and hypoglycemia, patients with biallelic HADHA variants (with or 
without the common LCHAD variant) manifest a traditional LCHADD phenotype, while 
those with HADHB gene variants more commonly reported neuromusculoskeletal type 
TFPD phenotype. While retinopathy, rhabdomyolysis and peripheral neuropathy 
tended to present later in childhood, many features including initial report of 
cardiomyopathy and hypoglycemia presented across a wide age spectrum.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates the utility of genotypic confirmation of 
patients identified with LCHADD/TFPD as variants in the HADHA and HADHB genes 
lead to different symptom profiles. In our data, biallelic HAHDA variants 
conferred a LCHADD phenotype, regardless of the presence of the common LCHAD 
variant.

© 2022 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgmr.2022.100884
PMCID: PMC9167967
PMID: 35677112