---
reference_id: "PMID:29994846"
title: "Treatment of Apert Hand Syndrome: Strategies for Achieving a Five-Digit Hand."
authors:
- Raposo-Amaral CE
- Denadai R
- Furlan P
- Raposo-Amaral CA
journal: Plast Reconstr Surg
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1097/PRS.0000000000004815
keywords:
- "Acrocephalosyndactylia/psychology, surgery"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Esthetics
- Female
- "Fingers/abnormalities, surgery"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Reoperation
- Retrospective Studies
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment of Apert Hand Syndrome: Strategies for Achieving a Five-Digit Hand.
**Authors:** Raposo-Amaral CE, Denadai R, Furlan P, Raposo-Amaral CA
**Journal:** Plast Reconstr Surg (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1097/PRS.0000000000004815](https://doi.org/10.1097/PRS.0000000000004815)

## Content

1. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2018 Oct;142(4):972-982. doi:
10.1097/PRS.0000000000004815.

Treatment of Apert Hand Syndrome: Strategies for Achieving a Five-Digit Hand.

Raposo-Amaral CE(1), Denadai R(1), Furlan P(1), Raposo-Amaral CA(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Institute of Plastic and Craniofacial Surgery, SOBRAPAR Hospital.

BACKGROUND: Apert hand reconstruction requires complex surgical planning. The 
purpose of this study was to describe the authors' 8-year surgical experience 
with Apert syndrome hand reconstruction, and provide specific surgical 
strategies for achieving a five-digit hand in Upton type I and II hands.
METHODS: A retrospective analysis of consecutive Apert syndrome patients who 
underwent web-space releases between 2007 and 2015 was performed. Demographic, 
surgical, and outcome data were verified through medical records, clinical 
photographs, radiographic images, and patient interviews.
RESULTS: A total of 41 Apert syndrome patients [23 boys (56.1 percent) and 18 
girls (43.9 percent)] have been treated at our hospital since 2007. A five-digit 
hand was achieved in all patients (100 percent) with Upton type I and II hands, 
and in eight patients (72.7 percent) with Upton type III hands. A four-digit 
hand was obtained in three of 11 patients (27.3 percent) with Upton type III 
hands. Four of 20 patients (25 percent) with Upton type I hands, three of 10 
patients (30 percent) with Upton type II hands, and six of 11 patients (54.5 
percent) with Upton type III hands required subsequent revision for aesthetic 
reasons.
CONCLUSIONS: Upton type III hands have demonstrated higher revision rates than 
type I and II hands, regardless of whether a four- or five-digit hand is 
obtained. Treatment strategies for Apert syndrome hands based on hand type are 
offered to guide four-web-space release in all patients with Upton type I and II 
hands.
CLINICAL QUESTION/LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Therapeutic, IV.

DOI: 10.1097/PRS.0000000000004815
PMID: 29994846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]