---
reference_id: "PMID:41008827"
title: Integrative Mutational Landscape of Mycosis Fungoides Using a National Genomics Repository.
authors:
- Saglimbeni GS
- Hsia B
- Silberstein PT
- Tauseef A
journal: Cancers (Basel)
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/cancers17182984
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Integrative Mutational Landscape of Mycosis Fungoides Using a National Genomics Repository.
**Authors:** Saglimbeni GS, Hsia B, Silberstein PT, Tauseef A
**Journal:** Cancers (Basel) (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cancers17182984](https://doi.org/10.3390/cancers17182984)

## Content

1. Cancers (Basel). 2025 Sep 12;17(18):2984. doi: 10.3390/cancers17182984.

Integrative Mutational Landscape of Mycosis Fungoides Using a National Genomics
Repository.

Saglimbeni GS(1), Hsia B(1), Silberstein PT(2), Tauseef A(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Creighton University School of
Medicine, Phoenix, AZ 85012, USA.
(2)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine,
Creighton University Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68124, USA.

BACKGROUND: Mycosis fungoides (MF) is a rare cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (CTCL)
that presents clinically on the skin as patches, plaques, or tumors. MF often
mimics benign inflammatory conditions which leads to difficult and delayed
diagnosis, worsening prognosis despite available treatment options. This study
seeks to improve diagnosis and identify potential therapeutic targets by better
characterizing MF's genetic landscape using the AACR Project GENIE dataset.
METHODS: Retrospective analysis of MF cases was conducted using the AACR Project
GENIE database accessed from cBioPortal (v17.0-public) on 5 June 2025. Data
analysis included identifying recurrent somatic mutations, assessing patterns of
mutation co-occurrence and mutual exclusivity using non-parametric tests with
Benjamini-Hochberg False Discovery Rate (FDR) correction, and examining
enrichment of specific mutations based on sex and race, with significance of p <
0.05.
RESULTS: Recurrent alterations included FAT1 (28.2%), KMT2D (19.2%), TP53
(13.5%), JAK3 (11.5%), and SETBP1 (11.5%), highlighting the role of Wnt
signaling, epigenetic dysregulation, the p53 pathway, and JAK/STAT signaling in
MF pathogenesis. Mutations with significant co-occurrence and enrichment in
White, Black, and Asian populations were identified.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings of this study provide a comprehensive understanding of
MF's molecular profile. The discovery of commonly mutated pathways (Wnt, p53,
JAK/STAT, and epigenetic regulators) suggests potential targets for the
development of future therapies. Furthermore, the enrichment of certain
mutations based on race and patterns of alteration co-occurrence offer
possibilities for patient-tailored treatment approaches.

DOI: 10.3390/cancers17182984
PMCID: PMC12469055
PMID: 41008827

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
