---
reference_id: "PMID:36006853"
title: "Acrodysostosis and pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP): adaptation of Japanese patients with a newly proposed classification and expanding the phenotypic spectrum of variants."
authors:
- Matsuura N
- Kaname T
- Niikawa N
- Ooyama Y
- Shinohara O
- Yokota Y
- Ohtsu S
- Takubo N
- Kitsuda K
- Shibayama K
- Takada F
- Koike A
- Sano H
- Ito Y
- Ishikura K
journal: Endocr Connect
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1530/EC-22-0151
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acrodysostosis and pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP): adaptation of Japanese patients with a newly proposed classification and expanding the phenotypic spectrum of variants.
**Authors:** Matsuura N, Kaname T, Niikawa N, Ooyama Y, Shinohara O, Yokota Y, Ohtsu S, Takubo N, Kitsuda K, Shibayama K, Takada F, Koike A, Sano H, Ito Y, Ishikura K
**Journal:** Endocr Connect (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1530/EC-22-0151](https://doi.org/10.1530/EC-22-0151)

## Content

1. Endocr Connect. 2022 Sep 22;11(10):e220151. doi: 10.1530/EC-22-0151. Print
2022  Oct 1.

Acrodysostosis and pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP): adaptation of Japanese 
patients with a newly proposed classification and expanding the phenotypic 
spectrum of variants.

Matsuura N(1), Kaname T(2), Niikawa N(3), Ooyama Y(1), Shinohara O(4), Yokota 
Y(1), Ohtsu S(1), Takubo N(1), Kitsuda K(1), Shibayama K(1), Takada F(5), Koike 
A(6), Sano H(7), Ito Y(8), Ishikura K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara, 
Japan.
(2)Department of Genome Medicine, National Research Institute for Child Health 
and Development, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Health Sciences University of Hokkaido, Sapporo, Japan.
(4)Shinohara Child Clinic, Machida, Japan.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, Kitasato University Graduate School of 
Medical Science, Sagamihara, Japan.
(6)Miyanosawa Child Clinic, Sapporo, Japan.
(7)Department of Pediatric, Sapporo City General Hospital, Sapporo, Japan.
(8)Department of Clinical Medicine, Japanese Red Cross Hospital Collage of 
Nursing, Kitami, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to report on 15 Japanese patients with 
acrodysostosis and pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) and analyze them using the 
newly proposed classification of the EuroPHP network to determine whether this 
classification system is suitable for Japanese patients.
DESIGN: We divided the patients into three groups based on hormone resistance, 
the number of fingers with short metacarpals, the existence of cone-shaped 
epiphyses and gene defects.
METHODS: We carried out clinical, radiological and genetic evaluations of two 
patients in group A (iPPSD5), six patients in group B (iPPDS4) and seven 
patients in group C (iPPSD2).
RESULTS: Group A consisted of two siblings without hormone resistance who had 
the most severe bone and physical developmental delays. PDE4D gene defects were 
detected in both cases. Group B consisted of six patients who showed hormone 
resistance without hypocalcemia. Short metacarpal bones with corn-shaped 
epiphyses were observed in all patients. In two cases, PRKAR1A gene defects were 
detected; however, their clinical and radiological features were not identical. 
The facial dysmorphism and developmental delay were less severe and PRKAR1A gene 
defects were detected in case B-3. Severe facial dysmorphism and deformity of 
metacarpal bones were observed, but no gene defect was detected in case B-1. 
Group C consisted of seven patients with PHP1a, four of whom had maternally 
inherited heterozygous inactivating mutations in one of the GNAS genes. The 
clinical and radiological features of the patients in group C were not identical 
either.
CONCLUSIONS: The newly proposed classification is suitable for Japanese 
patients; however, heterogeneities still existed within groups B and C.

DOI: 10.1530/EC-22-0151
PMCID: PMC9513636
PMID: 36006853