---
reference_id: "PMID:37848036"
title: Serotonin reduction in post-acute sequelae of viral infection.
authors:
- Wong AC
- Devason AS
- Umana IC
- Cox TO
- Dohnalová L
- Litichevskiy L
- Perla J
- Lundgren P
- Etwebi Z
- Izzo LT
- Kim J
- Tetlak M
- Descamps HC
- Park SL
- Wisser S
- McKnight AD
- Pardy RD
- Kim J
- Blank N
- Patel S
- Thum K
- Mason S
- Beltra JC
- Michieletto MF
- Ngiow SF
- Miller BM
- Liou MJ
- Madhu B
- Dmitrieva-Posocco O
- Huber AS
- Hewins P
- Petucci C
- Chu CP
- Baraniecki-Zwil G
- Giron LB
- Baxter AE
- Greenplate AR
- Kearns C
- Montone K
- Litzky LA
- Feldman M
- Henao-Mejia J
- Striepen B
- Ramage H
- Jurado KA
- Wellen KE
- "O'Doherty U"
- Abdel-Mohsen M
- Landay AL
- Keshavarzian A
- Henrich TJ
- Deeks SG
- Peluso MJ
- Meyer NJ
- Wherry EJ
- Abramoff BA
- Cherry S
- Thaiss CA
- Levy M
journal: Cell
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2023.09.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serotonin reduction in post-acute sequelae of viral infection.
**Authors:** Wong AC, Devason AS, Umana IC, Cox TO, Dohnalová L, Litichevskiy L, Perla J, Lundgren P, Etwebi Z, Izzo LT, Kim J, Tetlak M, Descamps HC, Park SL, Wisser S, McKnight AD, Pardy RD, Kim J, Blank N, Patel S, Thum K, Mason S, Beltra JC, Michieletto MF, Ngiow SF, Miller BM, Liou MJ, Madhu B, Dmitrieva-Posocco O, Huber AS, Hewins P, Petucci C, Chu CP, Baraniecki-Zwil G, Giron LB, Baxter AE, Greenplate AR, Kearns C, Montone K, Litzky LA, Feldman M, Henao-Mejia J, Striepen B, Ramage H, Jurado KA, Wellen KE, O'Doherty U, Abdel-Mohsen M, Landay AL, Keshavarzian A, Henrich TJ, Deeks SG, Peluso MJ, Meyer NJ, Wherry EJ, Abramoff BA, Cherry S, Thaiss CA, Levy M
**Journal:** Cell (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2023.09.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2023.09.013)

## Content

1. Cell. 2023 Oct 26;186(22):4851-4867.e20. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2023.09.013. Epub
 2023 Oct 16.

Serotonin reduction in post-acute sequelae of viral infection.

Wong AC(1), Devason AS(2), Umana IC(2), Cox TO(2), Dohnalová L(3), Litichevskiy 
L(2), Perla J(1), Lundgren P(2), Etwebi Z(4), Izzo LT(5), Kim J(2), Tetlak M(2), 
Descamps HC(2), Park SL(6), Wisser S(2), McKnight AD(2), Pardy RD(7), Kim J(2), 
Blank N(2), Patel S(2), Thum K(2), Mason S(2), Beltra JC(8), Michieletto MF(9), 
Ngiow SF(8), Miller BM(1), Liou MJ(2), Madhu B(1), Dmitrieva-Posocco O(1), Huber 
AS(4), Hewins P(10), Petucci C(11), Chu CP(7), Baraniecki-Zwil G(12), Giron 
LB(13), Baxter AE(6), Greenplate AR(6), Kearns C(4), Montone K(4), Litzky LA(4), 
Feldman M(4), Henao-Mejia J(9), Striepen B(7), Ramage H(14), Jurado KA(10), 
Wellen KE(5), O'Doherty U(4), Abdel-Mohsen M(13), Landay AL(15), Keshavarzian 
A(16), Henrich TJ(17), Deeks SG(18), Peluso MJ(18), Meyer NJ(19), Wherry EJ(20), 
Abramoff BA(21), Cherry S(22), Thaiss CA(23), Levy M(24).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Institute for Immunology and Immune Health, 
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Institute for Immunology and Immune Health, 
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Institute 
for Obesity, Diabetes and Metabolism, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Institute for Immunology and Immune Health, 
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Institute 
for Obesity, Diabetes and Metabolism, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Institute for Molecular Bio Science, Goethe 
University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(5)Department of Cancer Biology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(6)Institute for Immunology and Immune Health, University of Pennsylvania School 
of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Department of Systems Pharmacology and 
Translational Therapeutics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(7)Department of Pathobiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(8)Institute for Immunology and Immune Health, University of Pennsylvania School 
of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Department of Systems Pharmacology and 
Translational Therapeutics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA; Parker Institute for Cancer Immunotherapy, Perelman 
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(9)Institute for Immunology and Immune Health, University of Pennsylvania School 
of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Department of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
PA, USA; Division of Protective Immunity, Department of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(10)Department of Microbiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(11)Metabolomics Core, Penn Cardiovascular Institute, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(12)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(13)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(14)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Sidney Kimmel Medical College, 
Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(15)Department of Internal Medicine, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, 
IL, USA.
(16)Department of Internal Medicine, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, 
IL, USA; Rush Center for Integrated Microbiome and Chronobiology Research, 
Chicago, IL, USA.
(17)Division of Experimental Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, 
San Francisco, CA, USA.
(18)Division of HIV, Infectious Diseases, and Global Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(19)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(20)Institute for Immunology and Immune Health, University of Pennsylvania 
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Abramson Family Cancer Research 
Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Department of 
Systems Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, University of Pennsylvania 
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Parker Institute for Cancer 
Immunotherapy, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(21)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Electronic address: 
benjamin.abramoff@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(22)Institute for Immunology and Immune Health, University of Pennsylvania 
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA. Electronic address: cherrys@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(23)Department of Microbiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Institute for Immunology and Immune Health, 
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Institute 
for Obesity, Diabetes and Metabolism, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. Electronic address: 
thaiss@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.
(24)Department of Microbiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Institute for Immunology and Immune Health, 
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Abramson 
Family Cancer Research Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, 
USA. Electronic address: maayanle@pennmedicine.upenn.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2023 Dec;23(12):784. doi: 10.1038/s41577-023-00966-7.

Post-acute sequelae of COVID-19 (PASC, "Long COVID") pose a significant global 
health challenge. The pathophysiology is unknown, and no effective treatments 
have been found to date. Several hypotheses have been formulated to explain the 
etiology of PASC, including viral persistence, chronic inflammation, 
hypercoagulability, and autonomic dysfunction. Here, we propose a mechanism that 
links all four hypotheses in a single pathway and provides actionable insights 
for therapeutic interventions. We find that PASC are associated with serotonin 
reduction. Viral infection and type I interferon-driven inflammation reduce 
serotonin through three mechanisms: diminished intestinal absorption of the 
serotonin precursor tryptophan; platelet hyperactivation and thrombocytopenia, 
which impacts serotonin storage; and enhanced MAO-mediated serotonin turnover. 
Peripheral serotonin reduction, in turn, impedes the activity of the vagus nerve 
and thereby impairs hippocampal responses and memory. These findings provide a 
possible explanation for neurocognitive symptoms associated with viral 
persistence in Long COVID, which may extend to other post-viral syndromes.

Copyright © 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2023.09.013
PMCID: PMC11227373
PMID: 37848036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests E.J.W. is an advisor 
for Danger Bio, Janssen, New Limit, Marengo, Pluto Immunotherapeutics Related 
Sciences, Rubius Therapeutics, Santa Ana Bio, Synthekine, and Surface Oncology. 
E.J.W. is a founder of and holds stock in Surface Oncology, Danger Bio, and 
Arsenal Biosciences. N.J.M. reports consulting fees from Endpoint Health Inc and 
AstraZeneca and receives funding from Quantum Leap Healthcare Collaborative 
outside of the published work.