---
reference_id: "PMID:11501939"
title: Corneal dystrophies in Japan.
authors:
- Fujiki K
- Nakayasu K
- Kanai A
journal: J Hum Genet
year: '2001'
doi: 10.1007/s100380170041
keywords:
- "Corneal Dystrophies, Hereditary/classification, genetics, pathology"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Extracellular Matrix Proteins
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease/ethnology
- Humans
- Japan/epidemiology
- Molecular Biology
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- Neoplasm Proteins/genetics
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Transforming Growth Factor beta/genetics
- betaIG-H3 Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Corneal dystrophies in Japan.
**Authors:** Fujiki K, Nakayasu K, Kanai A
**Journal:** J Hum Genet (2001)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s100380170041](https://doi.org/10.1007/s100380170041)

## Content

1. J Hum Genet. 2001;46(8):431-5. doi: 10.1007/s100380170041.

Corneal dystrophies in Japan.

Fujiki K(1), Nakayasu K, Kanai A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan. fujiki@med.juntendo.ac.jp

Recent advances in molecular genetics have increased our understanding of the 
role of genes. Four autosomal dominant corneal dystrophies (CDs); granular CD 
(GCD), Avellino CD (ACD), lattice CD (LCD), and Reis-Bücklers CD (RBCD) were 
mapped to the long arm of chromosome 5 (5q31). These four diseases were shown, 
in a Caucasian series, to result from different missense mutations in the TGFBI 
(BIGH3, keratoepithelin) gene. The same mutations were also detected in Japanese 
patients, from a different ethnic background. Gelatinous drop-like corneal 
dystrophy (GDLD), on the other hand, which was found in Japanese patients in 
1914, is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by corneal 
amyloidosis. Parents of the patients had a markedly higher frequency of 
consanguineous marriages than the general population. The gene responsible for 
GDLD, the membrane component, chromosome 1, surface marker 1 (M1S1) gene was 
mapped to the short arm of chromosome 1(1p). Four deleterious mutations in this 
gene were detected in Japanese patients. We review here additional studies on 
mutations of the TGFBI and M1S1 genes found in Japanese patients. In the TGFBI 
gene, nine different mutations were detected in Japanese patients with GCD, ACD, 
LCD, or RBCD. The codons R124 and R555 of the TGFBI gene were hotspots in 
Japanese patients, of whom many were ACD patients with the R124H mutation. New 
mutations responsible for LCD were detected in the TGFBI gene of patients with 
LCD, in addition to the P501T mutation in LCD type IIIA found earlier. These 
studies showed a clear genotype/phenotype correlation associated with the TGFBI 
gene. In the M1S1 gene, the Q118X mutation was the most common alteration, and a 
founder mutation in Japanese GDLD patients, as previously reported. Ninety-two 
percent of the mutated alleles were the Q118X.

DOI: 10.1007/s100380170041
PMID: 11501939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]