---
reference_id: "PMID:26769252"
title: "Atypical Teratoid/Rhabdoid Tumor (AT/RT) Arising From Ependymoma: A Type of AT/RT Secondarily Developing From Other Primary Central Nervous System Tumors."
authors:
- Nobusawa S
- Hirato J
- Sugai T
- Okura N
- Yamazaki T
- Yamada S
- Ikota H
- Nakazato Y
- Yokoo H
journal: J Neuropathol Exp Neurol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1093/jnen/nlv017
keywords:
- "Central Nervous System Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology"
- "Chromosomal Proteins, Non-Histone/biosynthesis, genetics"
- DNA Copy Number Variations
- "DNA, Neoplasm/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Ependymoma/pathology
- Humans
- Male
- Proteins/genetics
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Rhabdoid Tumor/metabolism, pathology"
- SMARCB1 Protein
- "Supratentorial Neoplasms/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- "Teratoma/metabolism, pathology"
- "Transcription Factors/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Atypical Teratoid/Rhabdoid Tumor (AT/RT) Arising From Ependymoma: A Type of AT/RT Secondarily Developing From Other Primary Central Nervous System Tumors.
**Authors:** Nobusawa S, Hirato J, Sugai T, Okura N, Yamazaki T, Yamada S, Ikota H, Nakazato Y, Yokoo H
**Journal:** J Neuropathol Exp Neurol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jnen/nlv017](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnen/nlv017)

## Content

1. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2016 Feb;75(2):167-74. doi: 10.1093/jnen/nlv017.

Atypical Teratoid/Rhabdoid Tumor (AT/RT) Arising From Ependymoma: A Type of
AT/RT Secondarily Developing From Other Primary Central Nervous System Tumors.

Nobusawa S, Hirato J, Sugai T, Okura N, Yamazaki T, Yamada S, Ikota H, Nakazato
Y, Yokoo H.

Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors (AT/RT) are rare, aggressive, embryonal brain
tumors that occur most frequently in very young children; they are characterized
by rhabdoid cells and loss of INI1 protein nuclear expression. Here, we report
the case of a 24-year-old man with a left frontal lobe tumor that was composed
mainly of rhabdoid cells showing loss of INI1 nuclear reactivity and
polyphenotypic immunohistochemical expression, with a small INI1-positive
component of ependymoma. Array comparative genomic hybridization separately
conducted for each histologically distinct component revealed 22 shared
identical copy number alterations, including loss of heterozygosity of
chromosome 22q containing the INI1 locus. Furthermore, we found the
C11orf95-RELA fusion gene, the genetic hallmark of supratentorial ependymomas,
not only in the ependymoma component but also in the AT/RT component by
fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis, suggesting that the AT/RT cells
secondarily progressed from the preexisting ependymoma cells. A second genetic
inactivating event in the INI1 gene was not detected in the AT/RT component.
There are several reported cases of AT/RT (or INI1-negative rhabdoid tumors)
arising in the setting of other primary brain tumors (gangliogliomas,
pleomorphic xanthoastrocytomas, and high-grade gliomas), but the present case

DOI: 10.1093/jnen/nlv017
PMID: 26769252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
