---
reference_id: "PMID:36744987"
title: Detection of driver mutations in plasma cell-free nucleic acids in differentiated thyroid neoplasm.
authors:
- Dutta S
- Tarafdar S
- Mukhopadhyay P
- Bhattacharyya NP
- Ghosh S
journal: Eur J Endocrinol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1093/ejendo/lvac018
keywords:
- Humans
- "Thyroid Nodule/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local"
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Mutation
- Adenoma/pathology
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Detection of driver mutations in plasma cell-free nucleic acids in differentiated thyroid neoplasm.
**Authors:** Dutta S, Tarafdar S, Mukhopadhyay P, Bhattacharyya NP, Ghosh S
**Journal:** Eur J Endocrinol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1093/ejendo/lvac018](https://doi.org/10.1093/ejendo/lvac018)

## Content

1. Eur J Endocrinol. 2023 Jan 10;188(1):lvac018. doi: 10.1093/ejendo/lvac018.

Detection of driver mutations in plasma cell-free nucleic acids in
differentiated thyroid neoplasm.

Dutta S(1), Tarafdar S(1), Mukhopadhyay P(1), Bhattacharyya NP(1), Ghosh S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Institute of Post Graduate Medical Education &
Research, Kolkata, India.

IMPORTANCE: This proof-of-concept paper demonstrates that driver mutations can
be detected in plasma in differentiated thyroid tumors, and we were able to
detect mutations in upto 80% malignant thyroid nodules. Additionally, cancer
subtypes could also be predicted using a 8-gene panel. In almost 90% follicular
adenoma, rat sarcoma virus (RAS) mutations were detectable. There was a strong
agreement between driver mutations found in plasma samples, FNAC materials, and
histopathology samples. This has potential as a noninvasive, preoperative
diagnostic tool (particularly of clinical importance in indeterminate nodules)
and may help in detection of residual tumor after surgery. Future research is
warranted to test the role of this tool to detect tumor recurrence.
OBJECTIVE: Ultrasonographic (USG) evaluation and fine-needle aspiration (FNA)
are cornerstone for evaluation of thyroid neoplasm. Molecular technique
including detection of driver mutation from FNA cytology (FNAC) material is an
established modality. In this study, we explored the feasibility of using plasma
cell-free nucleic acids to identify known driver mutations in differentiated
thyroid neoplasm.
DESIGN: Patients presenting with thyroid nodules underwent USG with Thyroid
Image Reporting and Data Systems scoring and FNAC (Bethesda classification). All
patients in Bethesda 3, 4, 5, 6 underwent surgery and histopathological
confirmation. Patients in Bethesda 2 (cosmetic concerns, compressive symptoms)
underwent surgery, and rest were presumed benign on the basis of USG, FNAC
features, and clinical followup.).
SETTING: Endocrinology clinic.
PARTICIPANTS: Subjects with thyroid nodule.
INTERVENTION(S) OR EXPOSURE(S): None.
MAIN OUTCOME(S) AND MEASURE(S): Plasma sample, FNA, and histopathology material
were evaluated for driver mutations (8-gene panel comprising BRAF-V600E,
RET/PTC3, RET/PTC1, TERT promoter, HRAS, NRAS, KRAS, and PAX8-PPARG).
RESULTS: A total of 223 subjects were recruited; of these 154 were benign and 69
had differentiated thyroid cancer. We were able to detect driver mutation from
plasma in 55 subjects (79.71%) of all malignant patients, and 11 patients in
benign category had RAS mutation (follicular adenoma). Rest of the benign
nodules did not have any detectable driver mutations.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Plasma might be a viable noninvasive alternative
source for detection of driver mutations (8-gene panel) in subjects with
differentiated thyroid tumors and may have significant clinical utility.

© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of (ESE)
European Society of Endocrinology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ejendo/lvac018
PMID: 36744987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
