---
reference_id: "PMID:35804238"
title: "Surgical and Cardiac Catheterization Outcomes of Scimitar Syndrome Patients: A Three Decade Single-Center Experience."
authors:
- Seymour E
- Mallory G
- Morales-Demori R
journal: Pediatr Cardiol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1007/s00246-022-02965-2
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Surgical and Cardiac Catheterization Outcomes of Scimitar Syndrome Patients: A Three Decade Single-Center Experience.
**Authors:** Seymour E, Mallory G, Morales-Demori R
**Journal:** Pediatr Cardiol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00246-022-02965-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00246-022-02965-2)

## Content

1. Pediatr Cardiol. 2023 Mar;44(3):579-586. doi: 10.1007/s00246-022-02965-2. Epub
 2022 Jul 8.

Surgical and Cardiac Catheterization Outcomes of Scimitar Syndrome Patients: A 
Three Decade Single-Center Experience.

Seymour E(1), Mallory G(2), Morales-Demori R(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Critical Care Medicine, Baylor College 
of Medicine, Texas Children's Hospital, 6651 Main St. MC. E1420, Houston, TX, 
USA. emma.seymour@bcm.edu.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pulmonology, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Texas Children's Hospital, 6701 Fannin St., Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Critical Care Medicine, Baylor College 
of Medicine, Texas Children's Hospital, 6651 Main St. MC. E1420, Houston, TX, 
USA.

Scimitar syndrome (SS) is a rare congenital condition which includes partial 
anomalous pulmonary venous return (PAPVR) and a variable degree of pulmonary 
hypoplasia. We describe the clinical features, therapeutic approach and outcomes 
of patients who underwent cardiac catheterization and/or surgical repair of the 
scimitar vein at a single institution in the United States. This retrospective 
cohort study included all patients with SS who underwent scimitar vein surgical 
repair or cardiac catheterization from October 1989 through August 2021 in a 
tertiary care center. A total of 84 patients with SS were included and median 
follow-up time was 74 months. Patients diagnosed with SS under the age of one 
year had a significantly greater incidence of congenital heart defects (CHD) 
(p < 0.001), non-cardiac anomalies (p = 0.02), pulmonary hypertension 
(p = 0.02), and mortality (p = 0.04) compared to those diagnosed over the age of 
1 year. Twenty-eight patients underwent surgical repair of the scimitar vein. 
Overall, eight (10%) patients died. Compared to surviving patients, deceased 
patients had a significantly higher incidence of pulmonary hypertension (PH), 
neonatal SS diagnosis, and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) support. 
Median scimitar vein pressure (20 mmHg) of deceased patients was significantly 
higher compared to pressures in surviving patients (11 mmHg; p = 0.02). PH, CHD, 
neonatal SS diagnosis, ECMO support, and markedly elevated scimitar vein 
pressure are associated with mortality. Scimitar vein surgical repair during 
infancy is commonly associated with PH and restenosis that requires 
re-intervention.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1007/s00246-022-02965-2
PMID: 35804238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]