---
reference_id: "PMID:30975089"
title: "Novel homozygous OSGEP gene pathogenic variants in two unrelated patients with Galloway-Mowat syndrome: case report and review of the literature."
authors:
- Domingo-Gallego A
- Furlano M
- Pybus M
- Barraca D
- Martínez AB
- Mora Muñoz E
- Torra R
- Ars E
journal: BMC Nephrol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1186/s12882-019-1317-y
keywords:
- Atrophy
- Biopsy
- "Brain/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Clinical Deterioration
- Fatal Outcome
- Female
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- "Hernia, Hiatal/complications, diagnosis, genetics, mortality"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Kidney/pathology
- Life Expectancy
- Male
- Metalloendopeptidases/genetics
- "Microcephaly/complications, diagnosis, etiology, genetics, mortality"
- "Nephrosis/complications, diagnosis, genetics, mortality"
- "Nephrotic Syndrome/diagnosis, etiology, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel homozygous OSGEP gene pathogenic variants in two unrelated patients with Galloway-Mowat syndrome: case report and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Domingo-Gallego A, Furlano M, Pybus M, Barraca D, Martínez AB, Mora Muñoz E, Torra R, Ars E
**Journal:** BMC Nephrol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12882-019-1317-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12882-019-1317-y)

## Content

1. BMC Nephrol. 2019 Apr 11;20(1):126. doi: 10.1186/s12882-019-1317-y.

Novel homozygous OSGEP gene pathogenic variants in two unrelated patients with
Galloway-Mowat syndrome: case report and review of the literature.

Domingo-Gallego A(1)(2), Furlano M(2), Pybus M(1)(2), Barraca D(3), Martínez
AB(3), Mora Muñoz E(4), Torra R(2), Ars E(5)(6).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Fundació Puigvert, Instituto de Investigaciones
Biomédicas Sant Pau (IIB-Sant Pau), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, REDinREN,
Instituto de Investigación Carlos III, Cartagena 340-350, 08025, Barcelona,
Catalonia, Spain.
(2)Nephrology Department, Fundació Puigvert, Instituto de Investigaciones
Biomédicas Sant Pau (IIB-Sant Pau), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, REDinREN,
Instituto de Investigación Carlos III, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(3)Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Hospital Universitario Mutua de Terrassa, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(5)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Fundació Puigvert, Instituto de Investigaciones
Biomédicas Sant Pau (IIB-Sant Pau), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, REDinREN,
Instituto de Investigación Carlos III, Cartagena 340-350, 08025, Barcelona,
Catalonia, Spain. ears@fundacio-puigvert.es.
(6)Nephrology Department, Fundació Puigvert, Instituto de Investigaciones
Biomédicas Sant Pau (IIB-Sant Pau), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, REDinREN,
Instituto de Investigación Carlos III, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
ears@fundacio-puigvert.es.

BACKGROUND: Galloway-Mowat syndrome (GAMOS) is a rare autosomal recessive
disorder characterized by early-onset nephrotic syndrome and microcephaly with
brain anomalies. WDR73 pathogenic variants were described as the first genetic
cause of GAMOS and, very recently, four novel causative genes, OSGEP, LAGE3,
TP53RK, and TPRKB, have been identified.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present the clinical and genetic characteristics of two
unrelated infants with clinical suspicion of GAMOS who were born from
consanguineous parents. Both patients showed a similar clinical presentation,
with early-onset nephrotic syndrome, microcephaly, brain atrophy, developmental
delay, axial hypotonia, and early fatality. We identified two novel likely
disease-causing variants in the OSGEP gene. These two cases, in conjunction with
the findings of a literature review, indicate that OSGEP pathogenic variants are
associated with an earlier onset of nephrotic syndrome and shorter life
expectancy than WDR73 pathogenic variants.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings expand the spectrum of pathogenic variants in the
OSGEP gene and, taken in conjunction with the results of the literature review,
suggest that the OSGEP gene should be considered the main known monogenic cause
of GAMOS. Early genetic diagnosis of GAMOS is of paramount importance for
genetic counseling and family planning.

DOI: 10.1186/s12882-019-1317-y
PMCID: PMC6458604
PMID: 30975089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: This
study was approved by Fundació Puigvert Institutional Review Board. The parents
of the patients provided written informed consent to participate in this study.
CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: The parents of the patients provided written informed
consent to publish this case report, including case description, medical data,
and images, maintaining anonymity. COMPETING INTERESTS: RT is the Editorial
Board Member of BMC Nephrology. The other authors declare that they have no
competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature remains neutral with
regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional
affiliations.
