---
reference_id: "PMID:34382383"
title: Whole-genome profiling of primary cutaneous anaplastic large cell lymphoma.
authors:
- Bastidas Torres AN
- Melchers RC
- Van Grieken L
- Out-Luiting JJ
- Mei H
- Agaser C
- Kuipers TB
- Quint KD
- Willemze R
- Vermeer MH
- Tensen CP
journal: Haematologica
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3324/haematol.2020.263251
keywords:
- 3-Phosphoinositide-Dependent Protein Kinases
- Fetal Proteins
- Humans
- Ki-1 Antigen
- "Lymphoma, Large-Cell, Anaplastic/genetics, pathology"
- "Lymphoma, Primary Cutaneous Anaplastic Large Cell"
- Lymphoproliferative Disorders/pathology
- Protein-Tyrosine Kinases
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt
- Skin Neoplasms/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Whole-genome profiling of primary cutaneous anaplastic large cell lymphoma.
**Authors:** Bastidas Torres AN, Melchers RC, Van Grieken L, Out-Luiting JJ, Mei H, Agaser C, Kuipers TB, Quint KD, Willemze R, Vermeer MH, Tensen CP
**Journal:** Haematologica (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3324/haematol.2020.263251](https://doi.org/10.3324/haematol.2020.263251)

## Content

1. Haematologica. 2022 Jul 1;107(7):1619-1632. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2020.263251.

Whole-genome profiling of primary cutaneous anaplastic large cell lymphoma.

Bastidas Torres AN(1), Melchers RC(1), Van Grieken L(1), Out-Luiting JJ(1), Mei
H(2), Agaser C(2), Kuipers TB(2), Quint KD(1), Willemze R(1), Vermeer MH(1),
Tensen CP(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden.
(2)Sequencing Analysis Support Core, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden.
c.p.tensen@lumc.nl.

Primary cutaneous anaplastic large cell lymphoma (pcALCL), a hematological
neoplasm caused by skin-homing CD30+ malignant T cells, is part of the spectrum
of primary cutaneous CD30+ lymphoproliferative disorders. To date, only a small
number of molecular alterations have been described in pcALCL and, so far, no
clear unifying theme that could explain the pathogenetic origin of the disease
has emerged among patients. In order to clarify the pathogenetic basis of
pcALCL, we performed high-resolution genetic profiling (genome/transcriptome) of
this lymphoma (n=12) by using whole-genome sequencing, whole-exome sequencing
and RNA sequencing. Our study, which uncovered novel genomic rearrangements,
copy number alterations and small-scale mutations underlying this malignancy,
revealed that the cell cycle, T-cell physiology regulation, transcription and
signaling via the PI-3-K, MAPK and G-protein pathways are cellular processes
commonly impacted by molecular alterations in patients with pcALCL. Recurrent
events affecting cancer-associated genes included deletion of PRDM1 and
TNFRSF14, gain of EZH2 and TNFRSF8, small-scale mutations in LRP1B, PDPK1 and
PIK3R1 and rearrangements involving GPS2, LINC-PINT and TNK1. Consistent with
the genomic data, transcriptome analysis uncovered upregulation of signal
transduction routes associated with the PI-3-K, MAPK and G-protein pathways
(e.g., ERK, phospholipase C, AKT). Our molecular findings suggest that
inhibition of proliferation-promoting pathways altered in pcALCL (particularly
PI-3-K/AKT signaling) should be explored as potential alternative therapy for
patients with this lymphoma, especially, for cases that do not respond to
first-line skin-directed therapies or with extracutaneous disease.

DOI: 10.3324/haematol.2020.263251
PMCID: PMC9244823
PMID: 34382383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
