---
reference_id: "PMID:31095038"
title: "Disseminated intravascular coagulation and melanoma: a novel case occurring in metastatic melanoma with BRAF and NRAS mutations and systematic review."
authors:
- Haggstrom L
- Duong TA
- Thomas B
- Brungs D
- Aghmesheh M
- Parmar G
journal: Melanoma Res
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1097/CMR.0000000000000622
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Disseminated intravascular coagulation and melanoma: a novel case occurring in metastatic melanoma with BRAF and NRAS mutations and systematic review.
**Authors:** Haggstrom L, Duong TA, Thomas B, Brungs D, Aghmesheh M, Parmar G
**Journal:** Melanoma Res (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1097/CMR.0000000000000622](https://doi.org/10.1097/CMR.0000000000000622)

## Content

1. Melanoma Res. 2019 Oct;29(5):533-538. doi: 10.1097/CMR.0000000000000622.

Disseminated intravascular coagulation and melanoma: a novel case occurring in 
metastatic melanoma with BRAF and NRAS mutations and systematic review.

Haggstrom L(1), Duong TA, Thomas B, Brungs D, Aghmesheh M, Parmar G.

Author information:
(1)The Wollongong Hospital, Wollongong, New South Wales, Australia.

Disseminated intravascular coagulation is a complex and potentially lethal 
complication of malignancy, in which the fundamental abnormality is excessive 
activation of the coagulation system. It is a rare complication of melanoma 
which can be difficult to diagnose in some circumstances, leading to delay in 
treatment. Herein, we describe the first case of disseminated intravascular 
coagulation occurring in BRAF and NRAS-mutant metastatic melanoma, and 
systematically review the literature regarding disseminated intravascular 
coagulation in melanoma. This review summarizes the reported cases of 
disseminated intravascular coagulation in melanoma and those secondary to the 
novel treatment of melanoma, and explores the pathophysiology of disseminated 
intravascular coagulation in melanoma, highlighting the key role of expression 
of markers of coagulation and fibrinolysis in disseminated intravascular 
coagulation, as well as more widely in melanoma. Current limitations in the 
literature are also identified and discussed, particularly with respect to 
improving the management of this lethal complication. Disseminated intravascular 
coagulation is a rare complication of melanoma that typically portends poor 
prognosis.

DOI: 10.1097/CMR.0000000000000622
PMID: 31095038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]