---
reference_id: "PMID:30484670"
title: Genetic predictors of the development and recurrence of Graves' disease.
authors:
- Vejrazkova D
- Vcelak J
- Vaclavikova E
- Vankova M
- Zajickova K
- Duskova M
- Vrbikova J
- Bendlova B
journal: Physiol Res
year: '2018'
doi: 10.33549/physiolres.934018
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic predictors of the development and recurrence of Graves' disease.
**Authors:** Vejrazkova D, Vcelak J, Vaclavikova E, Vankova M, Zajickova K, Duskova M, Vrbikova J, Bendlova B
**Journal:** Physiol Res (2018)
**DOI:** [10.33549/physiolres.934018](https://doi.org/10.33549/physiolres.934018)

## Content

1. Physiol Res. 2018 Nov 28;67(Suppl 3):S431-S439. doi:
10.33549/physiolres.934018.

Genetic predictors of the development and recurrence of Graves' disease.

Vejrazkova D(1), Vcelak J, Vaclavikova E, Vankova M, Zajickova K, Duskova M, 
Vrbikova J, Bendlova B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, Institute of Endocrinology, Prague, 
Czech Republic. dvejrazkova@endo.cz.

Graves' disease affects approximately 3 % of women and 0.5 % of men. The 
first-choice therapy is based on the administration of thyrostatic drugs. 
However, approximately half of patients relapse within two years of 
discontinuation. These patients must then decide whether to re-initiate 
thyrostatics, which may have serious side effects, or to undergo surgery or 
radioiodine treatment. Familial forms of Graves' disease indicate a significant 
genetic component, with twin studies demonstrating a contribution of genetic 
factors up to 70-80 %. The autoimmune nature of the disease involves the human 
leukocyte antigen (HLA) complex, which has a decisive impact on each 
individual's immune response. Within HLA, some variants of the DRB1, DQA1 and 
DQB1 genes appear to be possible predictors of the development and recurrence of 
Graves' disease. Outside the HLA region, many variants of immunocompetent genes 
have also been identified as potential Graves' disease predictors. Apart from 
the immune system, some thyroid-specific genes have been described in relation 
to the disease. Here, we present current knowledge regarding the genetic 
components involved in the development and recurrence of Graves' disease. 
Further, we present original pilot results from a cohort of Czech Graves' 
disease patients regarding the HLA variants.

DOI: 10.33549/physiolres.934018
PMID: 30484670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]