---
reference_id: "PMID:2942452"
title: Juvenile Huntington disease.
authors:
- van Dijk JG
- van der Velde EA
- Roos RA
- Bruyn GW
journal: Hum Genet
year: '1986'
doi: 10.1007/BF00401235
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Juvenile Huntington disease.
**Authors:** van Dijk JG, van der Velde EA, Roos RA, Bruyn GW
**Journal:** Hum Genet (1986)
**DOI:** [10.1007/BF00401235](https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00401235)

## Content

1. Hum Genet. 1986 Jul;73(3):235-9. doi: 10.1007/BF00401235.

Juvenile Huntington disease.

van Dijk JG, van der Velde EA, Roos RA, Bruyn GW.

Of 195 cases of juvenile Huntington disease gathered from case descriptions, the 
sex, age at onset, duration of disease, clinical type, sex of the affected 
parent, as well as sex, mean age at onset and at death of adult cases in the 
same pedigrees were noted when available, and the data were investigated for 
evidence of relationships between different features. Examination of a subset of 
112 cases showed a preponderance of rigid cases, whose affected parent proved to 
be the father in a significantly high number of cases. Rigid paternal cases had 
a significantly lower age at onset, as well as a shorter duration of disease 
than choreatic paternal cases. No such relationship exists between rigid 
maternal and choreatic maternal cases. In rigid cases duration of disease proved 
to be shorter for those with a lower age at onset. Female juvenile cases tended 
to have a lower age at onset than male ones, regardless of clinical type or sex 
of the affected parent. The mean ages at onset and at death of adult members of 
the same pedigrees were not related to clinical type or age at onset of juvenile 
cases. It is argued that juvenile Huntington disease should not be regarded as a 
separate clinical entity, but as a manifestation of the rigid variant of the 
disease.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00401235
PMID: 2942452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]