---
reference_id: "PMID:34807422"
title: Ehlers Danlos Syndrome with Glycosaminoglycan Abnormalities.
authors:
- Miyake N
- Kosho T
- Matsumoto N
journal: Adv Exp Med Biol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-80614-9_10
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ehlers Danlos Syndrome with Glycosaminoglycan Abnormalities.
**Authors:** Miyake N, Kosho T, Matsumoto N
**Journal:** Adv Exp Med Biol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-030-80614-9_10](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-80614-9_10)

## Content

1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2021;1348:235-249. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-80614-9_10.

Ehlers Danlos Syndrome with Glycosaminoglycan Abnormalities.

Miyake N(1), Kosho T(2), Matsumoto N(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, National Center for Global Health and Medicine, 
Tokyo, Japan. nomiyake@ri.ncgm.go.jp.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Shinshu University School of Medicine, 
Matsumoto, Japan.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.

Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a genetically and clinically heterogeneous group 
of connective tissue disorders that typically present with skin 
hyperextensibility, joint hypermobility, and tissue fragility. The major cause 
of EDS appears to be impaired biosynthesis and enzymatic modification of 
collagen. In this chapter, we discuss two types of EDS that are associated with 
proteoglycan abnormalities: spondylodysplastic EDS and musculocontractural EDS. 
Spondylodysplastic EDS is caused by pathogenic variants in B4GALT7 or B3GALT6, 
both of which encode key enzymes that initiate glycosaminoglycan synthesis. 
Musculocontractural EDS is caused by mutations in CHST14 or DSE, both of which 
encode enzymes responsible for the post-translational biosynthesis of dermatan 
sulfate. The clinical and molecular characteristics of both types of EDS are 
described in this chapter.

© 2021. Springer Nature Switzerland AG.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-80614-9_10
PMID: 34807422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]