---
reference_id: "PMID:25860607"
title: Modeling familial cancer with induced pluripotent stem cells.
authors:
- Lee DF
- Su J
- Kim HS
- Chang B
- Papatsenko D
- Zhao R
- Yuan Y
- Gingold J
- Xia W
- Darr H
- Mirzayans R
- Hung MC
- Schaniel C
- Lemischka IR
journal: Cell
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.02.045
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Animals
- Child
- Decorin/metabolism
- Female
- Gene Regulatory Networks
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/cytology
- "Li-Fraumeni Syndrome/complications, genetics, pathology"
- Male
- Mesenchymal Stem Cells/metabolism
- Mice
- "Models, Biological"
- Neoplasm Transplantation
- "Osteoblasts/cytology, metabolism"
- Osteogenesis
- "Osteosarcoma/etiology, genetics, pathology"
- "RNA, Long Noncoding/metabolism"
- "Transplantation, Heterologous"
- Tumor Suppressor Protein p53/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Modeling familial cancer with induced pluripotent stem cells.
**Authors:** Lee DF, Su J, Kim HS, Chang B, Papatsenko D, Zhao R, Yuan Y, Gingold J, Xia W, Darr H, Mirzayans R, Hung MC, Schaniel C, Lemischka IR
**Journal:** Cell (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2015.02.045](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2015.02.045)

## Content

1. Cell. 2015 Apr 9;161(2):240-54. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.02.045.

Modeling familial cancer with induced pluripotent stem cells.

Lee DF(1), Su J(2), Kim HS(2), Chang B(2), Papatsenko D(3), Zhao R(4), Yuan 
Y(2), Gingold J(2), Xia W(4), Darr H(3), Mirzayans R(5), Hung MC(6), Schaniel 
C(7), Lemischka IR(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology and The Black Family 
Stem Cell Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 
10029, USA. Electronic address: dung-fang.lee@mssm.edu.
(2)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology and The Black Family 
Stem Cell Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 
10029, USA; The Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(3)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology and The Black Family 
Stem Cell Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 
10029, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas M.D. 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(5)Department of Oncology, University of Alberta, Cross Cancer Institute, 
Edmonton, AB T6G 1Z2, Canada.
(6)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas M.D. 
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Center for Molecular Medicine 
and Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology, China Medical University, Taichung 
404, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology and The Black Family 
Stem Cell Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 
10029, USA; The Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; Department of Pharmacology and Systems 
Therapeutics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(8)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology and The Black Family 
Stem Cell Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 
10029, USA; The Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; Department of Pharmacology and Systems 
Therapeutics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA. 
Electronic address: ihor.lemischka@mssm.edu.

In vitro modeling of human disease has recently become feasible with induced 
pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) technology. Here, we established patient-derived 
iPSCs from a Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) family and investigated the role of 
mutant p53 in the development of osteosarcoma (OS). LFS iPSC-derived osteoblasts 
(OBs) recapitulated OS features including defective osteoblastic differentiation 
as well as tumorigenic ability. Systematic analyses revealed that the expression 
of genes enriched in LFS-derived OBs strongly correlated with decreased time to 
tumor recurrence and poor patient survival. Furthermore, LFS OBs exhibited 
impaired upregulation of the imprinted gene H19 during osteogenesis. Restoration 
of H19 expression in LFS OBs facilitated osteoblastic differentiation and 
repressed tumorigenic potential. By integrating human imprinted gene network 
(IGN) into functional genomic analyses, we found that H19 mediates suppression 
of LFS-associated OS through the IGN component DECORIN (DCN). In summary, these 
findings demonstrate the feasibility of studying inherited human cancer 
syndromes with iPSCs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.02.045
PMCID: PMC4397979
PMID: 25860607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]