---
reference_id: "PMID:35944490"
title: DNA-Damage-Repair Gene Alterations in Genitourinary Malignancies.
authors:
- Dariane C
- Timsit MO
journal: Eur Surg Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1159/000526415
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- "Prostatic Neoplasms, Castration-Resistant/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- "Carcinoma, Transitional Cell/drug therapy"
- Androgen Antagonists/therapeutic use
- Androgens/therapeutic use
- Urinary Bladder Neoplasms/drug therapy
- "Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerase Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- DNA/therapeutic use
content_type: abstract_only
---

# DNA-Damage-Repair Gene Alterations in Genitourinary Malignancies.
**Authors:** Dariane C, Timsit MO
**Journal:** Eur Surg Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000526415](https://doi.org/10.1159/000526415)

## Content

1. Eur Surg Res. 2022;63(4):155-164. doi: 10.1159/000526415. Epub 2022 Aug 9.

DNA-Damage-Repair Gene Alterations in Genitourinary Malignancies.

Dariane C(1)(2), Timsit MO(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Urology and Transplant Surgery, AP-HP, Université de
Paris/Hôpital Européen Georges-Pompidou, Paris, France.
(2)U1151 INSERM Team 5, INEM/Paris University/Necker Hospital, Paris, France.
(3)INSERM Team 13, PARCC/Paris University/Hôpital Européen Georges-Pompidou,
Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: High-fidelity repair of DNA damage repair (DDR) (either
single-strand- [SSBs] or double-strand breaks [DSBs]) is necessary for
maintaining genomic integrity and cell survival. DDR alterations are commonly
found in genitourinary malignancies involving either DSB repair by the
homologous recombination (HR) repair (HRR) system (BRCA1/2 pathway) or the SSB
repair through the poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) pathway. PARP inhibitors
(PARPi) exploit defects in the DNA repair pathway through synthetic lethality,
DSBs being repaired only in HR-proficient cells but not in HR-deficient (HRD)
cells.
SUMMARY: A growing body of evidence supports the need for identification of
germinal and somatic DDR alterations in patients with genitourinary
malignancies. PARPi have already shown significant survival benefits in patients
harboring HRR mutations in advanced settings, paving the way for precision
medicine.
KEY MESSAGES: In advanced prostate cancer (PCa), somatic mutations in HRR
pathway are observed in up to 27% of metastatic resistant-to-castration PCa
(mCRPC), although occurring early in PCa development, and mainly involving
BRCA2, ATM, CHEK2, and BRCA1. Overall, germinal alterations are present in
roughly 30-50% of cases of HRR alterations, and relative risk of PCa in germinal
BRCA2 alteration carriers is 4.65-fold higher compared to noncarriers.
Determination of DDR gene status is recommended in metastatic patients, a
fortiori in mCRPC setting, since it could be a putative biomarker of response to
first line of treatment (androgen-receptor signaling inhibitors [ARSI] vs.
taxane-based chemotherapy) and allows to assess eligibility for PARPi use. Thus,
olaparib (combined with androgen deprivation therapy) recently improved overall
survival in mCRPC HRD patients, after new hormonal therapy (NHT) and led to its
approvement for patients with an alteration in 14 of 15 prespecified HRR genes.
Moreover, since preclinical data suggested synergic action between PARPi and
ARSI, the use of either olaparib or niraparib has also been proposed in
combination with NHT, with a radiological progression-free survival improvement
when used with abiraterone. In urothelial carcinoma, a DDR gene alteration is
identified in 23-54% of patients mostly in muscle-invasive bladder cancer, with
a strong association between DDR gene mutation and a higher tumor mutation
burden and sensitivity to cisplatin-based chemotherapy and immunotherapy. Recent
phase 2 trials supported the use of HRR status to select patients for PARPi
treatment in advanced urothelial carcinoma. Finally, in renal cell carcinomas
(RCCs), pathogenic germline variants in DDR genes were identified in 7.3% of the
cases, and deleterious somatic alterations have also been described as recurrent
genomic events in patients with advanced RCC.

© 2022 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000526415
PMID: 35944490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
