---
reference_id: "PMID:31876392"
title: "Hearing loss in individuals with osteogenesis imperfecta in North America: Results from a multicenter study."
authors:
- Machol K
- Hadley TD
- Schmidt J
- Cuthbertson D
- Traboulsi H
- Silva RC
- Citron C
- Khan S
- Citron K
- Carter E
- Brookler K
- Shapiro JR
- Steiner RD
- Byers PH
- Glorieux FH
- Durigova M
- Smith P
- Bober MB
- Sutton VR
- Lee BH
- Members of the BBD Consortium
- Nagamani SCS
- Raggio C
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61464
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- Collagen Type I/genetics
- "Collagen Type I, alpha 1 Chain"
- Female
- Genotype
- "Hearing Loss/epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- North America/epidemiology
- Osteogenesis Imperfecta/physiopathology
- Phenotype
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hearing loss in individuals with osteogenesis imperfecta in North America: Results from a multicenter study.
**Authors:** Machol K, Hadley TD, Schmidt J, Cuthbertson D, Traboulsi H, Silva RC, Citron C, Khan S, Citron K, Carter E, Brookler K, Shapiro JR, Steiner RD, Byers PH, Glorieux FH, Durigova M, Smith P, Bober MB, Sutton VR, Lee BH, Members of the BBD Consortium, Nagamani SCS, Raggio C
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.61464](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.61464)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2020 Apr;182(4):697-704. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61464. Epub
2019  Dec 26.

Hearing loss in individuals with osteogenesis imperfecta in North America: 
Results from a multicenter study.

Machol K(1)(2), Hadley TD(1), Schmidt J(1), Cuthbertson D(3), Traboulsi H(4)(2), 
Silva RC(4)(2), Citron C(5), Khan S(5), Citron K(5), Carter E(5), Brookler K(5), 
Shapiro JR(6)(7), Steiner RD(8)(9), Byers PH(10)(11), Glorieux FH(12), Durigova 
M(12), Smith P(13), Bober MB(14), Sutton VR(1)(2), Lee BH(1)(2); Members of the 
BBD Consortium; Nagamani SCS(1)(2), Raggio C(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, Texas.
(2)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas.
(3)College of Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida.
(4)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Texas.
(5)Department of Pediatric Orthopedic Surgery, Hospital for Special Surgery, New 
York, New York.
(6)Department of Bone and Osteogenesis Imperfecta, Kennedy Krieger Institute, 
Baltimore, Maryland.
(7)Department of Medicine at Uniformed Services, University of the Health 
Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland.
(8)University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, 
Wisconsin.
(9)Pediatrics and Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Portland, Oregon.
(10)Department of Medicine, Division of Medical Genetics, University of 
Washington, Seattle.
(11)Department of Pathology, Division of Medical Genetics, University of 
Washington, Seattle.
(12)Shriner's Hospital for Children and McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada.
(13)Motion Analysis Laboratory, Shriners Hospitals for Children, Chicago, 
Illinois.
(14)Division of Orthogenetics, Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children, 
Wilmington, Delaware.

Hearing loss (HL) is an extra-skeletal manifestation of the connective tissue 
disorder osteogenesis imperfecta (OI). Systematic evaluation of the prevalence 
and characteristics of HL in COL1A1/COL1A2-related OI will contribute to a 
better clinical management of individuals with OI. We collected and analyzed 
pure-tone audiometry data from 312 individuals with OI who were enrolled in the 
Linked Clinical Research Centers and the Brittle Bone Disorders Consortium. The 
prevalence, type, and severity of HL in COL1A1/COL1A2-related OI are reported. 
We show that the prevalence of HL in OI is 28% and increased with age in Type I 
OI but not in Types III and IV. Individuals with OI Types III and IV are at a 
higher risk to develop HL in the first decade of life when compared to OI Type 
I. We also show that the prevalence of SNHL is higher in females with OI 
compared to males. This study reveals new insights regarding prevalence of HL in 
OI including a lower general prevalence of HL in COL1A1/COL1A2-related OI than 
previously reported (28.3 vs. 65%) and high prevalence of SNHL in females. Our 
data support the need in early routine hearing evaluation in all types of OI 
that can be adjusted to the severity of the skeletal disease.

© 2019 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.61464
PMCID: PMC7385724
PMID: 31876392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]