---
reference_id: "PMID:20301626"
title: X-Linked Agammaglobulinemia.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Smith CIE
- Berglöf A
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# X-Linked Agammaglobulinemia.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Smith CIE, Berglöf A

## Content

1. X-Linked Agammaglobulinemia.

Smith CIE(1), Berglöf A(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2001 Apr 5 [updated 2024 Jun 27].

Author information:
(1)Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA) is characterized by 
recurrent bacterial infections in affected males in the first two years of life. 
Recurrent otitis is the most common infection prior to diagnosis. 
Conjunctivitis, sinopulmonary infections, diarrhea, and skin infections are also 
frequently seen. Approximately 60% of individuals with XLA are recognized as 
having immunodeficiency when they develop a severe, life-threatening infection 
such as pneumonia, empyema, meningitis, sepsis, cellulitis, or septic arthritis. 
S pneumoniae and H influenzae are the most common organisms found prior to 
diagnosis and may continue to cause sinusitis and otitis after diagnosis and the 
initiation of gammaglobulin substitution therapy. Severe, difficult-to-treat 
enteroviral infections (often manifesting as dermatomyositis or chronic 
meningoencephalitis) can be prevented by this treatment. The prognosis for 
individuals with XLA has improved markedly in the last 25 years as a result of 
earlier diagnosis, the development of preparations of gammaglobulin that allow 
normal concentrations of serum immunoglobulin G to be achieved, and more liberal 
use of antibiotics.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of XLA is established in a male proband with 
characteristic clinical and laboratory findings and a hemizygous BTK pathogenic 
variant identified by molecular genetic testing. The diagnosis of XLA can be 
established in a female proband with characteristic clinical and laboratory 
findings and a heterozygous pathogenic variant in BTK identified by molecular 
genetic testing. Females with a heterozygous pathogenic variant in BTK extremely 
rarely have clinical and laboratory findings of XLA.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapy: The mainstay of treatment is gammaglobulin 
substitution therapy (by weekly subcutaneous injection or intravenous infusion 
every two to four weeks) to prevent bacterial infections. Treatment of 
manifestations: Generous use of antibiotics can decrease the incidence of 
chronic sinusitis and lung disease. Prophylactic antibiotics can be considered 
to prevent infections. Vaccines, apart from live vaccines, are recommended to 
prevent infection. Inactivated polio vaccine (as opposed to live oral polio 
vaccine) should be given to affected individuals and their family contacts. 
Surveillance: Complete blood count with differential and quantitative serum 
immunoglobulins at least annually; chest and sinus imaging as needed to assess 
for chronic lung and/or sinus disease. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Live viral 
vaccines, particularly oral polio vaccine. Evaluation of relatives at risk: 
Molecular genetic testing of at-risk male relatives as soon after birth as 
possible ensures that gammaglobulin substitution therapy is initiated as soon as 
possible in affected individuals and administration of live viral vaccines can 
be avoided.
GENETIC COUNSELING: By definition, XLA is inherited in an X-linked manner. The 
risk to sibs of a male proband depends on the genetic status of the mother: if 
the mother has a BTK pathogenic variant, the chance of transmitting the BTK 
pathogenic variant in each pregnancy is 50%. Males who inherit the pathogenic 
variant will be affected; females who inherit the pathogenic variant will be 
carriers and are highly unlikely to be affected. Affected males transmit the BTK 
pathogenic variant to all of their daughters and none of their sons. Once the 
BTK pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, carrier 
testing for at-risk female relatives, prenatal testing, and preimplantation 
genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301626