---
reference_id: "PMID:22940071"
title: Type VII collagen deficiency causes defective tooth enamel formation due to poor differentiation of ameloblasts.
authors:
- Umemoto H
- Akiyama M
- Domon T
- Nomura T
- Shinkuma S
- Ito K
- Asaka T
- Sawamura D
- Uitto J
- Uo M
- Kitagawa Y
- Shimizu H
journal: Am J Pathol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.07.018
keywords:
- "Ameloblasts/metabolism, pathology"
- Amelogenesis
- Animals
- "Calcification, Physiologic"
- Cell Differentiation
- Child
- "Collagen Type VII/deficiency, metabolism"
- "Dental Enamel/growth & development, metabolism, pathology, ultrastructure"
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa Dystrophica/pathology, physiopathology"
- Female
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- Humans
- Mice
- "Models, Biological"
- Phenotype
- "Tooth/growth & development, metabolism, pathology, ultrastructure"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type VII collagen deficiency causes defective tooth enamel formation due to poor differentiation of ameloblasts.
**Authors:** Umemoto H, Akiyama M, Domon T, Nomura T, Shinkuma S, Ito K, Asaka T, Sawamura D, Uitto J, Uo M, Kitagawa Y, Shimizu H
**Journal:** Am J Pathol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.07.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.07.018)

## Content

1. Am J Pathol. 2012 Nov;181(5):1659-71. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.07.018. Epub
2012 Aug 31.

Type VII collagen deficiency causes defective tooth enamel formation due to poor
differentiation of ameloblasts.

Umemoto H(1), Akiyama M, Domon T, Nomura T, Shinkuma S, Ito K, Asaka T, Sawamura
D, Uitto J, Uo M, Kitagawa Y, Shimizu H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sapporo, Japan.

Recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB) is caused by mutations in the
gene encoding type VII collagen (COL7), a major component of anchoring fibrils
in the epidermal basement membrane zone. Patients with RDEB present a low oral
hygiene index and prevalent tooth abnormalities with caries. We examined the
tooth enamel structure of an RDEB patient by scanning electron microscopy. It
showed irregular enamel prisms, indicating structural enamel defects. To
elucidate the pathomechanisms of enamel defects due to COL7 deficiency, we
investigated tooth formation in Col7a1(-/-) and COL7-rescued humanized mice that
we have established. The enamel from Col7a1(-/-) mice had normal surface
structure. The enamel calcification and chemical composition of Col7a1(-/-) mice
were similar to those of the wild type. However, transverse sections of teeth
from the Col7a1(-/-) mice showed irregular enamel prisms, which were also
observed in the RDEB patient. Furthermore, the Col7a1(-/-) mice teeth had poorly
differentiated ameloblasts, lacking normal enamel protein-secreting Tomes'
processes, and showed reduced mRNA expression of amelogenin and other
enamel-related molecules. These enamel abnormalities were corrected in the
COL7-rescued humanized mice expressing a human COL7A1 transgene. These findings
suggest that COL7 regulates ameloblast differentiation and is essential for the
formation of Tomes' processes. Collectively, COL7 deficiency is thought to
disrupt epithelial-mesenchymal interactions, leading to defective ameloblast
differentiation and enamel malformation in RDEB patients.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.07.018
PMID: 22940071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
