---
reference_id: "PMID:39008716"
title: A brain organoid/ALL coculture model reveals the AP-1 pathway as critically associated with CNS involvement of BCP-ALL.
authors:
- Gebing P
- Loizou S
- Hänsch S
- Schliehe-Diecks J
- Spory L
- Stachura P
- Jepsen VH
- Vogt M
- Pandyra AA
- Wang H
- Zhuang Z
- Zimmermann J
- Schrappe M
- Cario G
- Alsadeq A
- Schewe DM
- Borkhardt A
- Lenk L
- Fischer U
- Bhatia S
journal: Blood Adv
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2023011145
keywords:
- Humans
- Organoids/metabolism
- Transcription Factor AP-1/metabolism
- Animals
- Mice
- Coculture Techniques
- Signal Transduction
- "Brain/metabolism, pathology"
- Proto-Oncogene Mas
- "Central Nervous System Neoplasms/metabolism, pathology"
- "Precursor Cell Lymphoblastic Leukemia-Lymphoma/metabolism, pathology"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A brain organoid/ALL coculture model reveals the AP-1 pathway as critically associated with CNS involvement of BCP-ALL.
**Authors:** Gebing P, Loizou S, Hänsch S, Schliehe-Diecks J, Spory L, Stachura P, Jepsen VH, Vogt M, Pandyra AA, Wang H, Zhuang Z, Zimmermann J, Schrappe M, Cario G, Alsadeq A, Schewe DM, Borkhardt A, Lenk L, Fischer U, Bhatia S
**Journal:** Blood Adv (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1182/bloodadvances.2023011145](https://doi.org/10.1182/bloodadvances.2023011145)

## Content

1. Blood Adv. 2024 Oct 8;8(19):4997-5011. doi: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2023011145.

A brain organoid/ALL coculture model reveals the AP-1 pathway as critically 
associated with CNS involvement of BCP-ALL.

Gebing P(1), Loizou S(1), Hänsch S(2), Schliehe-Diecks J(1), Spory L(3), 
Stachura P(1)(4), Jepsen VH(1), Vogt M(1), Pandyra AA(1)(5)(6), Wang H(7), 
Zhuang Z(7), Zimmermann J(8)(9), Schrappe M(3), Cario G(3), Alsadeq A(10), 
Schewe DM(11), Borkhardt A(1)(12), Lenk L(3), Fischer U(1)(12), Bhatia S(1)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Clinical Immunology, Medical 
Faculty, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(2)Center for Advanced Imaging, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, 
Düsseldorf, Germany.
(3)Department of Pediatrics I, Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, ALL-BFM Study 
Group, University Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany.
(4)Department of Molecular Medicine II, Medical Faculty, 
Heinrich-Heine-University, Universitätsstraße 1, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.
(5)Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, University 
Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(6)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Partner Site Bonn-Cologne, Bonn, 
Germany.
(7)Neuro-Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.
(8)Research Group Evolutionary Ecology and Genetics, Zoological Institute, Kiel 
University, Kiel, Germany.
(9)Cluster of Excellence Balance of the Microverse, Friedrich Schiller 
University, Jena, Germany.
(10)Institute of Immunology, Ulm University Medical Centre, Ulm, Germany.
(11)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital 
Dresden, Dresden, Germany.
(12)German Cancer Consortium, Partner Site Essen/Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, 
Germany.

Central nervous system (CNS) involvement remains a clinical hurdle in treating 
childhood B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia (BCP-ALL). The disease 
mechanisms of CNS leukemia are primarily investigated using 2-dimensional cell 
culture and mouse models. Given the variations in cellular identity and 
architecture between the human and murine CNS, it becomes imperative to seek 
complementary models to study CNS leukemia. Here, we present a first-of-its-kind 
3-dimensional coculture model combining human brain organoids and BCP-ALL cells. 
We noticed significantly higher engraftment of BCP-ALL cell lines and 
patient-derived xenograft (PDX) cells in cerebral organoids than non-ALL cells. 
To validate translatability between organoid coculture and in vivo murine 
models, we confirmed that targeting CNS leukemia-relevant pathways such as 
CD79a/Igα or C-X-C motif chemokine receptor 4-stromal cell-derived factor 
1 reduced the invasion of BCP-ALL cells into organoids. RNA sequencing and 
functional validations of organoid-invading leukemia cells compared with the 
noninvaded fraction revealed significant upregulation of activator protein 1 
(AP-1) transcription factor-complex members in organoid-invading cells. 
Moreover, we detected a significant enrichment of AP-1 pathway genes in PDX ALL 
cells recovered from the CNS compared with spleen blasts of mice that had 
received transplantation with TCF3::PBX1+ PDX cells, substantiating the role of 
AP-1 signaling in CNS disease. Accordingly, we found significantly higher levels 
of the AP-1 gene, jun proto-oncogene, in patients initially diagnosed as 
CNS-positive BCP-ALL compared with CNS-negative cases as well as CNS-relapse vs 
non-CNS-relapse cases in a cohort of 100 patients with BCP-ALL. Our results 
suggest CNS organoids as a novel model to investigate CNS involvement and 
identify the AP-1 pathway as a critical driver of CNS disease in BCP-ALL.

Licensed under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 
International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0), permitting only noncommercial, nonderivative 
use with attribution.

DOI: 10.1182/bloodadvances.2023011145
PMCID: PMC11465051
PMID: 39008716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict-of-interest disclosure: The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.