---
reference_id: "PMID:26179593"
title: "Varicella infection is not associated with increasing prevalence of eczema: a U.S. population-based study."
authors:
- Li JC
- Silverberg JI
journal: Br J Dermatol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1111/bjd.14028
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Varicella infection is not associated with increasing prevalence of eczema: a U.S. population-based study.
**Authors:** Li JC, Silverberg JI
**Journal:** Br J Dermatol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bjd.14028](https://doi.org/10.1111/bjd.14028)

## Content

1. Br J Dermatol. 2015 Nov;173(5):1169-74. doi: 10.1111/bjd.14028. Epub 2015 Oct
4.

Varicella infection is not associated with increasing prevalence of eczema: a 
U.S. population-based study.

Li JC(1), Silverberg JI(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Feinberg School of Medicine at Northwestern 
University, Suite 1600, 676 N. St Clair St, Chicago, IL, 60611, U.S.A.
(2)Departments of Dermatology, Preventive Medicine and Medical Social Sciences, 
Feinberg School of Medicine at Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, U.S.A.
(3)Northwestern Medicine Multidisciplinary Eczema Center, Chicago, IL, U.S.A.

Comment in
    Br J Dermatol. 2015 Nov;173(5):1120-1. doi: 10.1111/bjd.14182.

BACKGROUND: Chickenpox infection early in childhood has previously been shown to 
protect against the development of childhood eczema in line with the hygiene 
hypothesis. In 1995, the American Academy of Pediatrics recommended routine 
vaccination against varicella zoster virus in the United States. Subsequently, 
rates of chickenpox infection have dramatically decreased in childhood.
OBJECTIVES: We sought to understand the impact of declining rates of chickenpox 
infection on the prevalence of eczema.
METHODS: We analysed data from 207 007 children in the 1997-2013 National Health 
Interview Survey. One-year prevalence of eczema and 'ever had' history of 
chickenpox were analysed. Associations between chickenpox infection and eczema 
were tested using survey-weighted logistic regression. The impact of chickenpox 
on trends of eczema prevalence was tested using survey logistic regression and 
generalized linear models.
RESULTS: Children with a history of chickenpox compared with those without 
chickenpox had a lower prevalence [survey-weighted logistic regression (95% 
confidence interval, CI)] of eczema [8·8% (8·5-9·0%) vs. 10·6% (10·4-10·8%)]. In 
pooled multivariate models controlling for age, sex, race/ethnicity, household 
income, highest level of household education, insurance coverage, U.S. 
birthplace and family size, eczema was inversely associated with chickenpox 
[adjusted odds ratio (95% CI), 0·90 (0·86-0·94), P < 0·001]. The prevalence of 
eczema significantly increased over time (Tukey post-hoc test, P < 0·001 for 
comparisons of survey years 2001-13 vs. 1997-2000, 2008-13 vs. 2001-04 and 
2008-13 vs. 2005-07). In multivariate generalized linear models, the odds of 
eczema was not associated with chickenpox in 2001-13 (P ≥ 0·06).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that lower rates of chickenpox infection 
secondary to widespread vaccination against varicella zoster virus are not 
contributing to higher rates of childhood eczema in the U.S.

© 2015 British Association of Dermatologists.

DOI: 10.1111/bjd.14028
PMID: 26179593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]