---
reference_id: "PMID:37389024"
title: "Spectrum of PRSS1, SPINK1, CTRC, CFTR, and CPA1 Gene Variants in Chronic Pancreatitis Patients in Russia."
authors:
- Litvinova MM
- Khafizov KF
- Speranskaya AS
- Matsvay AD
- Asanov AY
- Nikolskaya KA
- Vinokurova LV
- Dubtsova EA
- Ipatova MG
- Mukhina TF
- Karnaushkina MA
- Bordin DS
journal: Sovrem Tekhnologii Med
year: '2023'
doi: 10.17691/stm2023.15.2.06
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spectrum of PRSS1, SPINK1, CTRC, CFTR, and CPA1 Gene Variants in Chronic Pancreatitis Patients in Russia.
**Authors:** Litvinova MM, Khafizov KF, Speranskaya AS, Matsvay AD, Asanov AY, Nikolskaya KA, Vinokurova LV, Dubtsova EA, Ipatova MG, Mukhina TF, Karnaushkina MA, Bordin DS
**Journal:** Sovrem Tekhnologii Med (2023)
**DOI:** [10.17691/stm2023.15.2.06](https://doi.org/10.17691/stm2023.15.2.06)

## Content

1. Sovrem Tekhnologii Med. 2023;15(2):60-70. doi: 10.17691/stm2023.15.2.06. Epub 
2023 Mar 29.

Spectrum of PRSS1, SPINK1, CTRC, CFTR, and CPA1 Gene Variants in Chronic 
Pancreatitis Patients in Russia.

Litvinova MM(1), Khafizov KF(2), Speranskaya AS(3), Matsvay AD(4), Asanov AY(5), 
Nikolskaya KA(6), Vinokurova LV(7), Dubtsova EA(8), Ipatova MG(9), Mukhina 
TF(10), Karnaushkina MA(11), Bordin DS(12).

Author information:
(1)Associate Professor, Deputy Head for Research Work, Department of Medical 
Genetics1; Clinical Geneticist; The Loginov Moscow Clinical Scientific Center of 
Moscow Healthcare Department, 86 Entuziastov Shosse, Moscow, 111123, Russia.
(2)Head of the Laboratory of Genomic Research; Central Research Institute of 
Epidemiology, Russian Federal Service for Surveillance on Consumer Rights 
Protection and Human Wellbeing, 3A Novogireevskaya St., Moscow, 111123, Russia.
(3)Senior Researcher, Head of the Laboratory of Multiomix Investigations; 
Scientific Research Institute for Systems Biology and Medicine, Russian Federal 
Service for Surveillance on Consumer Rights Protection and Human Wellbeing, 18 
Nauchniy Proezd, Moscow, 117246, Russia; Researcher; Lomonosov Moscow State 
University, 1 Leninskiye Gory, Moscow, 119991, Russia.
(4)Researcher, Laboratory of Genomic Methods Development; Centre for Strategic 
Planning and Management of Biomedical Health Risks of FMBA of Russia.
(5)Professor, Department of Medical Genetics; I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State 
Medical University (Sechenov University), 8/2 Malaya Trubetskaya St., Moscow, 
119991, Russia.
(6)Physician; The Loginov Moscow Clinical Scientific Center of Moscow Healthcare 
Department, 86 Entuziastov Shosse, Moscow, 111123, Russia.
(7)Gastroenterologist; The Loginov Moscow Clinical Scientific Center of Moscow 
Healthcare Department, 86 Entuziastov Shosse, Moscow, 111123, Russia.
(8)Head of the Department of Pathology of the Pancreas and Bile Ducts; The 
Loginov Moscow Clinical Scientific Center of Moscow Healthcare Department, 86 
Entuziastov Shosse, Moscow, 111123, Russia.
(9)Associate Professor, Department of Hospital Pediatrics named after 
Academician V.A. Tabolin; Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, 
1 Ostrovitianova St., Moscow, 117997, Russia; Head of the Center for the 
Treatment of Developmental Anomalies and Diseases of the Hepatobiliary System in 
Children; N.F. Filatov Children's City Hospital of Moscow Healthcare Department, 
15 Sadovaya-Kudrinskaya St., Moscow, 123001, Russia.
(10)Gastroenterologist; Morozovskaya Children's City Clinical Hospital of Moscow 
Healthcare Department, 1/9, 4 Dobrininskiy Pereulok, 119049, Moscow, Russia.
(11)Professor, Department of Internal Medicine with a Course of Cardiology and 
Functional Diagnostics named after Academician V.S. Moiseev; Peoples' Friendship 
University of Russia (RUDN University), 6 Miklukho-Maklaya St., Moscow, 117198, 
Russia.
(12)Professor, Head of the Department of Pancreatic, Biliary and Upper Digestive 
Tract Disorders; The Loginov Moscow Clinical Scientific Center of Moscow 
Healthcare Department, 86 Entuziastov Shosse, Moscow, 111123, Russia; Professor, 
Department of Propaedeutic of Internal Diseases and Gastroenterology; A.I. 
Yevdokimov Moscow State University of Medicine and Dentistry, 20/1 Delegatskaya 
St., Moscow, 127473, Russia; Professor, Department of General Medical Practice 
and Family Medicine; Tver State Medical University, 4 Sovetaskaya St., Tver, 
170100, Russia.

The aim of the study was to define the spectrum of genetic risk factors of 
chronic pancreatitis (CP) development in patients living in the European part of 
the Russian Federation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The study group included 105 patients with CP, with the 
age of the disease onset under 40 years old (the average age of onset was 26.9 
years). The control group consisted of 76 persons without clinical signs of 
pancreatitis. The diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis in patients was made on the 
basis of clinical manifestations and the results of laboratory and instrumental 
investigations. Genetic examination of patients was conducted using the 
next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology and included targeted sequencing of 
all exons and exon-intron boundaries of the PRSS1, SPINK1, CTRC, CFTR, and CPA1 
genes. The genotyping of the rs61734659 locus of the PRSS2 gene was also 
conducted.
RESULTS: Genetic risk factors of the CP development were found in 61% of 
patients. Pathogenic and likely-pathogenic variants associated with the risk of 
CP development were identified in the following genes: CTRC (37.1% of patients), 
CFTR (18.1%), SPINK1 (8.6%), PRSS1 (8.6%), and CPA1 (6.7%). The frequent gene 
variants in Russian patients with CP were as follows: CTRC gene - c.180C>T 
(rs497078), c.760C>T (rs121909293), c.738_761del24 (rs746224507); cumulative 
odds ratio (OR) for all risk alleles was 1.848 (95% CI: 1.054-3.243); CFTR gene 
- c.3485G>T (rs1800120), c.1521_1523delCTT (p.Phe508del, rs113993960), and 
c.650A>G (rs121909046); OR=2.432 (95% CI: 1.066-5.553). In the SPINK1, PRSS1, 
and CPA1 genes, pathogenic variants were found only in the group of patients 
with CP. The frequent variants of the SPINK1 gene include c.101A>G (p.Asn34Ser, 
rs17107315) and c.194+2T>C (rs148954387); of the PRSS1 gene - c.86A>T 
(p.Asn29Ile, rs111033566); of the CPA1 gene - c.586-30C>T (rs782335525) and 
c.696+23_696+24delGG. The OR for the CP development for the c.180TT genotype 
(rs497078) CTRC according to the recessive model (TT vs. CT+CC) was 7.05 (95% 
CI: 0.86-263, p=0.011). In the CTRC gene, the variant c.493+49G>C (rs6679763) 
appeared to be benign, the c.493+51C>A (rs10803384) variant was frequently 
detected among both the diseased and healthy persons and did not demonstrate a 
protective effect. The protective factor c.571G>A (p.Gly191Arg, rs61734659) of 
the PRSS2 gene was detected only in the group of healthy individuals and 
confirmed its protective role. 12.4% of the patients with CP had risk factors in 
2 or 3 genes.
CONCLUSION: Sequencing of the coding regions of the PRSS1, SPINK1, CTRC, CFTR, 
and CPA1 genes allowed to identify genetic risk factors of the CP development in 
61% of cases. Determining the genetic cause of CP helps to predict the disease 
course, perform preventive measures in the proband's relatives, and facilitate a 
personalized treatment of the patient in future.

DOI: 10.17691/stm2023.15.2.06
PMCID: PMC10306969
PMID: 37389024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest. The authors of the 
publication claimed that they had no conflicts of interest to report.