---
reference_id: "PMID:23659897"
title: "Ataxin-3 protein modification as a treatment strategy for spinocerebellar ataxia type 3: removal of the CAG containing exon."
authors:
- Evers MM
- Tran HD
- Zalachoras I
- Pepers BA
- Meijer OC
- den Dunnen JT
- van Ommen GJ
- Aartsma-Rus A
- van Roon-Mom WM
journal: Neurobiol Dis
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2013.04.019
keywords:
- Animals
- Ataxin-3
- "Cells, Cultured"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Exons/genetics
- "Fibroblasts/drug effects, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Machado-Joseph Disease/drug therapy, genetics, pathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred C57BL"
- Mutation/genetics
- "Nerve Tissue Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Nuclear Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Oligonucleotides, Antisense/pharmacology"
- Peptides/metabolism
- "Protein Binding/drug effects, genetics"
- "RNA, Messenger/metabolism"
- "Repressor Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- Transfection
- Trinucleotide Repeats/genetics
- Ubiquitin/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ataxin-3 protein modification as a treatment strategy for spinocerebellar ataxia type 3: removal of the CAG containing exon.
**Authors:** Evers MM, Tran HD, Zalachoras I, Pepers BA, Meijer OC, den Dunnen JT, van Ommen GJ, Aartsma-Rus A, van Roon-Mom WM
**Journal:** Neurobiol Dis (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.nbd.2013.04.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nbd.2013.04.019)

## Content

1. Neurobiol Dis. 2013 Oct;58:49-56. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2013.04.019. Epub 2013
May  6.

Ataxin-3 protein modification as a treatment strategy for spinocerebellar ataxia
type 3: removal of the CAG containing exon.

Evers MM(1), Tran HD, Zalachoras I, Pepers BA, Meijer OC, den Dunnen JT, van
Ommen GJ, Aartsma-Rus A, van Roon-Mom WM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, The
Netherlands. M.M.Evers@lumc.nl

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 is caused by a polyglutamine expansion in the
ataxin-3 protein, resulting in gain of toxic function of the mutant protein. The
expanded glutamine stretch in the protein is the result of a CAG triplet repeat
expansion in the penultimate exon of the ATXN3 gene. Several gene silencing
approaches to reduce mutant ataxin-3 toxicity in this disease aim to lower
ataxin-3 protein levels, but since this protein is involved in deubiquitination
and proteasomal protein degradation, its long-term silencing might not be
desirable. Here, we propose a novel protein modification approach to reduce
mutant ataxin-3 toxicity by removing the toxic polyglutamine repeat from the
ataxin-3 protein through antisense oligonucleotide-mediated exon skipping while
maintaining important wild type functions of the protein. In vitro studies
showed that exon skipping did not negatively impact the ubiquitin binding
capacity of ataxin-3. Our in vivo studies showed no toxic properties of the
novel truncated ataxin-3 protein. These results suggest that exon skipping may
be a novel therapeutic approach to reduce polyglutamine-induced toxicity in
spinocerebellar ataxia type 3.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2013.04.019
PMID: 23659897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
