---
reference_id: "PMID:22180458"
title: Mutations of ATIC and ADSL affect purinosome assembly in cultured skin fibroblasts from patients with AICA-ribosiduria and ADSL deficiency.
authors:
- Baresova V
- Skopova V
- Sikora J
- Patterson D
- Sovova J
- Zikanova M
- Kmoch S
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr591
keywords:
- "Adenylosuccinate Lyase/deficiency, genetics"
- Autistic Disorder
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Fibroblasts/enzymology
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- "Hydroxymethyl and Formyl Transferases/analysis, genetics"
- Keratinocytes/enzymology
- "Multienzyme Complexes/analysis, genetics"
- Mutation
- "Nucleotide Deaminases/analysis, genetics"
- "Purine-Pyrimidine Metabolism, Inborn Errors/enzymology, genetics"
- Purines/metabolism
- Skin/cytology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations of ATIC and ADSL affect purinosome assembly in cultured skin fibroblasts from patients with AICA-ribosiduria and ADSL deficiency.
**Authors:** Baresova V, Skopova V, Sikora J, Patterson D, Sovova J, Zikanova M, Kmoch S
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddr591](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddr591)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Apr 1;21(7):1534-43. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr591. Epub 2011
Dec  16.

Mutations of ATIC and ADSL affect purinosome assembly in cultured skin
fibroblasts from patients with AICA-ribosiduria and ADSL deficiency.

Baresova V(1), Skopova V, Sikora J, Patterson D, Sovova J, Zikanova M, Kmoch S.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Charles University in Prague and
General University Hospital in Prague, 128 08 Prague 2, Czech Republic.

The purinosome is a multienzyme complex composed by the enzymes active in de
novo purine synthesis (DNPS) that cells transiently assemble in their cytosol
upon depletion or increased demand of purines. The process of purinosome
formation has thus far been demonstrated and studied only in human epithelial
cervical cancer cells (HeLa) and human liver carcinoma cells (C3A) transiently
expressing recombinant fluorescently labeled DNPS proteins. Using parallel
immunolabeling of various DNPS enzymes and confocal fluorescent microscopy, we
proved purinosome assembly in HeLa, human hepatocellular liver carcinoma cell
line (HepG2), sarcoma osteogenic cells (Saos-2), human embryonic kidney cells
(HEK293), human skin fibroblasts (SF) and primary human keratinocytes (KC)
cultured in purine-depleted media. Using the identical approach, we proved in
cultured skin fibroblasts from patients with AICA-ribosiduria and ADSL
deficiency that various mutations of ATIC and ADSL destabilize to various
degrees of purinosome assembly and found that the ability to form purinosomes
correlates with clinical phenotypes of individual ADSL patients. Our results
thus shown that the assembly of functional purinosomes is fully dependent on the
presence of structurally unaffected ATIC and ADSL complexes and presumably also
on the presence of all the other DNPS proteins. The results also corroborate the
hypothesis that the phenotypic severity of ADSL deficiency is mainly determined
by structural stability and residual catalytic capacity of the corresponding
mutant ADSL protein complexes, as this is prerequisite for the formation and
stability of the purinosome and at least partial channeling of
succinylaminoimidazolecarboxamide riboside-ADSL enzyme substrates-through the
DNPS pathway.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddr591
PMID: 22180458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
