---
reference_id: "PMID:20716442"
title: "How well does urinary lyso-Gb3 function as a biomarker in Fabry disease?"
authors:
- Auray-Blais C
- Ntwari A
- Clarke JT
- Warnock DG
- Oliveira JP
- Young SP
- Millington DS
- Bichet DG
- Sirrs S
- West ML
- Casey R
- Hwu WL
- Keutzer JM
- Zhang XK
- Gagnon R
journal: Clin Chim Acta
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2010.07.038
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- Biomarkers/urine
- Case-Control Studies
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Creatine/urine
- "Fabry Disease/enzymology, physiopathology, urine"
- Female
- "Glycolipids/pharmacology, urine"
- Humans
- Kidney/physiopathology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Psychosine/analogs & derivatives, urine"
- Reference Standards
- Reproducibility of Results
- Sex Factors
- "Sphingolipids/pharmacology, urine"
- "Urinalysis/methods, standards"
- Young Adult
- "alpha-Galactosidase/antagonists & inhibitors"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# How well does urinary lyso-Gb3 function as a biomarker in Fabry disease?
**Authors:** Auray-Blais C, Ntwari A, Clarke JT, Warnock DG, Oliveira JP, Young SP, Millington DS, Bichet DG, Sirrs S, West ML, Casey R, Hwu WL, Keutzer JM, Zhang XK, Gagnon R
**Journal:** Clin Chim Acta (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cca.2010.07.038](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cca.2010.07.038)

## Content

1. Clin Chim Acta. 2010 Dec 14;411(23-24):1906-14. doi:
10.1016/j.cca.2010.07.038.  Epub 2010 Aug 14.

How well does urinary lyso-Gb3 function as a biomarker in Fabry disease?

Auray-Blais C(1), Ntwari A, Clarke JT, Warnock DG, Oliveira JP, Young SP,
Millington DS, Bichet DG, Sirrs S, West ML, Casey R, Hwu WL, Keutzer JM, Zhang
XK, Gagnon R.

Author information:
(1)Service of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada.
Christiane.auray-blais@usherbrooke.ca

BACKGROUND: Fabry disease is characterized by accumulation of
glycosphingolipids, such as globotriaosylceramide (Gb(3)), in many tissues and
body fluids. A novel plasma biomarker, globotriaosylsphingosine (lyso-Gb(3)), is
increased in patients with the disease. Until now, lyso-Gb(3) was not detectable
in urine, possibly because of the presence of interfering compounds.
METHODS: We undertook to: 1) characterize lyso-Gb(3) in urine; 2) develop a
method to quantitate urinary lyso-Gb(3) by mass spectrometry; 3) evaluate
urinary lyso-Gb(3) as a potential biomarker for Fabry disease; and 4) determine
whether lyso-Gb(3) is an inhibitor of α-galactosidase A activity. We analyzed
urinary lyso-Gb(3) from 83 Fabry patients and 77 healthy age-matched controls.
RESULTS: The intraday and interday bias and precision of the method were <15%.
Increases in lyso-Gb(3)/creatinine correlated with the concentrations of Gb(3)
(r(2)=0.43), type of mutations (p=0.0006), gender (p<0.0001) and enzyme
replacement therapy status (p=0.0012). Urine from healthy controls contained no
detectable lyso-Gb(3). Lyso-Gb(3) did not inhibit GLA activity in dried blood
spots. Increased urinary excretion of lyso-Gb(3) of Fabry patients correlated
well with a number of indicators of disease severity.
CONCLUSION: Lyso-Gb(3) is a reliable independent biomarker for clinically
important characteristics of Fabry disease.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cca.2010.07.038
PMID: 20716442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
