---
reference_id: "PMID:34765335"
title: Anorexia and Starvation Related Duodenal Villous Atrophy in an Adult Patient.
authors:
- Tamlyn E
- Das D
journal: Cureus
year: '2021'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.18536
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anorexia and Starvation Related Duodenal Villous Atrophy in an Adult Patient.
**Authors:** Tamlyn E, Das D
**Journal:** Cureus (2021)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.18536](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.18536)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2021 Oct 6;13(10):e18536. doi: 10.7759/cureus.18536. eCollection 2021 
Oct.

Anorexia and Starvation Related Duodenal Villous Atrophy in an Adult Patient.

Tamlyn E(1), Das D(2).

Author information:
(1)Gastroenterology, Leicester Medical School, Leicester, GBR.
(2)Gastroenterology, Kettering General Hospital, NHS Foundation Trust, 
Kettering, GBR.

Coeliac disease is the most well-known cause of villous atrophy in duodenal 
biopsies. Other well recognised causes of villous atrophy include infection with 
Giardia duodenalis and HIV, peptic duodenitis, drug-induced enteropathy, common 
variable immunodeficiency, Crohn's disease, Whipple's disease, small intestinal 
bacterial overgrowth, eosinophilic gastroenteritis, tropical or collagenous 
sprue and autoimmune enteropathy. While mucosal adaptation due to malnutrition, 
leading to villous atrophy, has been reported in paediatric populations in 
Africa and South America, in hibernating animals and animal models of 
experimental starvation, there is very little literature on adult human 
subjects. We report a case of a 76-year-old gentleman, presenting with chronic 
metabolic acidosis and anorexia who was found to have villous atrophy on 
duodenal biopsy, in the absence of any evidence of coeliac disease or other 
non-coeliac enteropathy. The nutritional state improved with correction of the 
underlying metabolic abnormality, and serial endoscopic assessment showed 
improvement in the villous atrophy. We discuss the relationship between 
malnutrition and villous atrophy, and suggest a potential workup for non-coeliac 
villous atrophy.

Copyright © 2021, Tamlyn et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.18536
PMCID: PMC8575289
PMID: 34765335

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.