---
reference_id: "PMID:37525225"
title: "A multidisciplinary approach to inherited retinal dystrophies from diagnosis to initial care: a narrative review with inputs from clinical practice."
authors:
- Murro V
- Banfi S
- Testa F
- Iarossi G
- Falsini B
- Sodi A
- Signorini S
- Iolascon A
- Russo R
- Mucciolo DP
- Caputo R
- Bacci GM
- Bargiacchi S
- Turco S
- Fortini S
- Simonelli F
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02798-z
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Humans
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Leber Congenital Amaurosis/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- "Retinal Dystrophies/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- "Retinitis Pigmentosa/diagnosis, genetics, therapy"
- Genetic Testing
- Genetic Therapy
- Mutation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A multidisciplinary approach to inherited retinal dystrophies from diagnosis to initial care: a narrative review with inputs from clinical practice.
**Authors:** Murro V, Banfi S, Testa F, Iarossi G, Falsini B, Sodi A, Signorini S, Iolascon A, Russo R, Mucciolo DP, Caputo R, Bacci GM, Bargiacchi S, Turco S, Fortini S, Simonelli F
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-023-02798-z](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-023-02798-z)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2023 Jul 31;18(1):223. doi: 10.1186/s13023-023-02798-z.

A multidisciplinary approach to inherited retinal dystrophies from diagnosis to 
initial care: a narrative review with inputs from clinical practice.

Murro V(#)(1)(2), Banfi S(#)(3)(4), Testa F(#)(5), Iarossi G(#)(6), Falsini 
B(7), Sodi A(2), Signorini S(8), Iolascon A(9)(10)(11), Russo R(10)(11), 
Mucciolo DP(1)(12), Caputo R(13), Bacci GM(13), Bargiacchi S(14), Turco S(15), 
Fortini S(15), Simonelli F(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Psychology, Drug Research and Child Health, 
University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(2)Eye Clinic, Careggi Teaching Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(3)Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Pozzuoli, NA, Italy.
(4)Medical Genetics, Department of Precision Medicine, University of Campania 
Luigi Vanvitelli, Naples, Italy.
(5)Eye Clinic, Multidisciplinary Department of Medical, Surgical and Dental 
Sciences, University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Naples, Italy. 
francesco.testa@unicampania.it.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(7)Ophthalmology Unit, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli IRCCS, 
Rome, Italy.
(8)Center of Child Neuro-Ophthalmology, IRCCS, Mondino Foundation, Pavia, Italy.
(9)Medical Genetics Unit, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Federico II, Naples, 
Italy.
(10)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnologies, University of 
Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy.
(11)CEINGE-Biotecnologie Avanzate, Naples, Italy.
(12)Ophthalmology Unit, San Jacopo Hospital, Pistoia, Italy.
(13)Pediatric Ophthalmology Unit, A. Meyer Children's Hospital IRCCS, Florence, 
Italy.
(14)Medical Genetics Unit, Ospedale Pediatrico Meyer, Florence, Italy.
(15)National Centre of Services and Research for the Prevention of Blindness and 
Rehabilitation of the Visually Impaired, International Agency for the Prevention 
of Blindness-IAPB Italy Onlus, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli 
IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(16)Eye Clinic, Multidisciplinary Department of Medical, Surgical and Dental 
Sciences, University of Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, Naples, Italy.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Non-syndromic inherited retinal dystrophies (IRDs) such as retinitis 
pigmentosa or Leber congenital amaurosis generally manifest between early 
childhood and late adolescence, imposing profound long-term impacts as a result 
of vision impairment or blindness. IRDs are highly heterogeneous, with often 
overlapping symptoms among different IRDs, and achieving a definite diagnosis is 
challenging. This narrative review provides a clinical overview of the 
non-syndromic generalized photoreceptor dystrophies, particularly retinitis 
pigmentosa and Leber congenital amaurosis. The clinical investigations and 
genetic testing needed to establish a diagnosis are outlined, and current 
management approaches are discussed, focusing on the importance of the 
involvement of an interdisciplinary team from diagnosis and initial care to 
long-term follow-up and support.
RESULTS: The effective management of IRDs requires a multidisciplinary, and 
ideally interdisciplinary, team of experts knowledgeable about IRDs, with 
experienced professionals from fields as diverse as ophthalmology, 
neuropsychiatry, psychology, neurology, genetics, orthoptics, developmental 
therapy, typhlology, occupational therapy, otolaryngology, and orientation and 
mobility specialties. Accurate clinical diagnosis encompasses a range of 
objective and subjective assessments as a prerequisite for the genetic testing 
essential in establishing an accurate diagnosis necessary for the effective 
management of IRDs, particularly in the era of gene therapies. Improvements in 
genome sequencing techniques, such as next-generation sequencing, have greatly 
facilitated the complex process of determining IRD-causing gene variants and 
establishing a molecular diagnosis. Genetic counseling is essential to help the 
individual and their family understand the condition, the potential risk for 
offspring, and the implications of a diagnosis on visual prognosis and treatment 
options. Psychological support for patients and caregivers is important at all 
stages of diagnosis, care, and rehabilitation and is an essential part of the 
multidisciplinary approach to managing IRDs. Effective communication throughout 
is essential, and the patient and caregivers' needs and expectations must be 
acknowledged and discussed.
CONCLUSION: As IRDs can present at an early age, clinicians need to be aware of 
the clinical signs suggesting visual impairment and follow up with 
multidisciplinary support for timely diagnoses to facilitate appropriate 
therapeutic or rehabilitation intervention to minimize vision loss.

© 2023. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-023-02798-z
PMCID: PMC10388566
PMID: 37525225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: SB, GI, AS, GMB, SB, SS, ST acted as a speakers 
and consultants at webinars and advisory board meetings organized by Novartis. 
SF, RC acted as speakers at webinars organized by Novartis. RC acted as 
consultant for Kedrion, Medivis and Santen.