---
reference_id: "PMID:11826236"
title: Cardiopulmonary manifestations of fulminant enterovirus 71 infection.
authors:
- Wu JM
- Wang JN
- Tsai YC
- Liu CC
- Huang CC
- Chen YJ
- Yeh TF
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1542/peds.109.2.e26
keywords:
- "Brain Diseases/physiopathology, virology"
- "Brain Stem/physiopathology, virology"
- "Enterovirus/classification, isolation & purification"
- "Hand, Foot and Mouth Disease/etiology, physiopathology, virology"
- "Herpangina/etiology, physiopathology, virology"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Pulmonary Edema/etiology, physiopathology, virology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiopulmonary manifestations of fulminant enterovirus 71 infection.
**Authors:** Wu JM, Wang JN, Tsai YC, Liu CC, Huang CC, Chen YJ, Yeh TF
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.109.2.e26](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.109.2.e26)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2002 Feb;109(2):E26-. doi: 10.1542/peds.109.2.e26.

Cardiopulmonary manifestations of fulminant enterovirus 71 infection.

Wu JM(1), Wang JN, Tsai YC, Liu CC, Huang CC, Chen YJ, Yeh TF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, Tainan, 
Taiwan. jingming@mail.ncku.edu.tw

BACKGROUND: The pathogenesis of acute pulmonary edema and cardiac collapse after 
enterovirus 71 (EV71) infection are not completely understood.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the hemodynamic features and the mechanism of pulmonary 
edema (PE) after EV71 infection by direct intracardiac monitoring.
DESIGN: Prospective clinical and laboratory study at a tertiary medical center.
PARTICIPANTS: Five consecutive infants, ages 2 to 13 months, with EV71 
infection-proved by viral isolation in 4 and antibody in 1-with PE were 
enrolled. The clinical characteristics were systemically assessed. Hemodynamic 
profiles were determined every 4 hours by simultaneously implanted pulmonary 
arterial and central venous catheters during the acute stage.
RESULTS: Magnetic resonance imaging revealed that all 5 infants had brainstem 
lesions. All patients had tachycardia and hyperthermia. Transient systolic 
hypertension was noted in 1 patient, and 1 presented with hypotension. Pulmonary 
artery pressure in all 5 infants was normal or mildly elevated (26-31 mm Hg), 
and central venous pressure ranged from 10 to 22 mm Hg. Pulmonary artery 
occlusion pressures were normal or slightly elevated (13-16 mm Hg). Systemic and 
pulmonary vascular resistances were transiently increased in only 1 patient. The 
stroke volume index decreased to 15.3 to 35.7 mL/M2 (normal: 30-60 mL/M2), but 
because of the elevated heart rate, the cardiac index did not decrease. All 
hemodynamics normalized within days.
CONCLUSION: Fulminant EV71 infection may lead to severe neurologic complications 
and acute PE. The acute PE and cardiopulmonary decompensation in EV71 infection 
are not directly caused by viral myocarditis. The mechanism of PE may be related 
to increased pulmonary vascular permeability caused by brainstem lesions and/or 
systemic inflammatory response instead of increased pulmonary capillary 
hydrostatic pressure.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.109.2.e26
PMID: 11826236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]