---
reference_id: "PMID:35644869"
title: Mitral regurgitation impact on left atrial myopathy in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
authors:
- Zegkos T
- Kamperidis V
- Gossios T
- Ntelios D
- Parcharidou D
- Papanastasiou CA
- Panagiotidis T
- Tsianaka T
- Rouskas P
- Katranas S
- Karvounis H
- Efthimiadis G
journal: Echocardiography
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/echo.15370
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitral regurgitation impact on left atrial myopathy in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
**Authors:** Zegkos T, Kamperidis V, Gossios T, Ntelios D, Parcharidou D, Papanastasiou CA, Panagiotidis T, Tsianaka T, Rouskas P, Katranas S, Karvounis H, Efthimiadis G
**Journal:** Echocardiography (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/echo.15370](https://doi.org/10.1111/echo.15370)

## Content

1. Echocardiography. 2022 Jun;39(6):819-826. doi: 10.1111/echo.15370. Epub 2022
May  29.

Mitral regurgitation impact on left atrial myopathy in hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy.

Zegkos T(1), Kamperidis V(1), Gossios T(1), Ntelios D(1), Parcharidou D(1), 
Papanastasiou CA(1), Panagiotidis T(1), Tsianaka T(1), Rouskas P(1), Katranas 
S(1), Karvounis H(1), Efthimiadis G(1).

Author information:
(1)1st Department of Cardiology, AHEPA University Hospital, Aristotle 
University, Thessaloniki, Greece.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have shown that mitral regurgitation (MR) represents 
a major determinant of left atrial (LA) function in patients with heart failure 
with preserved ejection fraction. The role of MR in determining LA myopathy in 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is unknown. The aim of this study was to 
examine the association of MR with LA myopathy, assessed by LA strain values in 
HCM patients.
METHODS: In total 250 consecutive patients (mean age 51 ± 16 years, 67.2% male) 
with an established diagnosis of HCM and with sinus rhythm at index 
echocardiography evaluation were included. LA reservoir, conduit and booster 
strain were analyzed, besides LA size, left ventricular (LV) systolic and 
diastolic function. The predictors of LA strain values were identified with 
linear regression analysis.
RESULTS: Significant (more than mild) MR was a significant univariate predictor 
of all the three LA strain values. In multivariate linear regression analysis, 
independent predictors of LA reservoir strain were more than mild MR (r = -.23), 
LV global longitudinal strain (r = -.49), LA volume index (r = -.27) and patient 
age (r = -.23). Significant MR was also an independent determinant of LA conduit 
(r = -.17) and booster strain (r = -.12). In patients with LA volume 
index < 34 ml/m2 more than mild MR was an independent predictor of LA reservoir 
(r = -.32) and conduit strain (r = -.27), but not LA booster strain.
CONCLUSION: Significant MR is associated with LA myopathy independently of the 
LV diastolic and systolic function and LA size.

© 2022 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/echo.15370
PMID: 35644869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]