---
reference_id: "PMID:28486967"
title: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum.
authors:
- Germain DP
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-017-0639-8
keywords:
- Animals
- "Choroidal Neovascularization/metabolism, pathology"
- Diphosphates/metabolism
- Humans
- Metabolic Diseases
- "Peripheral Arterial Disease/metabolism, pathology"
- "Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum/metabolism, pathology"
- "Skin/metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pseudoxanthoma elasticum.
**Authors:** Germain DP
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-017-0639-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-017-0639-8)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2017 May 10;12(1):85. doi: 10.1186/s13023-017-0639-8.

Pseudoxanthoma elasticum.

Germain DP(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, University of Versailles - Saint Quentin en 
Yvelines, Paris-Saclay University, 2 avenue de la source de la Bièvre, F-78180, 
Montigny, France. dominique.germain@uvsq.fr.

Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is a genetic metabolic disease with autosomal 
recessive inheritance caused by mutations in the ABCC6 gene. The lack of 
functional ABCC6 protein leads to ectopic mineralization that is most apparent 
in the elastic tissues of the skin, eyes and blood vessels. The clinical 
prevalence of PXE has been estimated at between 1 per 100,000 and 1 per 25,000, 
with slight female predominance. The first clinical sign of PXE is almost always 
small yellow papules on the nape and sides of the neck and in flexural areas. 
The papules coalesce, and the skin becomes loose and wrinkled. The mid-dermal 
elastic fibers are short, fragmented, clumped and calcified. Dystrophic 
calcification of Bruch's membrane, revealed by angioid streaks, may trigger 
choroidal neovascularization and, ultimately, loss of central vision and 
blindness in late-stage disease. Lesions in small and medium-sized artery walls 
may result in intermittent claudication and peripheral artery disease. Cardiac 
complications (myocardial infarction, angina pectoris) are thought to be 
relatively rare but merit thorough investigation. Ischemic strokes have been 
reported. PXE is a metabolic disease in which circulating levels of an 
anti-mineralization factor are low. There is good evidence to suggest that the 
factor is inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi), and that the circulating low levels of 
PPi and decreased PPi/Pi ratio result from the lack of ATP release by 
hepatocytes harboring the mutant ABCC6 protein. However, the substrate(s) bound, 
transported or modulated by the ABCC6 protein remain unknown. More than 300 
sequence variants of the ABCC6 gene have been identified. There is no cure for 
PXE; the main symptomatic treatments are vascular endothelial growth factor 
inhibitor therapy (for ophthalmic manifestations), lifestyle, lipid-lowering and 
dietary measures (for reducing vascular risk factors), and vascular surgery (for 
severe cardiovascular manifestations). Future treatment options may include gene 
therapy/editing and pharmacologic chaperone therapy.

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-017-0639-8
PMCID: PMC5424392
PMID: 28486967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]