---
reference_id: "PMID:27796143"
title: The mechanistic role of antibodies to dengue virus in protection and disease pathogenesis.
authors:
- Gan ES
- Ting DH
- Chan KR
journal: Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1080/14787210.2017.1254550
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The mechanistic role of antibodies to dengue virus in protection and disease pathogenesis.
**Authors:** Gan ES, Ting DH, Chan KR
**Journal:** Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14787210.2017.1254550](https://doi.org/10.1080/14787210.2017.1254550)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Anti Infect Ther. 2017 Feb;15(2):111-119. doi: 
10.1080/14787210.2017.1254550. Epub 2016 Nov 11.

The mechanistic role of antibodies to dengue virus in protection and disease 
pathogenesis.

Gan ES(1), Ting DH(2), Chan KR(1).

Author information:
(1)a Program in Emerging Infectious Diseases , Duke-NUS Medical School , 
Singapore , Singapore.
(2)b Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine 
, National University of Singapore , Singapore , Singapore.

Dengue is a prevalent disease in tropical and subtropical countries with an 
estimated 400 million people infected annually. While significant advancement 
has been made in the chase for an effective dengue vaccine, the recently 
licensed Sanofi vaccine was, in contrast to in vitro data, only partially 
protective. Areas covered: This suggests that our understanding of the 
serological correlates for dengue is currently inadequate. With growing evidence 
supporting the role of fragment crystalizable gamma receptors (FcγRs) in 
antibody-mediated neutralization or antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) of 
dengue virus (DENV) infection, FcγR-expressing cells have been increasingly used 
for measuring neutralizing antibody responses elicited by dengue vaccines. Here, 
we review the mechanisms of how FcγRs modulates both DENV neutralization and 
enhanced infections via its interactions with antibodies. Expert commentary: 
This review provides insights on the importance of factoring FcγRs for in vitro 
neutralization assays. Bridging the gap between in vitro and clinical 
observations would allow researchers to more accurately predict in vivo vaccine 
efficacy.

DOI: 10.1080/14787210.2017.1254550
PMID: 27796143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]