---
reference_id: "PMID:10935427"
title: New perspectives in the drug treatment of Kawasaki disease.
authors:
- Shingadia D
- Shulman ST
journal: Paediatr Drugs
year: '1999'
doi: 10.2165/00128072-199901040-00005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# New perspectives in the drug treatment of Kawasaki disease.
**Authors:** Shingadia D, Shulman ST
**Journal:** Paediatr Drugs (1999)
**DOI:** [10.2165/00128072-199901040-00005](https://doi.org/10.2165/00128072-199901040-00005)

## Content

1. Paediatr Drugs. 1999 Oct-Dec;1(4):291-7. doi:
10.2165/00128072-199901040-00005.

New perspectives in the drug treatment of Kawasaki disease.

Shingadia D(1), Shulman ST.

Author information:
(1)Division of Paediatric Infectious Diseases, Northwestern University Medical 
School, The Children's Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois 60614, USA. 
dshingadia@nwu.edu

Kawasaki disease (KD) has become the leading cause of acquired heart disease in 
developed countries. Conventional therapy for KD includes intravenous 
gammaglobulin (2 g/kg as a single dose over 12 hours) and aspirin 
(acetylsalicylic acid; high dose until the fourteenth day of illness then low 
dose). Therapy administered within the first 10 days of the onset of the illness 
has been shown to reduce arterial wall inflammation and thereby prevent the 
development of coronary artery aneurysm formation. The majority of patients with 
KD will respond to conventional therapy. However, the management of 
nonresponders and patients with complications (such as acute thrombosis and 
chronic coronary artery changes) remains controversial. In this review article, 
we address some of these controversies and also describe newer treatment 
modalities that have been used in the management of patients with KD, both in 
the acute and convalescent stages of the disease.

DOI: 10.2165/00128072-199901040-00005
PMID: 10935427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]