---
reference_id: "PMID:33201251"
title: Emerging cellular and molecular determinants of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.
authors:
- Phan THG
- Paliogiannis P
- Nasrallah GK
- Giordo R
- Eid AH
- Fois AG
- Zinellu A
- Mangoni AA
- Pintus G
journal: Cell Mol Life Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00018-020-03693-7
keywords:
- "Apoptosis/genetics, physiology"
- "Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress/genetics, physiology"
- "Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition/genetics, physiology"
- Humans
- "Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis/etiology, genetics, metabolism"
- "Inflammation/genetics, metabolism"
- "Lung/metabolism, pathology"
- Risk Factors
- Smoking/adverse effects
- "Unfolded Protein Response/genetics, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Emerging cellular and molecular determinants of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.
**Authors:** Phan THG, Paliogiannis P, Nasrallah GK, Giordo R, Eid AH, Fois AG, Zinellu A, Mangoni AA, Pintus G
**Journal:** Cell Mol Life Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00018-020-03693-7](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-020-03693-7)

## Content

1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2021 Mar;78(5):2031-2057. doi: 10.1007/s00018-020-03693-7.
Epub 2020 Nov 17.

Emerging cellular and molecular determinants of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.

Phan THG(#)(1), Paliogiannis P(#)(2), Nasrallah GK(3)(4), Giordo R(5), Eid
AH(6)(7)(8), Fois AG(2), Zinellu A(9), Mangoni AA(10), Pintus G(11)(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunology and Pathophysiology, University of Medicine and
Pharmacy, Hue University, Hue City, Vietnam.
(2)Department of Medical, Surgical and Experimental Sciences, University of
Sassari, 07100, Sassari, Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Health Sciences Member of QU
Health, Qatar University, P.O. Box 2713, Doha, Qatar.
gheyath.nasrallah@qu.edu.qa.
(4)Biomedical Research Center Qatar University, P.O Box 2713, Doha, Qatar.
gheyath.nasrallah@qu.edu.qa.
(5)Department of Medical Laboratory Sciences, College of Health Sciences, and
Sharjah Institute for Medical Research, University of Sharjah, University City
Rd, Sharjah, 27272, United Arab Emirates.
(6)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, QU Health, Qatar
University, PO Box 2713, Doha, Qatar.
(7)Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Research Unit, QU Health, Qatar University, PO
Box 2713, Doha, Qatar.
(8)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Medicine, American
University of Beirut, PO Box 11-0236, Beirut, Lebanon.
(9)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sassari, 07100, Sassari,
Italy.
(10)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, College of Medicine and Public Health,
Flinders University, Adelaide, Australia. arduino.mangoni@flinders.edu.au.
(11)Department of Medical Laboratory Sciences, College of Health Sciences, and
Sharjah Institute for Medical Research, University of Sharjah, University City
Rd, Sharjah, 27272, United Arab Emirates. gpintus@sharjah.ac.ae.
(12)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sassari, 07100, Sassari,
Italy. gpintus@sharjah.ac.ae.
(#)Contributed equally

Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), the most common form of idiopathic
interstitial pneumonia, is a progressive, irreversible, and typically lethal
disease characterized by an abnormal fibrotic response involving vast areas of
the lungs. Given the poor knowledge of the mechanisms underpinning IPF onset and
progression, a better understanding of the cellular processes and molecular
pathways involved is essential for the development of effective therapies,
currently lacking. Besides a number of established IPF-associated risk factors,
such as cigarette smoking, environmental factors, comorbidities, and viral
infections, several other processes have been linked with this devastating
disease. Apoptosis, senescence, epithelial-mesenchymal transition,
endothelial-mesenchymal transition, and epithelial cell migration have been
shown to play a key role in IPF-associated tissue remodeling. Moreover,
molecules, such as chemokines, cytokines, growth factors, adenosine,
glycosaminoglycans, non-coding RNAs, and cellular processes including oxidative
stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, endoplasmic reticulum stress, hypoxia, and
alternative polyadenylation have been linked with IPF development. Importantly,
strategies targeting these processes have been investigated to modulate abnormal
cellular phenotypes and maintain tissue homeostasis in the lung. This review
provides an update regarding the emerging cellular and molecular mechanisms
involved in the onset and progression of IPF.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-020-03693-7
PMCID: PMC7669490
PMID: 33201251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare they have no conflict of
interest.
