---
reference_id: "PMID:18202664"
title: Structural basis of microtubule severing by the hereditary spastic paraplegia protein spastin.
authors:
- Roll-Mecak A
- Vale RD
journal: Nature
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1038/nature06482
keywords:
- "Adenosine Triphosphatases/antagonists & inhibitors, chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- "Drosophila Proteins/antagonists & inhibitors, chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Humans
- "Microtubules/chemistry, metabolism"
- "Models, Biological"
- "Models, Molecular"
- "Protein Structure, Quaternary"
- "Protein Structure, Tertiary"
- "Scattering, Small Angle"
- "Spastic Paraplegia, Hereditary/genetics"
- Spastin
- Structure-Activity Relationship
- Substrate Specificity
- "Tubulin/chemistry, metabolism"
- X-Ray Diffraction
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Structural basis of microtubule severing by the hereditary spastic paraplegia protein spastin.
**Authors:** Roll-Mecak A, Vale RD
**Journal:** Nature (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nature06482](https://doi.org/10.1038/nature06482)

## Content

1. Nature. 2008 Jan 17;451(7176):363-7. doi: 10.1038/nature06482.

Structural basis of microtubule severing by the hereditary spastic paraplegia 
protein spastin.

Roll-Mecak A(1), Vale RD.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Cellular and Molecular 
Pharmacology, University of California, San Francisco, 600 16th Street, San 
Francisco, California 94158, USA.

Spastin, the most common locus for mutations in hereditary spastic paraplegias, 
and katanin are related microtubule-severing AAA ATPases involved in 
constructing neuronal and non-centrosomal microtubule arrays and in segregating 
chromosomes. The mechanism by which spastin and katanin break and destabilize 
microtubules is unknown, in part owing to the lack of structural information on 
these enzymes. Here we report the X-ray crystal structure of the Drosophila 
spastin AAA domain and provide a model for the active spastin hexamer generated 
using small-angle X-ray scattering combined with atomic docking. The spastin 
hexamer forms a ring with a prominent central pore and six radiating arms that 
may dock onto the microtubule. Helices unique to the microtubule-severing AAA 
ATPases surround the entrances to the pore on either side of the ring, and three 
highly conserved loops line the pore lumen. Mutagenesis reveals essential roles 
for these structural elements in the severing reaction. Peptide and antibody 
inhibition experiments further show that spastin may dismantle microtubules by 
recognizing specific features in the carboxy-terminal tail of tubulin. 
Collectively, our data support a model in which spastin pulls the C terminus of 
tubulin through its central pore, generating a mechanical force that 
destabilizes tubulin-tubulin interactions within the microtubule lattice. Our 
work also provides insights into the structural defects in spastin that arise 
from mutations identified in hereditary spastic paraplegia patients.

DOI: 10.1038/nature06482
PMCID: PMC2882799
PMID: 18202664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]