---
reference_id: "PMID:17592398"
title: "HLA-DRB1*1101 allele may be associated with bilateral Méniére's disease in southern European population."
authors:
- Lopez-Escamez JA
- Vilchez JR
- Soto-Varela A
- Santos-Perez S
- Perez-Garrigues H
- Aran I
- Lopez-Nevot MA
journal: Otol Neurotol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1097/MAO.0b013e3180dca1cc
content_type: abstract_only
---

# HLA-DRB1*1101 allele may be associated with bilateral Méniére's disease in southern European population.
**Authors:** Lopez-Escamez JA, Vilchez JR, Soto-Varela A, Santos-Perez S, Perez-Garrigues H, Aran I, Lopez-Nevot MA
**Journal:** Otol Neurotol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MAO.0b013e3180dca1cc](https://doi.org/10.1097/MAO.0b013e3180dca1cc)

## Content

1. Otol Neurotol. 2007 Oct;28(7):891-5. doi: 10.1097/MAO.0b013e3180dca1cc.

HLA-DRB1*1101 allele may be associated with bilateral Méniére's disease in 
southern European population.

Lopez-Escamez JA(1), Vilchez JR, Soto-Varela A, Santos-Perez S, Perez-Garrigues 
H, Aran I, Lopez-Nevot MA.

Author information:
(1)Otology and Neurotology Group, CTS495, Department of Surgery, Hospital de 
Poniente de Almería, El Ejido, Almería. jalopeze@cajamar.es

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the associations of HLA-DRB1* and DQB1* Class II alleles 
in patients with bilateral Méniére's disease (MD).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Eighty patients from two ethnically defined groups with 
definite bilateral MD, according to the diagnostic scale of the American Academy 
of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, were compared with normal controls from 
the same origin in a prospective multicenter study. We performed an 
allele-specific amplification for HLA-DRB1* and DQB1* genes of the major 
histocompatibility complex.
RESULTS: The allele HLA-DRB1*1101 was associated with bilateral MD in the 
Mediterranean population (odds ratio, 3.65 [95% confidence intervals, 1.5-9.1], 
corrected p = 0.029); however, this allele was not associated in the group from 
Galicia (northwest of Spain). No differences were found in the distribution of 
alleles for the gene HLA-DQB1* between patients and controls.
CONCLUSION: The allele HLA-DRB1*1101 and the allelic group HLA-DRB1*11 may 
determine an increased susceptibility to develop bilateral MD in a southern 
European population.

DOI: 10.1097/MAO.0b013e3180dca1cc
PMID: 17592398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]