---
reference_id: "PMID:33593995"
title: "Aortitis: recent advances, current concepts and future possibilities."
authors:
- Pugh D
- Grayson P
- Basu N
- Dhaun N
journal: Heart
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2020-318085
keywords:
- Aorta/diagnostic imaging
- Aortitis/diagnosis
- Humans
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aortitis: recent advances, current concepts and future possibilities.
**Authors:** Pugh D, Grayson P, Basu N, Dhaun N
**Journal:** Heart (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1136/heartjnl-2020-318085](https://doi.org/10.1136/heartjnl-2020-318085)

## Content

1. Heart. 2021 Oct;107(20):1620-1629. doi: 10.1136/heartjnl-2020-318085. Epub
2021  Feb 16.

Aortitis: recent advances, current concepts and future possibilities.

Pugh D(1), Grayson P(2), Basu N(3), Dhaun N(4).

Author information:
(1)University/BHF Centre for Cardiovascular Science, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, UK.
(2)National Institute of Arthritis & Musculoskeletal & Skin Diseases, NIH,
Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(3)Institute of Infection, Immunity & Inflammation, University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, UK.
(4)University/BHF Centre for Cardiovascular Science, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, UK Bean.Dhaun@ed.ac.uk.

Broadly defined, aortitis refers to inflammation of the aorta and incorporates
both infectious and non-infectious aetiologies. As advanced imaging modalities
are increasingly incorporated into clinical practice, the phenotypic spectrum
associated with aortitis has widened. The primary large vessel vasculitides,
giant cell arteritis and Takayasu arteritis, are the most common causes of
non-infectious aortitis. Aortitis without systemic disease or involvement of
other vascular territories is classified as clinically isolated aortitis.
Periaortitis, where inflammation spreads beyond the aortic wall, is an important
disease subset with a distinct group of aetiologies. Infectious aortitis can
involve bacterial, viral or fungal pathogens and, while uncommon, can be
devastating. Importantly, optimal management strategies and patient outcomes
differ between aortitis subgroups highlighting the need for a thorough
diagnostic workup. Monitoring disease activity over time is also challenging as
normal inflammatory markers do not exclude significant vascular inflammation,
particularly after starting treatment. Additional areas of unmet clinical need
include clear disease classifications and improved short-term and long-term
management strategies. Some of these calls are now being answered, particularly
with regard to large vessel vasculitis where our understanding has advanced
significantly in recent years. Work extrapolated from temporal artery histology
has paved the way for targeted biological agents and, although glucocorticoids
remain central to the management of non-infectious aortitis, these may allow
reduced glucocorticoid reliance. Future work should seek to clarify disease
definitions, improve diagnostic pathways and ultimately allow a more stratified
approach to patient management.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. No commercial re-use. See rights and
permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/heartjnl-2020-318085
PMID: 33593995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.
