---
reference_id: "PMID:35652870"
title: "A rare cause of mechanical intestinal obstruction due to small bowel intussusception: 'A solitary Peutz-Jeghers type hamartomatous polyp'."
authors:
- Aytin YE
- Türkyılmaz Z
journal: Ulus Travma Acil Cerrahi Derg
year: '2022'
doi: 10.14744/tjtes.2021.34560
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A rare cause of mechanical intestinal obstruction due to small bowel intussusception: 'A solitary Peutz-Jeghers type hamartomatous polyp'.
**Authors:** Aytin YE, Türkyılmaz Z
**Journal:** Ulus Travma Acil Cerrahi Derg (2022)
**DOI:** [10.14744/tjtes.2021.34560](https://doi.org/10.14744/tjtes.2021.34560)

## Content

1. Ulus Travma Acil Cerrahi Derg. 2022 Jun;28(6):879-883. doi: 
10.14744/tjtes.2021.34560.

A rare cause of mechanical intestinal obstruction due to small bowel 
intussusception: 'A solitary Peutz-Jeghers type hamartomatous polyp'.

Aytin YE(1), Türkyılmaz Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of General Surgery, Edirne Sultan 1. Murat State Hospital, 
Edirne-Turkey.
(2)Department of General Surgery, Trakya University Faculty of Medicine, 
Edirne-Turkey.

Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome (PJS) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder which is 
characterized by hyperpigmentation in mucocutaneous membranes and hamartomatous 
polyps in the gastrointestinal tract (GIT). Common complications reported in 
patients with PSJ are bleeding and mechanical intestinal obstruction due to the 
hamartomatous polyps. There is also an increased risk of gastrointestinal and 
extra-intestinal malignancies in patients with PJS. A 28-year-old female patient 
was admitted to the emergency service with complaints of abdominal pain and 
vomiting. In addition to distention and tenderness on abdominal examination, 
revealed hyperpigmented lesions on her lips. An abdominal examination did not 
reveal any scar from the previous abdominal operation. The patient with 
suspected mechanical intestinal obstruction at pre-diagnosis demonstrated 
intussusception in the distal jejunal loops on abdominal tomography. In the 
diagnostic laparoscopy observed intussusception in jejunal loops. After a 
minimal suprapubic incision, small intestine loops were checked through alexis 
with bidigital palpation and no other intraluminal mass were detected. 
Laparoscopy-assisted jejunojejunal re-section and anastomosis was performed for 
the intussusception segment, where the polyb is located. It has been recommended 
that endoscopic polyps removal should be performed to avoid multiple surgical 
resections, which lead to short bowel syndrome. It has been recommended that 
endoscopic polyps removal should be performed to avoid multiple surgical 
resections, which lead to short bowel syndrome. By the nature of the disease, 
there may be multiple polyps simultaneously in the GIT and the associated risk 
of recurrent intussusception attacks in patients with PJS. To prevent short 
bowel syndrome and intra-abdominal adhesions due to repeated, laparo-tomies 
treatment with combined endoscopy and laparoscopic/laparoscopy-assisted surgery 
should be preferred in patients with PJS.

DOI: 10.14744/tjtes.2021.34560
PMCID: PMC10443007
PMID: 35652870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None declared.