---
reference_id: "PMID:23311583"
title: A possible cranio-oro-facial phenotype in Cockayne syndrome.
authors:
- Bloch-Zupan A
- Rousseaux M
- Laugel V
- Schmittbuhl M
- Mathis R
- Desforges E
- Koob M
- Zaloszyc A
- Dollfus H
- Laugel V
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-9
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Cephalometry
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Cockayne Syndrome/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Craniofacial Abnormalities/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- DNA Helicases/genetics
- DNA Repair Enzymes/genetics
- "Face/abnormalities, pathology"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Phenotype
- Poly-ADP-Ribose Binding Proteins
- "Tooth Abnormalities/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Transcription Factors/genetics
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A possible cranio-oro-facial phenotype in Cockayne syndrome.
**Authors:** Bloch-Zupan A, Rousseaux M, Laugel V, Schmittbuhl M, Mathis R, Desforges E, Koob M, Zaloszyc A, Dollfus H, Laugel V
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1186/1750-1172-8-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/1750-1172-8-9)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2013 Jan 14;8:9. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-9.

A possible cranio-oro-facial phenotype in Cockayne syndrome.

Bloch-Zupan A(1), Rousseaux M, Laugel V, Schmittbuhl M, Mathis R, Desforges E, 
Koob M, Zaloszyc A, Dollfus H, Laugel V.

Author information:
(1)Faculté de Chirurgie Dentaire de Strasbourg, Université de Strasbourg, 1 
place de l'Hôpital, Strasbourg 67000, France. agnes.bloch-zupan@unistra.fr

BACKGROUND: Cockayne Syndrome CS (Type A - CSA; or CS Type I OMIM #216400) (Type 
B - CSB; or CS Type II OMIM #133540) is a rare autosomal recessive neurological 
disease caused by defects in DNA repair characterized by progressive cachectic 
dwarfism, progressive intellectual disability with cerebral leukodystrophy, 
microcephaly, progressive pigmentary retinopathy, sensorineural deafness 
photosensitivity and possibly orofacial and dental anomalies.
METHODS: We studied the cranio-oro-facial status of a group of 17 CS patients 
from 15 families participating in the National Hospital Program for Clinical 
Research (PHRC) 2005 « Clinical and molecular study of Cockayne syndrome ». All 
patients were examined by two investigators using the Diagnosing Dental Defects 
Database (D[4]/phenodent) record form.
RESULTS: Various oro-facial and dental anomalies were found: retrognathia; 
micrognathia; high- arched narrow palate; tooth crowding; hypodontia (missing 
permanent lateral incisor, second premolars or molars), screwdriver shaped 
incisors, microdontia, radiculomegaly, and enamel hypoplasia. Eruption was 
usually normal. Dental caries was associated with enamel defects, a high 
sugar/carbohydrate soft food diet, poor oral hygiene and dry mouth. 
Cephalometric analysis revealed mid-face hypoplasia, a small retroposed mandible 
and hypo-development of the skull.
CONCLUSION: CS patients may have associated oro-dental features, some of which 
may be more frequent in CS children - some of them being described for the first 
time in this paper (agenesis of second permanent molars and radiculomegaly). The 
high susceptibility to rampant caries is related to a combination of factors as 
well as enamel developmental defects. Specific attention to these anomalies may 
contribute to diagnosis and help plan management.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-8-9
PMCID: PMC3599377
PMID: 23311583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]