---
reference_id: "PMID:28017241"
title: "Prevalence of depression and anxiety in Multiple Sclerosis: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Boeschoten RE
- Braamse AMJ
- Beekman ATF
- Cuijpers P
- van Oppen P
- Dekker J
- Uitdehaag BMJ
journal: J Neurol Sci
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2016.11.067
keywords:
- "Anxiety/complications, epidemiology"
- "Databases, Bibliographic/statistics & numerical data"
- "Depression/complications, epidemiology"
- Humans
- "Multiple Sclerosis/complications, epidemiology"
- Prevalence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevalence of depression and anxiety in Multiple Sclerosis: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Boeschoten RE, Braamse AMJ, Beekman ATF, Cuijpers P, van Oppen P, Dekker J, Uitdehaag BMJ
**Journal:** J Neurol Sci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jns.2016.11.067](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jns.2016.11.067)

## Content

1. J Neurol Sci. 2017 Jan 15;372:331-341. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2016.11.067. Epub
2016  Nov 30.

Prevalence of depression and anxiety in Multiple Sclerosis: A systematic review
and meta-analysis.

Boeschoten RE(1), Braamse AMJ(2), Beekman ATF(2), Cuijpers P(3), van Oppen P(2),
Dekker J(4), Uitdehaag BMJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, VU University Medical Center and GGZinGeest,
Amsterdam, Netherlands; EMGO+ Institute for Health and Care Research, VU
University, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Electronic address:
r.boeschoten@ggzingeest.nl.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, VU University Medical Center and GGZinGeest,
Amsterdam, Netherlands; EMGO+ Institute for Health and Care Research, VU
University, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(3)EMGO+ Institute for Health and Care Research, VU University, Amsterdam,
Netherlands; Department of Clinical, Neuro and Developmental Psychology, VU
University, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, VU University Medical Center and GGZinGeest,
Amsterdam, Netherlands; EMGO+ Institute for Health and Care Research, VU
University, Amsterdam, Netherlands; Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, VU
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(5)Department of Neurology, Multiple Sclerosis Center, VU University Medical
Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Prevalence rates of depression and anxiety in patients with Multiple
Sclerosis (MS) vary widely across studies. Aim of this systematic review and
meta-analysis was to a) estimate the prevalence of depression and anxiety in MS,
and specifically b) explore sources of heterogeneity (assessment method,
prevalence period, study quality, recruitment resource, region) by extensive
analyses.
METHODS: A computerized search in PubMed, EMBASE, and PsycINFO for studies on
depression and anxiety in MS was performed up to December 2014.
RESULTS: Fifty-eight articles with a total sample size of 87,756 MS patients
were selected. Pooled mean prevalence was 30.5% (95% CI=26.3%-35.1%) for
depression, and 22.1% (95% CI=15.2%-31.0%) for anxiety. Prevalence of clinically
significant depressive or anxiety symptoms was higher (35% and 34%) compared
with disorders (21%; p=0.001 and 10%; p<0.001). Prevalence of a depressive
disorder was relatively lower in studies from Europe. Anxiety disorder was more
prevalent in community-based samples. Sources of high heterogeneity were not
revealed.
CONCLUSIONS: Data of a large number of patients indicate increased prevalence of
depression and anxiety in MS. Further research is needed to identify sources of
heterogeneity. Issues to consider are the definition of depression and anxiety,
patient recruitment, and patient characteristics.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2016.11.067
PMID: 28017241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
