---
reference_id: "PMID:34936739"
title: Trial of Spesolimab for Generalized Pustular Psoriasis.
authors:
- Bachelez H
- Choon SE
- Marrakchi S
- Burden AD
- Tsai TF
- Morita A
- Navarini AA
- Zheng M
- Xu J
- Turki H
- Anadkat MJ
- Rajeswari S
- Hua H
- Vulcu SD
- Hall D
- Tetzlaff K
- Thoma C
- Lebwohl MG
- Effisayil 1 Trial Investigators
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2111563
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal, Humanized/administration & dosage, adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Double-Blind Method
- Female
- Humans
- "Injections, Intravenous"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Placebos/adverse effects, therapeutic use"
- Psoriasis/drug therapy
- "Receptors, Interleukin/antagonists & inhibitors"
- Severity of Illness Index
- Symptom Flare Up
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Trial of Spesolimab for Generalized Pustular Psoriasis.
**Authors:** Bachelez H, Choon SE, Marrakchi S, Burden AD, Tsai TF, Morita A, Navarini AA, Zheng M, Xu J, Turki H, Anadkat MJ, Rajeswari S, Hua H, Vulcu SD, Hall D, Tetzlaff K, Thoma C, Lebwohl MG, Effisayil 1 Trial Investigators
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa2111563](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2111563)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2021 Dec 23;385(26):2431-2440. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2111563.

Trial of Spesolimab for Generalized Pustular Psoriasis.

Bachelez H(1), Choon SE(1), Marrakchi S(1), Burden AD(1), Tsai TF(1), Morita 
A(1), Navarini AA(1), Zheng M(1), Xu J(1), Turki H(1), Anadkat MJ(1), Rajeswari 
S(1), Hua H(1), Vulcu SD(1), Hall D(1), Tetzlaff K(1), Thoma C(1), Lebwohl 
MG(1); Effisayil 1 Trial Investigators.

Collaborators: Zheng M, Xu J, Ding Y, Liu Q, Bachelez H, Viguier MA, 
Beylot-Barry M, Rueff M, Ghoreschi K, Sondermann W, Wilsmann-Theis D, Honma M, 
Kato Y, Okubo Y, Aiba S, Morita A, Imafuku S, Lee MG, Choon SE, Teoh B, 
Selvarajah L, Yap E, Tang JJ, Tan WC, Binti Mohd Affandi A, Tan CL, Conrad C, 
Tsai TF, Rajatanavin N, Mokni M, Denguezli M, Turki H, Elewski BE, Nichols AJ, 
Lebwohl MG, Seminario Vidal V.

Author information:
(1)From Service de Dermatologie, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris Hôpital 
Saint-Louis, and INSERM Unité 1163, Imagine Institute of Genetic Diseases, 
Université de Paris - both in Paris (H.B.); the Department of Dermatology, 
Hospital Sultanah Aminah Johor Bahru, Clinical School Johor Bahru, Monash 
University Malaysia, Subang Jaya, Malaysia (S.-E.C.); the Dermatology 
Department, Hedi Chaker University Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia (S.M., H.T.); the 
Institute of Infection, Immunity, and Inflammation, University of Glasgow, 
Glasgow, United Kingdom (A.D.B.); the Department of Dermatology, National Taiwan 
University Hospital and National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, 
Taiwan (T.-F.T.); the Department of Geriatric and Environmental Dermatology, 
Nagoya City University, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan 
(A.M.); the Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Basel, Basel, 
Switzerland (A.A.N.); the Department of Dermatology, Second Affiliated Hospital, 
Zhejiang University, School of Medicine, Hangzhou (M.Z.), and the Department of 
Dermatology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University (J.X.), and Boehringer Ingelheim 
(China) Investment Company (H.H.), Shanghai - all in China; Washington 
University School of Medicine, Division of Dermatology, St. Louis (M.J.A.); 
Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals, Ridgefield, CT (S.R., D.H.); Boehringer 
Ingelheim International, Ingelheim (S.D.V., K.T.), the Medical Clinic, 
Department of Sports Medicine, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen (K.T.), and 
Boehringer Ingelheim International, Biberach (C.T.) - all in Germany; and the 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York (M.G.L.).

BACKGROUND: Generalized pustular psoriasis (GPP) is a rare, life-threatening, 
inflammatory skin disease characterized by widespread eruption of sterile 
pustules. Interleukin-36 signaling is involved in the pathogenesis of this 
disorder. Spesolimab, a humanized anti-interleukin-36 receptor monoclonal 
antibody, is being studied for the treatment of GPP flares.
METHODS: In a phase 2 trial, we randomly assigned patients with a GPP flare in a 
2:1 ratio to receive a single 900-mg intravenous dose of spesolimab or placebo. 
Patients in both groups could receive an open-label dose of spesolimab on day 8, 
an open-label dose of spesolimab as a rescue medication after day 8, or both and 
were followed to week 12. The primary end point was a Generalized Pustular 
Psoriasis Physician Global Assessment (GPPGA) pustulation subscore of 0 (range, 
0 [no visible pustules] to 4 [severe pustulation]) at the end of week 1. The key 
secondary end point was a GPPGA total score of 0 or 1 (clear or almost clear 
skin) at the end of week 1; scores range from 0 to 4, with higher scores 
indicating greater disease severity.
RESULTS: A total of 53 patients were enrolled: 35 were assigned to receive 
spesolimab and 18 to receive placebo. At baseline, 46% of the patients in the 
spesolimab group and 39% of those in the placebo group had a GPPGA pustulation 
subscore of 3, and 37% and 33%, respectively, had a pustulation subscore of 4. 
At the end of week 1, a total of 19 of 35 patients (54%) in the spesolimab group 
had a pustulation subscore of 0, as compared with 1 of 18 patients (6%) in the 
placebo group (difference, 49 percentage points; 95% confidence interval [CI], 
21 to 67; P<0.001). A total of 15 of 35 patients (43%) had a GPPGA total score 
of 0 or 1, as compared with 2 of 18 patients (11%) in the placebo group 
(difference, 32 percentage points; 95% CI, 2 to 53; P = 0.02). Drug reactions 
were reported in 2 patients who received spesolimab, in 1 of them concurrently 
with a drug-induced hepatic injury. Among patients assigned to the spesolimab 
group, infections occurred in 6 of 35 (17%) through the first week; among 
patients who received spesolimab at any time in the trial, infections had 
occurred in 24 of 51 (47%) at week 12. Antidrug antibodies were detected in 23 
of 50 patients (46%) who received at least one dose of spesolimab.
CONCLUSIONS: In a phase 2 randomized trial involving patients with GPP, the 
interleukin-36 receptor inhibitor spesolimab resulted in a higher incidence of 
lesion clearance at 1 week than placebo but was associated with infections and 
systemic drug reactions. Longer and larger trials are warranted to determine the 
effect and risks of spesolimab in patients with pustular psoriasis. (Funded by 
Boehringer Ingelheim; Effisayil 1 ClinicalTrials.gov number, NCT03782792.).

Copyright © 2021 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa2111563
PMID: 34936739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]