---
reference_id: "PMID:33777819"
title: "Oral Levothyroxine is an Effective Option for Myxedema Coma: A Single-Centre Experience."
authors:
- Rajendran A
- Bhavani N
- Nair V
- Pavithran PV
- Menon VU
- Kumar H
journal: Eur Thyroid J
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1159/000507855
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oral Levothyroxine is an Effective Option for Myxedema Coma: A Single-Centre Experience.
**Authors:** Rajendran A, Bhavani N, Nair V, Pavithran PV, Menon VU, Kumar H
**Journal:** Eur Thyroid J (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000507855](https://doi.org/10.1159/000507855)

## Content

1. Eur Thyroid J. 2021 Mar;10(1):52-58. doi: 10.1159/000507855. Epub 2020 Jun 11.

Oral Levothyroxine is an Effective Option for Myxedema Coma: A Single-Centre 
Experience.

Rajendran A(1), Bhavani N(1), Nair V(1), Pavithran PV(1), Menon VU(1), Kumar 
H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences, Amrita 
Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Cochin, India.

INTRODUCTION: Myxedema coma is an endocrine emergency with a very high mortality 
rate. As per the American Thyroid Association, initial thyroid hormone 
replacement for myxedema coma should be intravenous levothyroxine (LT4). 
However, in India, the availability of intravenous LT4 is limited. Often, 
crushed LT4 tablets are given through the enteral route when parenteral therapy 
is unavailable. No data or protocol is available for the administration of oral 
LT4 in myxedema coma. The aim of this study was to assess the effectiveness of 
oral LT4 in patients diagnosed with myxedema coma and to formulate a protocol 
for oral LT4 that can be used to guide the treatment of patients when 
intravenous LT4 is unavailable.
METHODS: This retrospective observational study included patients diagnosed with 
myxedema coma between January 2010 and December 2019. The diagnosis of myxedema 
coma was based on the diagnostic scoring system for myxedema coma proposed by 
Popoveniuc et al. [Endocr Pract. 2014 Aug;20(8):808-17]. Dosing of oral LT4 was 
decided as per our institutional protocol.
RESULTS: Fourteen patients (11 males and 3 females) with a median age of 67.5 
years (range 11-82) with myxedema coma were included. All patients had central 
nervous system manifestations, and sepsis was the most common precipitating 
factor. The median myxedema score was 72.5 (normal ≤25), and the median length 
of hospital stay was 12 days (range 3-18). The oral LT4 regimen consisted of a 
loading dose of 300-500 μg, followed by taper over the next 3-5 days. With this 
regimen, 13 patients survived, and only 1 patient died.
CONCLUSION: Oral LT4 is an effective treatment option for myxedema coma when 
intravenous LT4 is unavailable.

Copyright © 2020 by European Thyroid Association Published by S. Karger AG, 
Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000507855
PMCID: PMC7983610
PMID: 33777819

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.