---
reference_id: "PMID:36031989"
title: Time-of-flight completion in ultrasound computed tomography based on the singular value threshold algorithm.
authors:
- Fang X
- Zhou R
- Gan H
- Ding M
- Yuchi M
journal: Math Biosci Eng
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3934/mbe.2022476
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Time-of-flight completion in ultrasound computed tomography based on the singular value threshold algorithm.
**Authors:** Fang X, Zhou R, Gan H, Ding M, Yuchi M
**Journal:** Math Biosci Eng (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3934/mbe.2022476](https://doi.org/10.3934/mbe.2022476)

## Content

1. Math Biosci Eng. 2022 Jul 19;19(10):10160-10175. doi: 10.3934/mbe.2022476.

Time-of-flight completion in ultrasound computed tomography based on the 
singular value threshold algorithm.

Fang X(1), Zhou R(1), Gan H(1), Ding M(2)(3), Yuchi M(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)School of Computer Science, Hubei University of Technology, No. 28, Nanli 
Road, Hongshan District, Wuhan, China.
(2)School of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and 
Technology, No. 1037, Luoyu Road, Hongshan District, Wuhan, China.
(3)Wuhan Wesee Medical Imaging Co. LTD, East Lake High-tech Creation Zone, 
Wutong Lake District, Ezhou, China.

Ultrasound computed tomography (USCT) has been developed for breast tumor 
screening. The sound-speed modal of USCT can provide quantitative sound-speed 
values to help tumor diagnosis. Time-of-flight (TOF) is the critical input in 
sound-speed reconstruction. However, we found that the missing data problem in 
the detected TOF causes artifacts on the reconstructed sound-speed images, which 
may affect the tumor identification. In this study, to address the missing TOF 
data problem, we first adopted the singular value threshold (SVT) algorithm to 
complete the TOF matrix. The threshold value in SVT is difficult to determine, 
so we proposed a selection strategy, that is, to enumerate the threshold values 
as the multiples of the maximum singular value of the incomplete matrix and then 
evaluate the image quality to select the proper threshold value. In the 
numerical breast phantom experiment, the artifacts are eliminated, and the 
accuracy is higher than the accuracy of the compared methods. In the in vivo 
experiment, we reconstructed the sound-speed image of the breast of a volunteer 
with invasive breast cancer, and the SVT algorithm improved the image sharpness. 
The completion of DTOF based on SVT gives better accuracy than the compared 
methods, but too large a threshold value decreases the accuracy. In the future, 
the selection method of the threshold value needs further research, and more 
USCT cases should be included in the experiments.

DOI: 10.3934/mbe.2022476
PMID: 36031989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]