---
reference_id: PMID:30264730
title: The hippocampus in multiple sclerosis.
authors:
- Rocca MA
- Barkhof F
- De Luca J
- Frisén J
- Geurts JJG
- Hulst HE
- Sastre-Garriga J
- Filippi M
- MAGNIMS Study Group
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(18)30309-0
keywords:
- "Cognitive Dysfunction/diagnostic imaging, etiology, pathology, physiopathology"
- "Hippocampus/diagnostic imaging, pathology, physiopathology"
- Humans
- "Multiple Sclerosis/complications, diagnostic imaging, pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The hippocampus in multiple sclerosis.
**Authors:** Rocca MA, Barkhof F, De Luca J, Frisén J, Geurts JJG, Hulst HE, Sastre-Garriga J, Filippi M, MAGNIMS Study Group
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(18)30309-0](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(18)30309-0)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2018 Oct;17(10):918-926. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(18)30309-0.
Epub  2018 Sep 18.

The hippocampus in multiple sclerosis.

Rocca MA(1), Barkhof F(2), De Luca J(3), Frisén J(4), Geurts JJG(5), Hulst 
HE(5), Sastre-Garriga J(6), Filippi M(7); MAGNIMS Study Group.

Collaborators: Barkhof F, Ciccarelli O, De Stefano N, Enzinger C, Filippi M, 
Frederiksen JL, Gasperini C, Kappos L, Palace J, Rocca MA, Rovira A, 
Sastre-Garriga J, Vrenken H, Yousry TA.

Author information:
(1)Neuroimaging Research Unit and Department of Neurology, Institute of 
Experimental Neurology, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Vita-Salute San 
Raffaele University, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, MS Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam 
Neuroscience, Amsterdam UMC-location VUmc, Amsterdam, Netherlands; Institute of 
Neurology and Institute of Healthcare Engineering, UCL Institute of Neurology, 
London, UK.
(3)Kessler Foundation, West Orange, NJ, USA; Department of Physical Medicine and 
Rehabilitation, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ, USA.
(4)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institute, Sweden.
(5)Department of Anatomy and Neurosciences, MS Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam 
Neuroscience, Amsterdam UMC-location VUmc, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(6)Department of Neurology/Neuroimmunology, Multiple Sclerosis Centre of 
Catalonia (Cemcat), Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Neuroimaging Research Unit and Department of Neurology, Institute of 
Experimental Neurology, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Vita-Salute San 
Raffaele University, Milan, Italy. Electronic address: filippi.massimo@hsr.it.

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2018 Oct;17(10):837-839. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(18)30324-7.

Some of the clinical manifestations of multiple sclerosis, such as memory 
impairment and depression, are, at least partly, related to involvement of the 
hippocampus. Pathological studies have shown extensive demyelination, neuronal 
damage, and synaptic abnormalities in the hippocampus of patients with multiple 
sclerosis, and improvements in MRI technology have provided novel ways to assess 
hippocampal involvement in vivo. It is now accepted that clinical manifestations 
related to the hippocampus are due not only to focal hippocampal damage, but 
also to disconnection of the hippocampus from several brain networks. Evidence 
suggests anatomical and functional subspecialisation of the different 
hippocampal subfields, resulting in variability between regions in the extent to 
which damage and repair occur. The hippocampus also has important roles in 
plasticity and neurogenesis, both of which potentially contribute to functional 
preservation and restoration. These findings underline the importance of 
evaluation of the hippocampus not only to improve understanding of the clinical 
manifestations of multiple sclerosis, but also as a potential future target for 
treatment.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(18)30309-0
PMID: 30264730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]