---
reference_id: "PMID:26851065"
title: Impaired nitric oxide production in children with MELAS syndrome and the effect of arginine and citrulline supplementation.
authors:
- El-Hattab AW
- Emrick LT
- Hsu JW
- Chanprasert S
- Almannai M
- Craigen WJ
- Jahoor F
- Scaglia F
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.01.010
keywords:
- Adolescent
- "Arginine/administration & dosage, pharmacokinetics"
- Case-Control Studies
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Citrulline/administration & dosage, pharmacokinetics"
- Dietary Supplements
- Female
- Humans
- "MELAS Syndrome/diagnosis, diet therapy, metabolism"
- Male
- Nitric Oxide/biosynthesis
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impaired nitric oxide production in children with MELAS syndrome and the effect of arginine and citrulline supplementation.
**Authors:** El-Hattab AW, Emrick LT, Hsu JW, Chanprasert S, Almannai M, Craigen WJ, Jahoor F, Scaglia F
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.01.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.01.010)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2016 Apr;117(4):407-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.01.010.
Epub  2016 Jan 27.

Impaired nitric oxide production in children with MELAS syndrome and the effect 
of arginine and citrulline supplementation.

El-Hattab AW(1), Emrick LT(2), Hsu JW(3), Chanprasert S(4), Almannai M(4), 
Craigen WJ(4), Jahoor F(3), Scaglia F(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA; Division of Clinical Genetics and Metabolic Disorders, 
Pediatrics Department, Tawam Hospital, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates.
(2)Division of Neurology and Developmental Neuroscience, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)USDA/ARS Children's Nutrition Research Center, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA; Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA.
(5)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA; Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA. Electronic 
address: fscaglia@bcm.edu.

Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis, and stroke-like episodes 
(MELAS) syndrome is one of the most frequent maternally inherited mitochondrial 
disorders. The pathogenesis of this syndrome is not fully understood and 
believed to result from several interacting mechanisms including impaired 
mitochondrial energy production, microvasculature angiopathy, and nitric oxide 
(NO) deficiency. NO deficiency in MELAS syndrome is likely to be multifactorial 
in origin with the decreased availability of the NO precursors, arginine and 
citrulline, playing a major role. In this study we used stable isotope infusion 
techniques to assess NO production in children with MELAS syndrome and healthy 
pediatric controls. We also assessed the effect of oral arginine and citrulline 
supplementations on NO production in children with MELAS syndrome. When compared 
to control subjects, children with MELAS syndrome were found to have lower NO 
production, arginine flux, plasma arginine, and citrulline flux. In children 
with MELAS syndrome, arginine supplementation resulted in increased NO 
production, arginine flux, and arginine concentration. Citrulline 
supplementation resulted in a greater increase of these parameters. 
Additionally, citrulline supplementation was associated with a robust increase 
in citrulline concentration and flux and de novo arginine synthesis rate. The 
greater effect of citrulline in increasing NO production is due to its greater 
ability to increase arginine availability particularly in the intracellular 
compartment in which NO synthesis takes place. This study, which is the first 
one to assess NO metabolism in children with mitochondrial diseases, adds more 
evidence to the notion that NO deficiency occurs in MELAS syndrome, suggests a 
better effect for citrulline because of its greater role as NO precursor, and 
indicates that impaired NO production occurs in children as well as adults with 
MELAS syndrome. Thus, the initiation of treatment with NO precursors may be 
beneficial earlier in life. Controlled clinical trials to assess the therapeutic 
effects of arginine and citrulline on clinical complications of MELAS syndrome 
are needed.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2016.01.010
PMCID: PMC4818739
PMID: 26851065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]