---
reference_id: "PMID:31627700"
title: Uncommon EGFR Mutations in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer and Their Impact on the Treatment.
authors:
- Bílek O
- Holánek M
- Berkovcová J
- Horký O
- Kazda T
- Čoupková H
- Špelda S
- Kristková L
- Zvaríková M
- Podhorec J
- Bořilová S
- Bohovicová L
- Zdražilová Dubská L
journal: Klin Onkol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.14735/amko20193S6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Uncommon EGFR Mutations in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer and Their Impact on the Treatment.
**Authors:** Bílek O, Holánek M, Berkovcová J, Horký O, Kazda T, Čoupková H, Špelda S, Kristková L, Zvaríková M, Podhorec J, Bořilová S, Bohovicová L, Zdražilová Dubská L
**Journal:** Klin Onkol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.14735/amko20193S6](https://doi.org/10.14735/amko20193S6)

## Content

1. Klin Onkol. 2019 Fall;32(Supplementum 3):6-12. doi: 10.14735/amko20193S6.

Uncommon EGFR Mutations in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer and Their Impact on the 
Treatment.

[Article in English]

Bílek O, Holánek M, Berkovcová J, Horký O, Kazda T, Čoupková H, Špelda S, 
Kristková L, Zvaríková M, Podhorec J, Bořilová S, Bohovicová L, Zdražilová 
Dubská L.

BACKGROUND: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations play an important 
role in the pathogenesis of non-small cell lung cancer. Because these 
alterations are so-called targetable mutations, their identification is 
important in daily clinical practice. The diagnostic standard of EGFR mutations 
is currently based on polymerase chain reaction methods, particularly the 
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. In recent years, new 
generation sequencing has become increasingly important. In patients with EGFR 
mutations, a significant improvement in therapeutic outcomes was achieved with 
the administration of targeted therapy using tyrosine kinase inhibitors. EGFR is 
composed of four domains: extracellular with a ligand binding site, a 
transmembrane domain, a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase catalytic domain, and a 
C-terminal domain. The key structures of the tyrosine kinase domain responsible 
for signal activation and transmission are encoded within exons 18-21 on 
chromosome 7. EGFR mutations are highly heterogeneous. About 90% of EGFR 
mutations are deletions of exon 19 and point mutation L858R in exon 21. These 
are referred to as classic mutations. Approximately 10% of the total number of 
EGFR mutations is attributable to less frequent alterations in the EGFR gene. 
Due to the low incidence of non-small cell lung cancer with less frequent EGFR 
mutations, information on their predictive significance is still incomplete. 
Most of the data for the treatment of cases with uncommon mutations were 
gathered from retrospective analyses and evaluations of small cohorts.
PURPOSE: The aim of this review is to summarise the current options for 
diagnosing and treating non-small cell lung cancer patients with uncommon EGFR 
mutations. This work was supported by the MEYS - NPS I - LO1413 and MH CR - DRO 
(MMCI, 00209805). The authors declare they have no potential conflicts of 
interest concerning drugs, products, or&#8239;services used in the study. The 
Editorial Board declares that the manuscript met the ICMJE recommendation for 
biomedical papers. Submitted: 2. 6. 2019 Accepted: 26. 8. 2019.

DOI: 10.14735/amko20193S6
PMID: 31627700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]