---
reference_id: "PMID:33536261"
title: "Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome pulmonary fibrosis: a rare inherited interstitial lung disease."
authors:
- Yokoyama T
- Gochuico BR
journal: Eur Respir Rev
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1183/16000617.0193-2020
keywords:
- Hermanski-Pudlak Syndrome/genetics
- Humans
- Lung/diagnostic imaging
- "Lung Diseases, Interstitial/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- "Macrophages, Alveolar"
- Middle Aged
- "Pulmonary Fibrosis/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome pulmonary fibrosis: a rare inherited interstitial lung disease.
**Authors:** Yokoyama T, Gochuico BR
**Journal:** Eur Respir Rev (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1183/16000617.0193-2020](https://doi.org/10.1183/16000617.0193-2020)

## Content

1. Eur Respir Rev. 2021 Feb 2;30(159):200193. doi: 10.1183/16000617.0193-2020. 
Print 2021 Mar 31.

Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome pulmonary fibrosis: a rare inherited interstitial lung 
disease.

Yokoyama T(1)(2), Gochuico BR(3).

Author information:
(1)Section of Human Biochemical Genetics, Medical Genetics Branch, National 
Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 
USA.
(2)Dept of Pediatrics, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Japan.
(3)Section of Human Biochemical Genetics, Medical Genetics Branch, National 
Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 
USA gochuicb@mail.nih.gov.

Comment in
    doi: 10.1183/16000617.0042-2020.
    doi: 10.1183/16000617.0187-2019.
    doi: 10.1183/16000617.0001-2020.

Pulmonary fibrosis is a progressive interstitial lung disease of unknown 
aetiology with a poor prognosis. Studying genetic diseases associated with 
pulmonary fibrosis provides insights into the pathogenesis of the disease. 
Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome (HPS), a rare autosomal recessive disorder 
characterised by abnormal biogenesis of lysosome-related organelles, manifests 
with oculocutaneous albinism and excessive bleeding of variable severity. 
Pulmonary fibrosis is highly prevalent in three out of 10 genetic types of HPS 
(HPS-1, HPS-2 and HPS-4). Thus, genotyping of individuals with HPS is clinically 
relevant. HPS-1 tends to affect Puerto Rican individuals due to a genetic 
founder effect. HPS pulmonary fibrosis shares some clinical features with 
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), including dyspnoea, cough, restrictive lung 
physiology and computed tomography (CT) findings of fibrosis. In contrast to 
IPF, HPS pulmonary fibrosis generally affects children (HPS-2) or middle-aged 
adults (HPS-1 or HPS-4) and may be associated with ground-glass opacification in 
CT scans. Histopathology of HPS pulmonary fibrosis, and not IPF, shows 
vacuolated hyperplastic type II cells with enlarged lamellar bodies and alveolar 
macrophages with lipofuscin-like deposits. Antifibrotic drugs approved as 
treatment for IPF are not approved for HPS pulmonary fibrosis. However, lung 
transplantation has been performed in patients with severe HPS pulmonary 
fibrosis. HPS pulmonary fibrosis serves as a model for studying fibrotic lung 
disease and fibrosis in general.

The content of this work is not subject to copyright. Design and branding are 
copyright ©ERS 2021.

DOI: 10.1183/16000617.0193-2020
PMCID: PMC9488956
PMID: 33536261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: T. Yokoyama has nothing to 
disclose. Conflict of interest: B.R. Gochuico has nothing to disclose.