---
reference_id: "PMID:37726736"
title: "Ultrasonographic characteristics, genetic features, and maternal and fetal outcomes in fetuses with omphalocele in China: a single tertiary center study."
authors:
- Que Y
- Cai M
- Yang F
- Ji Q
- Zhang S
- Huang W
- Gao Y
- Zhou B
- Huang H
- Cao H
- Lin N
journal: BMC Pregnancy Childbirth
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12884-023-05999-3
keywords:
- Pregnancy
- Child
- Humans
- Female
- "Hernia, Umbilical/diagnostic imaging, genetics"
- Prenatal Care
- China
- Family
- Amniotic Fluid
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ultrasonographic characteristics, genetic features, and maternal and fetal outcomes in fetuses with omphalocele in China: a single tertiary center study.
**Authors:** Que Y, Cai M, Yang F, Ji Q, Zhang S, Huang W, Gao Y, Zhou B, Huang H, Cao H, Lin N
**Journal:** BMC Pregnancy Childbirth (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12884-023-05999-3](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12884-023-05999-3)

## Content

1. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2023 Sep 19;23(1):679. doi: 
10.1186/s12884-023-05999-3.

Ultrasonographic characteristics, genetic features, and maternal and fetal 
outcomes in fetuses with omphalocele in China: a single tertiary center study.

Que Y(#)(1), Cai M(#)(2), Yang F(#)(3), Ji Q(3), Zhang S(1), Huang W(1), Gao 
Y(1), Zhou B(1), Huang H(4), Cao H(5), Lin N(6).

Author information:
(1)College of Clinical Medicine for Obstetrics & Gynecology and Pediatrics, 
Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, China.
(2)Medical Genetic Diagnosis and Therapy Center, College of Clinical Medicine 
for Obstetrics & Gynecology and Pediatrics, Fujian Key Laboratory for Prenatal 
Diagnosis and Birth Defects, Fujian Maternity and Child Health Hospital, Fujian 
Medical University, Fuzhou, China.
(3)Department of Gynecology, Fujian Maternity and Child Health Hospital, Fuzhou, 
China.
(4)Medical Genetic Diagnosis and Therapy Center, College of Clinical Medicine 
for Obstetrics & Gynecology and Pediatrics, Fujian Key Laboratory for Prenatal 
Diagnosis and Birth Defects, Fujian Maternity and Child Health Hospital, Fujian 
Medical University, Fuzhou, China. huanghailong@fjmu.edu.cn.
(5)Medical Genetic Diagnosis and Therapy Center, College of Clinical Medicine 
for Obstetrics & Gynecology and Pediatrics, Fujian Key Laboratory for Prenatal 
Diagnosis and Birth Defects, Fujian Maternity and Child Health Hospital, Fujian 
Medical University, Fuzhou, China. caohua69@fjmu.edu.cn.
(6)Medical Genetic Diagnosis and Therapy Center, College of Clinical Medicine 
for Obstetrics & Gynecology and Pediatrics, Fujian Key Laboratory for Prenatal 
Diagnosis and Birth Defects, Fujian Maternity and Child Health Hospital, Fujian 
Medical University, Fuzhou, China. linna1088@fjmu.edu.cn.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Patients with omphalocele, a midline abdominal wall defect at the 
umbilical cord base, have a low survival rate. However, the long-term outcomes 
of fetuses with prenatally diagnosed omphalocele have scarcely been studied. 
Therefore, we investigated the ultrasonographic features, genetic 
characteristics, and maternal and fetal outcomes of fetuses with omphalocele and 
provided a reference for the perinatal management of such cases.
METHODS: A total of 120 pregnant females with fetal omphalocele were diagnosed 
using prenatal ultrasonography at the Fujian Provincial Maternity and Child 
Health Hospital from January 2015 to March 2022. Amniotic fluid or cord blood 
samples were drawn at different gestational weeks for routine karyotype 
analysis, chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) detection, and whole exome 
sequencing (WES). The maternal and fetal outcomes were followed up.
RESULTS: Among the 120 fetuses, 27 were diagnosed with isolated omphalocele and 
93 with nonisolated omphalocele using prenatal ultrasonography. Cardiac 
anomalies were the most observed cause in 17 fetuses. Routine karyotyping and 
CMA were performed on 35 patients, and chromosomal abnormalities were observed 
in five patients, trisomy 18 in three, trisomy 13 in one, and chromosome 8-11 
translocation in one patient; all were non-isolated omphalocele cases. Six 
nonisolated cases had normal CMA results and conventional karyotype tests, and 
further WES examination revealed one pathogenic variant and two suspected 
pathogenic variants. Of the 120 fetuses, 112 were successfully followed up. 
Eighty of the 112 patients requested pregnancy termination. Seven of the cases 
died in utero. A 72% 1-year survival rate was observed from the successful 25 
live births.
CONCLUSION: The prognosis of fetuses with nonisolated omphalocele varies 
greatly, and individualized analysis should be performed to determine fetal 
retention carefully. Routine karyotyping with CMA testing should be provided for 
fetuses with omphalocele. WES is an option if karyotype and CMA tests are 
normal. If the fetal karyotype is normal and no associated abnormalities are 
observed, fetuses with omphalocele could have a high survival rate, and most 
will have a good prognosis.

© 2023. BioMed Central Ltd., part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1186/s12884-023-05999-3
PMCID: PMC10510157
PMID: 37726736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.