---
reference_id: "PMID:38956600"
title: Biallelic variants in SLC26A2 cause multiple epiphyseal dysplasia-4 by disturbing chondrocyte homeostasis.
authors:
- Li S
- Sheng Y
- Wang X
- Wang Q
- Wang Y
- Zhang Y
- Wu C
- Jiang X
journal: Orphanet J Rare Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03228-4
keywords:
- Humans
- "Chondrocytes/metabolism, pathology"
- "Sulfate Transporters/genetics, metabolism"
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Male
- Female
- Homeostasis/genetics
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biallelic variants in SLC26A2 cause multiple epiphyseal dysplasia-4 by disturbing chondrocyte homeostasis.
**Authors:** Li S, Sheng Y, Wang X, Wang Q, Wang Y, Zhang Y, Wu C, Jiang X
**Journal:** Orphanet J Rare Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s13023-024-03228-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13023-024-03228-4)

## Content

1. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2024 Jul 2;19(1):245. doi: 10.1186/s13023-024-03228-4.

Biallelic variants in SLC26A2 cause multiple epiphyseal dysplasia-4 by 
disturbing chondrocyte homeostasis.

Li S(#)(1), Sheng Y(#)(1), Wang X(1), Wang Q(1), Wang Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Wu C(2), 
Jiang X(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Orthopaedics, National Center for Orthopaedics, 
Beijing Research Institute of Traumatology and Orthopaedics, Beijing Jishuitan 
Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Molecular Orthopaedics, National Center for Orthopaedics, 
Beijing Research Institute of Traumatology and Orthopaedics, Beijing Jishuitan 
Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China. wuchengai@jst-hosp.com.cn.
(3)Department of Orthopaedics, National Center for Orthopaedics, Beijing 
Jishuitan Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China. 
xujiang@vip.163.com.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Multiple epiphyseal dysplasia-4 (MED-4, MIM 226900) is a rare 
autosomal recessive disease characterized by disproportionate height and early 
onset osteoarthritis of the lower limbs. MED-4 is caused by homozygous or 
compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in the SLC26A2 gene. However, the 
underlying pathogenic mechanisms in chondrocytes remains unknown. This study 
aimed to identify the pathogenic variants within a MED-4 family and explore the 
molecular etiology of this condition in human primary chondrocyte cells.
METHODS: Clinical data were recorded and peripheral blood samples were collected 
for analysis. Whole exome sequencing (WES) and bioinformatic analyses were 
performed to determine causative variants. Wild-type SLC26A2 and corresponding 
mutant expression plasmids were constructed and transfected into human primary 
chondrocytes. The expression and subcellular distribution of SLC26A2 protein in 
chondrocytes were detected by immunoblotting and immunofluorescence. Effects of 
these variants on chondrocytes viability and apoptosis were measured by Cell 
Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) assay. Expression of genes related to cartilage 
homeostasis was subsequently analyzed by quantitative real-time polymerase chain 
reaction (qRT-PCR).
RESULTS: We identified two compound heterozygous variants 
c.1020_1022delTGT(p.Val341del) and c.1262 T > C(p.Ile421Thr) in the SLC26A2 gene 
in the patients. Mutant SLC26A2Val341del and SLC26A2Ile421Thr proteins were 
distributed in relatively few cells and were observed only within the nucleus. 
The viability of chondrocytes with the SLC26A2 variant group was similar to the 
wild-type (WT) group. However, the protein expressions of SLC26A2Val341del and 
SLC26A2Ile421Thr were decreased compared with SLC26A2WT. Expression levels of 
matrix metallopeptidase 13 (MMP13), α-1 chain of type X collagen (COL10A1), and 
Runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) were significantly decreased in the 
variant group. However, aggrecan (ACAN) expression was higher in the variant 
group than the WT group.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, our data demonstrate that the variants p.Val341del and 
p.Ile421Thr in SLC26A2 cause MED-4 and that these two variants promote 
chondrocyte proliferation while inhibiting chondrocyte differentiation.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13023-024-03228-4
PMCID: PMC11220988
PMID: 38956600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted without any commercial or financial relationships that could be 
construed as a potential conflict of interest.