---
reference_id: "PMID:11854387"
title: "Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs as anticancer agents: mechanistic, pharmacologic, and clinical issues."
authors:
- Thun MJ
- Henley SJ
- Patrono C
journal: J Natl Cancer Inst
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1093/jnci/94.4.252
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs as anticancer agents: mechanistic, pharmacologic, and clinical issues.
**Authors:** Thun MJ, Henley SJ, Patrono C
**Journal:** J Natl Cancer Inst (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1093/jnci/94.4.252](https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/94.4.252)

## Content

1. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2002 Feb 20;94(4):252-66. doi: 10.1093/jnci/94.4.252.

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs as anticancer agents: mechanistic, 
pharmacologic, and clinical issues.

Thun MJ(1), Henley SJ, Patrono C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Surveillance Research, American Cancer 
Society, National Home Office, Atlanta, GA 30329-4251, USA. mthun@cancer.org

Numerous experimental, epidemiologic, and clinical studies suggest that 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), particularly the highly selective 
cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 inhibitors, have promise as anticancer agents. NSAIDs 
restore normal apoptosis in human adenomatous colorectal polyps and in various 
cancer cell lines that have lost adenomatous polyposis coli gene function. 
NSAIDs also inhibit angiogenesis in cell culture and rodent models of 
angiogenesis. Many epidemiologic studies have found that long-term use of NSAIDs 
is associated with a lower risk of colorectal cancer, adenomatous polyps, and, 
to some extent, other cancers. Two NSAIDs, sulindac and celecoxib, have been 
found to inhibit the growth of adenomatous polyps and cause regression of 
existing polyps in randomized trials of patients with familial adenomatous 
polyposis (FAP). However, unresolved questions about the safety, efficacy, 
optimal treatment regimen, and mechanism of action of NSAIDs currently limit 
their clinical application to the prevention of polyposis in FAP patients. 
Moreover, the development of safe and effective drugs for chemoprevention is 
complicated by the potential of even rare, serious toxicity to offset the 
benefit of treatment, particularly when the drug is administered to healthy 
people who have low annual risk of developing the disease for which treatment is 
intended. This review considers generic approaches to improve the balance 
between benefits and risks associated with the use of NSAIDs in chemoprevention. 
We critically examine the published experimental, clinical, and epidemiologic 
literature on NSAIDs and cancer, especially that regarding colorectal cancer, 
and identify strategies to overcome the various logistic and scientific barriers 
that impede clinical trials of NSAIDs for cancer prevention. Finally, we suggest 
research opportunities that may help to accelerate the future clinical 
application of NSAIDs for cancer prevention or treatment.

DOI: 10.1093/jnci/94.4.252
PMID: 11854387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]