---
reference_id: "PMID:18224496"
title: Serology and serum DNA detection in shingles.
authors:
- Dobec M
- Bossart W
- Kaeppeli F
- Mueller-Schoop J
journal: Swiss Med Wkly
year: '2008'
doi: 10.4414/smw.2008.12021
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Serology and serum DNA detection in shingles.
**Authors:** Dobec M, Bossart W, Kaeppeli F, Mueller-Schoop J
**Journal:** Swiss Med Wkly (2008)
**DOI:** [10.4414/smw.2008.12021](https://doi.org/10.4414/smw.2008.12021)

## Content

1. Swiss Med Wkly. 2008 Jan 26;138(3-4):47-51. doi: 10.4414/smw.2008.12021.

Serology and serum DNA detection in shingles.

Dobec M(1), Bossart W, Kaeppeli F, Mueller-Schoop J.

Author information:
(1)Medizinische Laboratorien Dr. F. Kaeppeli, Zürich, Switzerland. 
m.dobec@medica-labor.ch

AIM: To investigate the sensitivity of various laboratory approaches in the 
diagnosis of herpes zoster from patient serum.
METHODS: Paired sera from 53 consecutive adult patients with acute herpes zoster 
were tested for the presence of varicella-zoster virus (VZV) antibodies. All 
acute sera were tested subsequently by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 
for the presence of VZV DNA. In addition, convalescent sera of patients who 
tested initially positive for VZV DNA underwent PCR analysis.
RESULTS: VZV IgM antibodies were found by enzyme immunoassay (EIA) in 5 acute 
(9%) and 20 convalescent (38%) zoster sera. VZV DNA was detected by PCR in 21 
(40%) acute zoster sera and was no longer detectable in the convalescent 
samples. A seroconversion or a fourfold or greater titre increase was found by 
complement fixation (CF) test in 41 (77%), by IgG indirect fluorescent antibody 
assay (IgG IFA) in 43 (81%) and by CF and IgG IFA combined in 45 of 53 (85%) 
paired zoster sera. The combination of all serological methods detected 51 (96%) 
and PCR combined with serology identified 52 (98%) of 53 patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Optimal laboratory sensitivity in the diagnosis of herpes zoster 
from serum can be achieved by the combination of PCR and serology of paired 
serum samples. Serological methods alone are of limited value for early 
diagnosis of zoster when therapy can be initiated, because CF and IgG IFA need 
convalescent serum and IgM test sensitivity is insufficient. Early diagnosis of 
VZV reactivation is possible from serum by PCR in the first days of illness and 
test sensitivity needs further improvement. The findings highlight the need for 
future studies into the usefulness of PCR and serology in atypical cases of VZV 
reactivation.

DOI: 10.4414/smw.2008.12021
PMID: 18224496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]