---
reference_id: "PMID:27241104"
title: "Lynch Syndrome: Female Genital Tract Cancer Diagnosis and Screening."
authors:
- Mills AM
- Longacre TA
journal: Surg Pathol Clin
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.path.2016.01.004
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lynch Syndrome: Female Genital Tract Cancer Diagnosis and Screening.
**Authors:** Mills AM, Longacre TA
**Journal:** Surg Pathol Clin (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.path.2016.01.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.path.2016.01.004)

## Content

1. Surg Pathol Clin. 2016 Jun;9(2):201-14. doi: 10.1016/j.path.2016.01.004. Epub 
2016 Apr 12.

Lynch Syndrome: Female Genital Tract Cancer Diagnosis and Screening.

Mills AM(1), Longacre TA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Virginia, 1215 Lee Street, P.O. Box 
800214, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Room L235, 
300 Pasteur Drive, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. Electronic address: 
longacre@stanford.edu.

Lynch syndrome is responsible for approximately 5% of endometrial cancers and 1% 
of ovarian cancers. The molecular basis for Lynch syndrome is a heritable 
functional deficiency in the DNA mismatch repair system, typically due to a 
germline mutation. This review discusses the rationales and relative merits of 
current Lynch syndrome screening tests for endometrial and ovarian cancers and 
provides pathologists with an informed algorithmic approach to Lynch syndrome 
testing in gynecologic cancers. Pitfalls in test interpretation and strategies 
to resolve discordant test results are presented. The potential role for 
next-generation sequencing panels in future screening efforts is discussed.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.path.2016.01.004
PMID: 27241104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]