---
reference_id: "PMID:15070746"
title: Self-renewal capacity is a widespread property of various types of neural crest precursor cells.
authors:
- Trentin A
- Glavieux-Pardanaud C
- Le Douarin NM
- Dupin E
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0400629101
keywords:
- 3T3 Cells
- Animals
- Brain/embryology
- Cell Division
- Clone Cells
- Ectoderm/physiology
- "Embryo, Nonmammalian/physiology"
- Mesoderm/physiology
- Mice
- Nerve Regeneration
- "Neural Crest/cytology, physiology"
- Quail
- "Stem Cells/cytology, physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Self-renewal capacity is a widespread property of various types of neural crest precursor cells.
**Authors:** Trentin A, Glavieux-Pardanaud C, Le Douarin NM, Dupin E
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.0400629101](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0400629101)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Mar 30;101(13):4495-500. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0400629101. Epub 2004 Mar 15.

Self-renewal capacity is a widespread property of various types of neural crest
precursor cells.

Trentin A(1), Glavieux-Pardanaud C, Le Douarin NM, Dupin E.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire d'Embryologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, UMR 7128, 49, bis Avenue de la Belle Gabrielle, 94736
Nogent-sur-Marne, France.

In vertebrates, trunk neural crest (NC) generates glia, neurons, and
melanocytes. In addition, it yields mesectodermal derivatives (connective
tissues, chondrocytes, and myofibroblasts lining the blood vessels) in the head.
Previous in vitro clonal analyses of avian NC cells unraveled a hierarchical
succession of highly pluripotent, followed by various intermediate, progenitors,
suggesting a model of progressive restrictions in the multiple potentialities of
a totipotent stem cell, as prevails in the hematopoietic system. However, which
progenitors are able to self-renew within the hierarchy of the NC lineages is
still undetermined. Here, we explored further the stem cell properties of quail
NC cells by means of in vitro serial subcloning. We identified types of
multipotent and oligopotent NC progenitors that differ in their developmental
repertoire, ability to self-maintain, and response to exogenous endothelin 3
according to their truncal or cephalic origin. The most striking result is that
bipotent progenitors are endowed with self-renewal properties. Thus
glia-melanocyte and glia-myofibroblast progenitors behave like stem cells in
that they are able both to self-renew and generate a restricted progeny. In our
culture conditions, glia-myofibroblast precursors display a modest capacity to
self-renew, whereas glia-melanocyte precursors respond to endothelin 3 by
extensive self-renewal. These findings may explain the etiology of certain
multiphenotypic NC-derived tumors in humans. Moreover, the presence of multiple
stem cell phenotypes along the NC-derived lineages may account for the rarity of
the "totipotent NC stem cell" and may be related to the large variety and
widespread dispersion of NC derivatives throughout the body.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0400629101
PMCID: PMC384775
PMID: 15070746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
