---
reference_id: "PMID:26014514"
title: "The Effects of PMM2-CDG-Causing Mutations on the Folding, Activity, and Stability of the PMM2 Protein."
authors:
- Yuste-Checa P
- Gámez A
- Brasil S
- Desviat LR
- Ugarte M
- Pérez-Cerdá C
- Pérez B
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1002/humu.22817
keywords:
- Animals
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/genetics, metabolism"
- Enzyme Activation/genetics
- Enzyme Stability/genetics
- Fibroblasts
- Gene Expression
- Humans
- Mice
- Mutation
- "Phosphotransferases (Phosphomutases)/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Protein Folding
- Protein Multimerization
- Proteolysis
- "Recombinant Fusion Proteins/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Effects of PMM2-CDG-Causing Mutations on the Folding, Activity, and Stability of the PMM2 Protein.
**Authors:** Yuste-Checa P, Gámez A, Brasil S, Desviat LR, Ugarte M, Pérez-Cerdá C, Pérez B
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.22817](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.22817)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2015 Sep;36(9):851-60. doi: 10.1002/humu.22817. Epub 2015 Jul 23.

The Effects of PMM2-CDG-Causing Mutations on the Folding, Activity, and
Stability of the PMM2 Protein.

Yuste-Checa P(1), Gámez A(1), Brasil S(1), Desviat LR(1), Ugarte M(1),
Pérez-Cerdá C(1), Pérez B(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares, Centro de Biología
Molecular-SO UAM-CSIC, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Campus de Cantoblanco,
28049 Madrid/Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras
(CIBERER), Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria IdiPaZ, Madrid, Spain.

Congenital disorder of glycosylation type Ia (PMM2-CDG), the most common form of
CDG, is caused by mutations in the PMM2 gene that reduce phosphomannomutase 2
(PMM2) activity. No curative treatment is available. The present work describes
the functional analysis of nine human PMM2 mutant proteins frequently found in
PMM2-CDG patients and also two murine Pmm2 mutations carried by the unique
PMM2-CDG mouse model described to overcome embryonic lethality. The effects of
the mutations on PMM2/Pmm2 stability, oligomerization, and enzyme activity were
explored in an optimized bacterial system. The mutant proteins were associated
with an enzymatic activity of up to 47.3% as compared with wild type (WT).
Stability analysis performed using differential scanning fluorimetry and a
bacterial transcription-translation-coupled system allowed the identification of
several destabilizing mutations (p.V44A, p.D65Y, p.R123Q, p.R141H, p.R162W,
p.F207S, p.T237M, p.C241S). Exclusion chromatography identified one mutation,
p.P113L, that affected dimer interaction. Expression analysis of the p.V44A,
p.D65Y, p.R162W, and p.T237M mutations in a eukaryotic expression system under
permissive folding conditions showed the possibility of recovering their
associated PMM2 activity. Together, the results suggest that some
loss-of-function mutations detected in PMM2-CDG patients could be destabilizing,
and therefore PMM2 activity could be, in certain cases, rescuable via the use of
synergetic proteostasis modulators and/or chaperones.

© 2015 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22817
PMID: 26014514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
