---
reference_id: "PMID:19076658"
title: Epidemiology and biology of menstrual migraine.
authors:
- Martin VT
- Lipton RB
journal: Headache
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1111/j.1526-4610.2008.01310.x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology and biology of menstrual migraine.
**Authors:** Martin VT, Lipton RB
**Journal:** Headache (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1111/j.1526-4610.2008.01310.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1526-4610.2008.01310.x)

## Content

1. Headache. 2008 Nov-Dec;48 Suppl 3:S124-30. doi: 
10.1111/j.1526-4610.2008.01310.x.

Epidemiology and biology of menstrual migraine.

Martin VT(1), Lipton RB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, 
USA.

Migraine is frequently associated with menstruation in female migraineurs, and 
consequently it is commonly referred to as menstrually associated migraine. The 
trigger thought to be partially responsible for menstrually associated migraine 
is a significant drop in circulating estrogen that is noted during 2-3 days 
prior to onset of menses. It is estimated that approximately 50% of women have 
an increased risk of experiencing migraine during the premenstrual phase of 
decreasing estrogen levels. Understanding the biological basis of migraine 
associated with menses will facilitate an accurate diagnosis and help patients 
recognize time susceptible to migraine exacerbations. This paper will review the 
biological bases for the hormonal changes that occur during the menstrual cycle 
and review the prevalence and burden of menstrual migraine among female headache 
sufferers.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1526-4610.2008.01310.x
PMID: 19076658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]