---
reference_id: "PMID:24412933"
title: Mutation of SALL2 causes recessive ocular coloboma in humans and mice.
authors:
- Kelberman D
- Islam L
- Lakowski J
- Bacchelli C
- Chanudet E
- Lescai F
- Patel A
- Stupka E
- Buck A
- Wolf S
- Beales PL
- Jacques TS
- Bitner-Glindzicz M
- Liasis A
- Lehmann OJ
- Kohlhase J
- Nischal KK
- Sowden JC
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt643
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutation of SALL2 causes recessive ocular coloboma in humans and mice.
**Authors:** Kelberman D, Islam L, Lakowski J, Bacchelli C, Chanudet E, Lescai F, Patel A, Stupka E, Buck A, Wolf S, Beales PL, Jacques TS, Bitner-Glindzicz M, Liasis A, Lehmann OJ, Kohlhase J, Nischal KK, Sowden JC
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddt643](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddt643)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 May 15;23(10):2511-26. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt643. Epub 2014 
Jan 9.

Mutation of SALL2 causes recessive ocular coloboma in humans and mice.

Kelberman D(1), Islam L, Lakowski J, Bacchelli C, Chanudet E, Lescai F, Patel A, 
Stupka E, Buck A, Wolf S, Beales PL, Jacques TS, Bitner-Glindzicz M, Liasis A, 
Lehmann OJ, Kohlhase J, Nischal KK, Sowden JC.

Author information:
(1)Ulverscroft Vision Research Group.

Ocular coloboma is a congenital defect resulting from failure of normal closure 
of the optic fissure during embryonic eye development. This birth defect causes 
childhood blindness worldwide, yet the genetic etiology is poorly understood. 
Here, we identified a novel homozygous mutation in the SALL2 gene in members of 
a consanguineous family affected with non-syndromic ocular coloboma variably 
affecting the iris and retina. This mutation, c.85G>T, introduces a premature 
termination codon (p.Glu29*) predicted to truncate the SALL2 protein so that it 
lacks three clusters of zinc-finger motifs that are essential for DNA-binding 
activity. This discovery identifies SALL2 as the third member of the Drosophila 
homeotic Spalt-like family of developmental transcription factor genes 
implicated in human disease. SALL2 is expressed in the developing human retina 
at the time of, and subsequent to, optic fissure closure. Analysis of 
Sall2-deficient mouse embryos revealed delayed apposition of the optic fissure 
margins and the persistence of an anterior retinal coloboma phenotype after 
birth. Sall2-deficient embryos displayed correct posterior closure toward the 
optic nerve head, and upon contact of the fissure margins, dissolution of the 
basal lamina occurred and PAX2, known to be critical for this process, was 
expressed normally. Anterior closure was disrupted with the fissure margins 
failing to meet, or in some cases misaligning leading to a retinal lesion. These 
observations demonstrate, for the first time, a role for SALL2 in eye 
morphogenesis and that loss of function of the gene causes ocular coloboma in 
humans and mice.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddt643
PMCID: PMC3990155
PMID: 24412933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]