---
reference_id: "PMID:27920634"
title: "Frontonasal Dysplasia: Towards an Understanding of Molecular and Developmental Aetiology."
authors:
- Farlie PG
- Baker NL
- Yap P
- Tan TY
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1159/000450533
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Frontonasal Dysplasia: Towards an Understanding of Molecular and Developmental Aetiology.
**Authors:** Farlie PG, Baker NL, Yap P, Tan TY
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000450533](https://doi.org/10.1159/000450533)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2016 Nov;7(6):312-321. doi: 10.1159/000450533. Epub 2016 Oct
29.

Frontonasal Dysplasia: Towards an Understanding of Molecular and Developmental 
Aetiology.

Farlie PG(1), Baker NL(1), Yap P(2), Tan TY(3).

Author information:
(1)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, University of Melbourne, Parkville, 
Vic., Australia; Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, 
Vic., Australia.
(2)Victorian Clinical Genetics Service, Royal Children's Hospital, University of 
Melbourne, Parkville, Vic., Australia; Genetic Health Service New Zealand 
(Northern Hub), Auckland City Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand.
(3)Victorian Clinical Genetics Service, Royal Children's Hospital, University of 
Melbourne, Parkville, Vic., Australia; Department of Paediatrics, University of 
Melbourne, Parkville, Vic., Australia.

The complex anatomy of the skull and face arises from the requirement to support 
multiple sensory and structural functions. During embryonic development, the 
diverse component elements of the neuro- and viscerocranium must be generated 
independently and subsequently united in a manner that sustains and promotes the 
growth of the brain and sensory organs, while achieving a level of structural 
integrity necessary for the individual to become a free-living organism. While 
each of these individual craniofacial components is essential, the cranial and 
facial midline lies at a structural nexus that unites these disparately derived 
elements, fusing them into a whole. Defects of the craniofacial midline can have 
a profound impact on both form and function, manifesting in a diverse array of 
phenotypes and clinical entities that can be broadly defined as frontonasal 
dysplasias (FNDs). Recent advances in the identification of the genetic basis of 
FNDs along with the analysis of developmental mechanisms impacted by these 
mutations have dramatically altered our understanding of this complex group of 
conditions.

DOI: 10.1159/000450533
PMCID: PMC5131330
PMID: 27920634