---
reference_id: "PMID:39911177"
title: A Case of Opsismodysplasia with a Novel INPPL1 Variant.
authors:
- Daşar T
- Aypar E
- Utine GE
- Şimşek-Kiper PÖ
journal: Mol Syndromol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1159/000540189
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A Case of Opsismodysplasia with a Novel INPPL1 Variant.
**Authors:** Daşar T, Aypar E, Utine GE, Şimşek-Kiper PÖ
**Journal:** Mol Syndromol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000540189](https://doi.org/10.1159/000540189)

## Content

1. Mol Syndromol. 2025 Feb;16(1):49-54. doi: 10.1159/000540189. Epub 2024 Sep 30.

A Case of Opsismodysplasia with a Novel INPPL1 Variant.

Daşar T(1)(2), Aypar E(3), Utine GE(1), Şimşek-Kiper PÖ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Genetics, Hacettepe 
University, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Genetics, Bilkent City 
Hospital, Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Hacettepe 
University, Ankara, Turkey.

INTRODUCTION: Opsismodysplasia is a rare autosomal recessive genetic skeletal 
disorder characterized by short stature, short limbs, small hands and feet, 
delayed bone age, severe platyspondyly, metaphyseal cupping, and facial 
dysmorphism. Opsismodysplasia is caused by biallelic variants in the INPPL1 
gene. Only 38 patients with a confirmed molecular diagnosis have been reported 
so far.
CASE PRESENTATION: We present a 9-month-old male patient who was referred to our 
clinic with a suspicion of mucopolysaccharidoses due to facial features and 
radiographic findings, but urine glycosaminoglycans were within normal ranges. 
Audiologic and ophthalmologic assessments, transfontanelle ultrasound, and 
echocardiography were all normal. A renal cortical cyst with a diameter of 33 × 
28 mm was detected in abdominal ultrasound. He had dysmorphic findings including 
relative macrocephaly, midface hypoplasia, depressed nasal bridge, anteverted 
nostrils, long philtrum, small hands and feet, and brachydactyly. His length was 
63 cm (-3.7 SD) and his arm span was 58 cm. Delayed bone age, short metacarpals 
and phalanges, wide and irregular metaphysis, platyspondyly, anterior beaking of 
the vertebrae, T12 vertebral hypoplasia, and acetabular dysplasia were noted on 
X-rays. Exome sequencing revealed a novel homozygous c.147C>G (p.Ser49Arg) 
variant in INPLL1.
CONCLUSION: Opsismodysplasia is an extremely rare skeletal disorder, and with 
this case, we further expand the clinical and molecular spectrum of 
opsismodysplasia.

© 2024 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000540189
PMCID: PMC11793891
PMID: 39911177

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.