---
reference_id: "PMID:32017208"
title: Diagnostic approach of hypogammaglobulinemia in infancy.
authors:
- Plebani A
- Palumbo L
- Dotta L
- Lougaris V
journal: Pediatr Allergy Immunol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/pai.13166
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Diagnostic approach of hypogammaglobulinemia in infancy.
**Authors:** Plebani A, Palumbo L, Dotta L, Lougaris V
**Journal:** Pediatr Allergy Immunol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pai.13166](https://doi.org/10.1111/pai.13166)

## Content

1. Pediatr Allergy Immunol. 2020 Feb;31 Suppl 24:11-12. doi: 10.1111/pai.13166.

Diagnostic approach of hypogammaglobulinemia in infancy.

Plebani A(1)(2), Palumbo L(2), Dotta L(2), Lougaris V(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Pediatrics Clinic, Department of Clinical and Experimental Sciences, 
University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(2)Pediatrics Clinic, ASST-Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy.

Primary B-cell immunodeficiency is the most frequent immune defect in infancy. 
Selective absence of serum and secretory immunoglobulin IgA is the most common, 
with rates ranging from 1/333 persons to 1/16 000, among different races. By 
contrast, it has been estimated that hypo/agammaglobulinemia occurs with a 
frequency of 1/50 000 persons. Patients with antibody deficiency are usually 
recognized because they have recurrent infections with encapsulated bacteria or 
a history of failure to respond adequately to antibiotic treatment. However, 
some individuals, mainly those affected by IgA deficiency (SIgAD) or transient 
hypogammaglobulinemia of infancy , may have few or no infections.

© 2020 EAACI and John Wiley and Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley and Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/pai.13166
PMID: 32017208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]