---
reference_id: "PMID:27214976"
title: Early diagnosis of oesophageal cancer improves outcomes.
authors:
- Hopper AD
- Campbell JA
journal: Practitioner
year: '2016'
keywords:
- Deglutition Disorders/etiology
- Early Diagnosis
- "Esophageal Neoplasms/diagnosis, therapy"
- Esophagoscopy
- Humans
- Risk Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Early diagnosis of oesophageal cancer improves outcomes.
**Authors:** Hopper AD, Campbell JA
**Journal:** Practitioner (2016)

## Content

1. Practitioner. 2016 Mar;260(1791):23-8, 3.

Early diagnosis of oesophageal cancer improves outcomes.

Hopper AD, Campbell JA.

There are two main types of oesophageal cancer, oesophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (OSCC) and oesophageal adenocarcinoma (OAC). They present in the same
manner and both carry a five-year survival of only 16%. In the UK there is a 2:1
male to female ratio for oesophageal cancer. Peak incidence at presentation is
in the 65-75 age group, with 95% of cases presenting in those over 50. Smoking
is a major risk factor for both types and is linked to an estimated 66% of cases
in the UK. OSCC is linked to alcohol, smoking, and chewing betel quid. OAC is
associated with the presence of GORD, and its duration, and obesity (especially
increased waist circumference). Oesophageal cancer commonly presents with
dysphagia or odynophagia. This can be associated with weight loss and vomiting.
All patients with recent onset dysphagia should be referred for rapid access
endoscopy. Referral for urgent endoscopy should still be considered in the
presence of dysphagia regardless of previous history or medication. Dysphagia is
not always present so all patients with alarm symptoms should be considered for
endoscopy. NICE recommends referral for urgent direct access upper GI endoscopy
to assess for oesophageal cancer for patients with dysphagia or aged 55 and over
with weight loss and any of the following: upper abdominal pain; reflux;
dyspepsia.

PMID: 27214976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
