---
reference_id: "PMID:15950012"
title: The neuropsychopharmacology of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
authors:
- Pliszka SR
journal: Biol Psychiatry
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2004.08.026
keywords:
- Animals
- "Attention Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity/metabolism, physiopathology"
- Dopamine/metabolism
- Drug Interactions
- Humans
- Neuropharmacology
- Norepinephrine/metabolism
- Psychopharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The neuropsychopharmacology of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
**Authors:** Pliszka SR
**Journal:** Biol Psychiatry (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.biopsych.2004.08.026](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2004.08.026)

## Content

1. Biol Psychiatry. 2005 Jun 1;57(11):1385-90. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsych.2004.08.026.

The neuropsychopharmacology of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.

Pliszka SR(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry,
University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, Texas 78284-7792, USA.
pliszka@uthscsa.edu

More than three decades of research has attempted to elucidate the
neuropsychopharmacology of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
Stimulants, a principle treatment for the disorder, act on the norepinephrine
(NE) and dopamine (DA) systems; this has led to a long-standing hypothesis of
catecholamine dysfunction in ADHD. Animal studies show a clear role for NE and
DA in the modulation of executive functions, which are often disturbed in
persons with ADHD. Nonstimulant agents that are effective in the treatment of
ADHD tend to affect the NE system, whereas those affecting only DA, or those
that affect neither catecholamine, are less potent in reducing ADHD symptoms.
Studies of the effects of NE and DA peripheral metabolites by ADHD
pharmacotherapies show acute increases in levels of these catecholamines;
however, their long-term turnover may be reduced. Imaging studies suggest
stimulants increases DA levels in the brain, whereas some animal models of ADHD
are more consistent with excessive DA activation in the disorder. Ultimately,
ADHD therapy may modify activity in the NE and DA systems to a more optimal
level, thus improving responses to environmental stimuli and enhancing working
memory and executive function.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2004.08.026
PMID: 15950012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
