---
reference_id: "PMID:33899511"
title: Murine Model of Cardiac Defects Observed in Adams-Oliver Syndrome Driven by Delta-Like Ligand-4 Haploinsufficiency.
authors:
- De Zoysa P
- Toubat O
- Harvey D
- Choi J
- Kumar SR
journal: Stem Cells Dev
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1089/scd.2021.0058
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Ectodermal Dysplasia
- Haploinsufficiency/genetics
- Humans
- Ligands
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/genetics"
- Mice
- Scalp Dermatoses/congenital
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Murine Model of Cardiac Defects Observed in Adams-Oliver Syndrome Driven by Delta-Like Ligand-4 Haploinsufficiency.
**Authors:** De Zoysa P, Toubat O, Harvey D, Choi J, Kumar SR
**Journal:** Stem Cells Dev (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1089/scd.2021.0058](https://doi.org/10.1089/scd.2021.0058)

## Content

1. Stem Cells Dev. 2021 Jun 15;30(12):611-621. doi: 10.1089/scd.2021.0058. Epub 
2021 May 31.

Murine Model of Cardiac Defects Observed in Adams-Oliver Syndrome Driven by 
Delta-Like Ligand-4 Haploinsufficiency.

De Zoysa P(1), Toubat O(1), Harvey D(1), Choi J(1)(2), Kumar SR(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, and Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.

Heterozygous loss-of-function mutation in Delta-like ligand-4 (Dll4) is an 
important cause of Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS). Cardiac defects, in particular 
outflow tract (OFT) alignment defects, are observed in about one-fourth of 
patients with this syndrome. The mechanism underlying this genotype-phenotype 
correlation has not yet been established. Dll4-mediated Notch signaling is known 
to play a crucial role in second heart field (SHF) progenitor cell 
proliferation. We hypothesized that the depletion of the SHF progenitor pool of 
cells due to partial loss of Dll4 is responsible for the OFT alignment defects 
seen in AOS. To demonstrate this, we studied Dll4 expression by murine SHF 
progenitor cells around E9.5, a crucial time-point in SHF biology. We used 
SHF-specific (Islet1-Cre) conditional knockout of Dll4 to bypass the early 
embryonic lethality seen in global Dll4 heterozygotes. Dll4-mediated Notch 
signaling is critically required for SHF proliferation such that Dll4 knockout 
results in a 33% reduction in proliferation and a fourfold increase in apoptosis 
in SHF cells, leading to a 56% decline in the size of the SHF progenitor pool. A 
reduction in SHF cells available for incorporation into the developing heart 
leads to underdevelopment of the SHF-derived right ventricle and OFT. Similar to 
the clinical syndrome, 32% of SHF-specific Dll4 heterozygotes demonstrate 
foreshortened and misaligned OFT, resulting in a double outlet right ventricle. 
Our murine model provides a molecular mechanism to explain the cardiac defects 
observed in AOS and establishes a novel clinical role for Dll4-mediated Notch 
signaling in SHF progenitor biology.

DOI: 10.1089/scd.2021.0058
PMCID: PMC8215425
PMID: 33899511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No competing interests are declared.