---
reference_id: "PMID:10556258"
title: Immunohistological analysis of synovial tissue for differential diagnosis in early arthritis.
authors:
- Kraan MC
- Haringman JJ
- Post WJ
- Versendaal J
- Breedveld FC
- Tak PP
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/38.11.1074
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Immunohistological analysis of synovial tissue for differential diagnosis in early arthritis.
**Authors:** Kraan MC, Haringman JJ, Post WJ, Versendaal J, Breedveld FC, Tak PP
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/38.11.1074](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/38.11.1074)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 1999 Nov;38(11):1074-80. doi: 
10.1093/rheumatology/38.11.1074.

Immunohistological analysis of synovial tissue for differential diagnosis in 
early arthritis.

Kraan MC(1), Haringman JJ, Post WJ, Versendaal J, Breedveld FC, Tak PP.

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Immunology, Department of Internal Medicine, Academic 
Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: An early diagnosis in patients presenting with arthritis is important 
to provide information about prognosis and to initiate treatment. The objective 
of this study was to determine which markers applied in immunohistological 
analysis of synovial tissue (ST) specimens could be used to differentiate 
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) from other forms of arthritis.
METHODS: Synovial biopsies were obtained by blind needle techniques from 95 
patients with early arthritis. After follow-up of at least 2 yr to verify the 
diagnosis, the patients could be classified as follows: RA (n=36), 
undifferentiated arthritis (UA; n=21), osteoarthritis (OA; n=17), reactive 
arthritis (ReA; n=10), ankylosing spondylitis (AS; n=3), psoriatic arthritis 
(PsA; n=2) and crystal-induced arthritis (CA; n=6). ST sections were analysed by 
immunohistochemistry using monoclonal antibodies against CD3, CD4, CD8, CD22 (B 
cells), CD38 (plasma cells), CD68 (macrophages) and CD55 (fibroblast-like 
synoviocytes).
RESULTS: Logistic regression analysis revealed that the higher scores for the 
numbers of CD38+ plasma cells and CD22+ B cells in RA were the best 
discriminating markers comparing RA to non-RA patients (CD38: P=0.0001; CD22: 
P<0.05). Polychotomous regression analysis comparing three diagnostic categories 
(1: RA; 2: UA, ReA, AS and PsA; 3: OA and CA) also identified the score for the 
number of CD38+ plasma cells (P<0.0001) as well as the numbers of CD68+ 
macrophages in the synovial sublining (P=0.05) as discriminating markers.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that immunohistochemical analysis of ST 
specimens from early arthritis patients can be used to differentiate RA from 
non-RA patients. The numbers of plasma cells, B cells and macrophages are 
especially increased in ST of patients with RA. Future studies in early 
arthritis patients with clinical features which do not allow an immediate 
confident diagnosis may clarify the role of this test system in differential 
diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/38.11.1074
PMID: 10556258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]