---
reference_id: "PMID:8681379"
title: Mutations of the human homolog of Drosophila patched in the nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome.
authors:
- Hahn H
- Wicking C
- Zaphiropoulous PG
- Gailani MR
- Shanley S
- Chidambaram A
- Vorechovsky I
- Holmberg E
- Unden AB
- Gillies S
- Negus K
- Smyth I
- Pressman C
- Leffell DJ
- Gerrard B
- Goldstein AM
- Dean M
- Toftgard R
- Chenevix-Trench G
- Wainwright B
- Bale AE
journal: Cell
year: '1996'
doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81268-4
keywords:
- Alleles
- Animals
- Basal Cell Nevus Syndrome/genetics
- Base Sequence
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 9"
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- "DNA, Complementary/genetics"
- Drosophila/genetics
- Drosophila Proteins
- Exons/genetics
- Female
- Gene Deletion
- Gene Expression
- "Genes, Tumor Suppressor/genetics"
- Humans
- In Vitro Techniques
- Insect Hormones/genetics
- Introns/genetics
- Membrane Proteins/genetics
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- "Receptors, Cell Surface"
- "Sequence Homology, Nucleic Acid"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations of the human homolog of Drosophila patched in the nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome.
**Authors:** Hahn H, Wicking C, Zaphiropoulous PG, Gailani MR, Shanley S, Chidambaram A, Vorechovsky I, Holmberg E, Unden AB, Gillies S, Negus K, Smyth I, Pressman C, Leffell DJ, Gerrard B, Goldstein AM, Dean M, Toftgard R, Chenevix-Trench G, Wainwright B, Bale AE
**Journal:** Cell (1996)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81268-4](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81268-4)

## Content

1. Cell. 1996 Jun 14;85(6):841-51. doi: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81268-4.

Mutations of the human homolog of Drosophila patched in the nevoid basal cell 
carcinoma syndrome.

Hahn H(1), Wicking C, Zaphiropoulous PG, Gailani MR, Shanley S, Chidambaram A, 
Vorechovsky I, Holmberg E, Unden AB, Gillies S, Negus K, Smyth I, Pressman C, 
Leffell DJ, Gerrard B, Goldstein AM, Dean M, Toftgard R, Chenevix-Trench G, 
Wainwright B, Bale AE.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Queensland, St. Lucia, 
Australia.

The nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS) is an autosomal dominant 
disorder characterized by multiple basal cell carcinomas (BCCs), pits of the 
palms and soles, jaw keratocysts, a variety of other tumors, and developmental 
abnormalities. NBCCS maps to chromosome 9q22.3. Familial and sporadic BCCs 
display loss of heterozygosity in this region, consistent with the gene being a 
tumor suppressor. A human sequence (PTC) with strong homology to the Drosophila 
segment polarity gene, patched, was isolated from a YAC and cosmid contig of the 
NBCCS region. Mutation analysis revealed alterations of PTC in NBCCS patients 
and in related tumors. We propose that a reduction in expression of the patched 
gene can lead to the developmental abnormalities observed in the syndrome and 
that complete loss of patched function contributes to transformation of certain 
cell types.

DOI: 10.1016/s0092-8674(00)81268-4
PMID: 8681379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]