---
reference_id: "PMID:36108172"
title: Anomalous Epithelial Variations and Ectopic Inflammatory Response in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.
authors:
- Watanabe N
- Fujita Y
- Nakayama J
- Mori Y
- Kadota T
- Hayashi Y
- Shimomura I
- Ohtsuka T
- Okamoto K
- Araya J
- Kuwano K
- Yamamoto Y
journal: Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2021-0555OC
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anomalous Epithelial Variations and Ectopic Inflammatory Response in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.
**Authors:** Watanabe N, Fujita Y, Nakayama J, Mori Y, Kadota T, Hayashi Y, Shimomura I, Ohtsuka T, Okamoto K, Araya J, Kuwano K, Yamamoto Y
**Journal:** Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1165/rcmb.2021-0555OC](https://doi.org/10.1165/rcmb.2021-0555OC)

## Content

1. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2022 Dec;67(6):708-719. doi: 
10.1165/rcmb.2021-0555OC.

Anomalous Epithelial Variations and Ectopic Inflammatory Response in Chronic 
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease.

Watanabe N(1)(2), Fujita Y(2), Nakayama J(1), Mori Y(3), Kadota T(2), Hayashi 
Y(1), Shimomura I(1), Ohtsuka T(4), Okamoto K(3), Araya J(2), Kuwano K(2), 
Yamamoto Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Integrative Oncology and.
(2)Division of Respiratory Diseases, Department of Internal Medicine, and.
(3)Division of Cancer Differentiation, National Cancer Center Research 
Institute, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Division of Thoracic Surgery, Department of Surgery, The Jikei University 
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2022 Dec;67(6):621-622. doi: 
10.1165/rcmb.2022-0371ED.

Phenotypic alterations in the lung epithelium have been widely implicated in 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) pathogenesis, but the precise 
mechanisms orchestrating this persistent inflammatory process remain unknown 
because of the complexity of lung parenchymal and mesenchymal architecture. To 
identify cell type-specific mechanisms and cell-cell interactions among the 
multiple lung resident cell types and inflammatory cells that contribute to COPD 
progression, we profiled 57,918 cells from lungs of patients with COPD, smokers 
without COPD, and never-smokers using single-cell RNA sequencing technology. We 
predicted pseudotime of cell differentiation and cell-to-cell interaction 
networks in COPD. Although epithelial components in never-smokers were 
relatively uniform, smoker groups represent extensive heterogeneity in 
epithelial cells, particularly in alveolar type 2 (AT2) clusters. Among AT2 
cells, which are generally regarded as alveolar progenitors, we identified a 
unique subset that increased in patients with COPD and specifically expressed a 
series of chemokines including CXCL1 and CXCL8. A trajectory analysis revealed 
that the inflammatory AT2 cell subpopulation followed a unique differentiation 
path, and a prediction model of cell-to-cell interactions inferred significantly 
increased intercellular networks of inflammatory AT2 cells. Our results identify 
previously unidentified cell subsets and provide an insight into the biological 
and clinical characteristics of COPD pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1165/rcmb.2021-0555OC
PMID: 36108172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]