---
reference_id: "PMID:23202502"
title: Dendritic cell apoptosis and the pathogenesis of dengue.
authors:
- Martins Sde T
- Silveira GF
- Alves LR
- Duarte dos Santos CN
- Bordignon J
journal: Viruses
year: '2012'
doi: 10.3390/v4112736
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dendritic cell apoptosis and the pathogenesis of dengue.
**Authors:** Martins Sde T, Silveira GF, Alves LR, Duarte dos Santos CN, Bordignon J
**Journal:** Viruses (2012)
**DOI:** [10.3390/v4112736](https://doi.org/10.3390/v4112736)

## Content

1. Viruses. 2012 Nov 1;4(11):2736-53. doi: 10.3390/v4112736.

Dendritic cell apoptosis and the pathogenesis of dengue.

Martins Sde T(1), Silveira GF, Alves LR, Duarte dos Santos CN, Bordignon J.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Virology of the Carlos Chagas Institute, ICC/Fiocruz, 
Prof. Algacyr Munhoz Mader Street 3775, CIC, Curitiba, Paraná, 81350-010, 
Brazil. sth_martins@yahoo.com.br

Dengue viruses and other members of the Flaviviridae family are emerging human 
pathogens. Dengue is transmitted to humans by Aedes aegypti female mosquitoes. 
Following infection through the bite, cells of the hematopoietic lineage, like 
dendritic cells, are the first targets of dengue virus infection. Dendritic 
cells (DCs) are key antigen presenting cells, sensing pathogens, processing and 
presenting the antigens to T lymphocytes, and triggering an adaptive immune 
response. Infection of DCs by dengue virus may induce apoptosis, impairing their 
ability to present antigens to T cells, and thereby contributing to dengue 
pathogenesis. This review focuses on general mechanisms by which dengue virus 
triggers apoptosis, and possible influence of DC-apoptosis on dengue disease 
severity.

DOI: 10.3390/v4112736
PMCID: PMC3509670
PMID: 23202502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]