---
reference_id: "PMID:38962753"
title: Clinical utility of DNA methylation profiling for choroid plexus tumors.
authors:
- Yeo KK
- Macrae CB
- Gampel B
- Ahrendsen JT
- Lidov H
- Wright KD
- Chi S
- Fehnel K
- Baird L
- Clymer J
- Aldape K
- Alexandrescu S
journal: Neurooncol Adv
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1093/noajnl/vdae097
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical utility of DNA methylation profiling for choroid plexus tumors.
**Authors:** Yeo KK, Macrae CB, Gampel B, Ahrendsen JT, Lidov H, Wright KD, Chi S, Fehnel K, Baird L, Clymer J, Aldape K, Alexandrescu S
**Journal:** Neurooncol Adv (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1093/noajnl/vdae097](https://doi.org/10.1093/noajnl/vdae097)

## Content

1. Neurooncol Adv. 2024 Jun 12;6(1):vdae097. doi: 10.1093/noajnl/vdae097.
eCollection 2024 Jan-Dec.

Clinical utility of DNA methylation profiling for choroid plexus tumors.

Yeo KK(1), Macrae CB(2)(3), Gampel B(1)(4), Ahrendsen JT(5), Lidov H(2), Wright
KD(1), Chi S(1), Fehnel K(6), Baird L(6), Clymer J(1)(7), Aldape K(8),
Alexandrescu S(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and
Blood Disorder Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Forensic Pathology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New
Mexico, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Miami,
Florida, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, Illinois, USA.
(6)Department of Neurosurgery, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, New York University Lagone Medical Center, New
York, New York, USA.
(8)Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Choroid plexus tumors (CPTs) are rare, potentially aggressive CNS
tumors with defined histologic criteria for grading. In recent years, several
patients within our practice have demonstrated discordance between the
histologic diagnosis and clinical behavior. DNA methylation profiling has
emerged as a potential diagnostic adjunct for aiding the clinical approach.
METHODS: We reviewed the clinical and pathologic data of all CPTs diagnosed at
Boston Children's Hospital from 1995 to 2023. All cases with available material
(38/48) underwent DNA methylation profiling at NIH/NCI, and the classifier
results were correlated with the WHO histologic grade and patient outcomes.
Survival information was analyzed using Kaplan-Meier curves.
RESULTS: There was good correlation (11/12, 92%) between methylation class and
WHO histologic grade for choroid plexus carcinomas (CPC); one histologic CPC
grouped with choroid plexus papilloma (CPP) group pediatric (P). Five CPPs
grouped with methylation class CPC (5/17, 29%). In the group of atypical CPPs
(n = 9), there were two that grouped with methylation class CPC. Survival
analysis showed utility of methylation classes in the prediction of biologic
behavior.
CONCLUSIONS: Results indicated that methylation profiling may serve as a
valuable tool in the clinical decision-making process for patients with CPTs,
providing additional prognostic information compared to WHO histologic grade
alone. The value of methylation array analysis is particularly important given
the lack of consensus on treatment regimens for CPTs.

© The Author(s) 2024. Published by Oxford University Press, the Society for
Neuro-Oncology and the European Association of Neuro-Oncology.

DOI: 10.1093/noajnl/vdae097
PMCID: PMC11221062
PMID: 38962753

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest
related to this manuscript.
