---
reference_id: "PMID:38657118"
title: "ASPSCR1::TFE3 Drives Alveolar Soft Part Sarcoma by Inducing Targetable Transcriptional Programs."
authors:
- Sicinska E
- Kola VSR
- Kerfoot JA
- Taddei ML
- Al-Ibraheemi A
- Hsieh YH
- Church AJ
- Landesman-Bollag E
- Landesman Y
- Hemming ML
journal: Cancer Res
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-23-2115
keywords:
- "Basic Helix-Loop-Helix Leucine Zipper Transcription Factors/metabolism, genetics"
- "Sarcoma, Alveolar Soft Part/genetics, pathology, metabolism"
- Humans
- Animals
- Mice
- Cell Proliferation/genetics
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics, metabolism"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- "Neoplasm Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Xenograft Model Antitumor Assays
- "Cyclin-Dependent Kinase 4/genetics, metabolism, antagonists & inhibitors"
- Female
- "Neovascularization, Pathologic/genetics, pathology, metabolism"
- Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ASPSCR1::TFE3 Drives Alveolar Soft Part Sarcoma by Inducing Targetable Transcriptional Programs.
**Authors:** Sicinska E, Kola VSR, Kerfoot JA, Taddei ML, Al-Ibraheemi A, Hsieh YH, Church AJ, Landesman-Bollag E, Landesman Y, Hemming ML
**Journal:** Cancer Res (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-23-2115](https://doi.org/10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-23-2115)

## Content

1. Cancer Res. 2024 Jul 15;84(14):2247-2264. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-23-2115.

ASPSCR1::TFE3 Drives Alveolar Soft Part Sarcoma by Inducing Targetable 
Transcriptional Programs.

Sicinska E(#)(1), Kola VSR(#)(2), Kerfoot JA(1), Taddei ML(1), Al-Ibraheemi 
A(3), Hsieh YH(2), Church AJ(3), Landesman-Bollag E(4), Landesman Y(5), Hemming 
ML(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of 
Massachusetts Chan Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts.
(3)Department of Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Department of Medicine, Section of Hematology and Oncology, Boston University 
Chobanian and Avedisian School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts.
(5)Cure Alveolar Soft Part Sarcoma International, Brookline, Massachusetts.
(#)Contributed equally

Alveolar soft part sarcoma (ASPS) is a rare mesenchymal malignancy driven by the 
ASPSCR1::TFE3 fusion. A better understanding of the mechanisms by which this 
oncogenic transcriptional regulator drives cancer growth is needed to help 
identify potential therapeutic targets. In this study, we characterized the 
transcriptional and chromatin landscapes of ASPS tumors and preclinical models, 
identifying the essential role of ASPSCR1::TFE3 in tumor cell viability by 
regulating core transcriptional programs involved in cell proliferation, 
angiogenesis, and mitochondrial biology. ASPSCR1::TFE3 directly interacted with 
key epigenetic regulators at enhancers and promoters to support ASPS-associated 
transcription. Among the effector programs driven by ASPSCR1::TFE3, cell 
proliferation was driven by high levels of cyclin D1 expression. Disruption of 
cyclin D1/CDK4 signaling led to a loss of ASPS proliferative capacity, and 
combined inhibition of CDK4/6 and angiogenesis halted tumor growth in 
xenografts. These results define the ASPS oncogenic program, reveal mechanisms 
by which ASPSCR1::TFE3 controls tumor biology, and identify a strategy for 
therapeutically targeting tumor cell-intrinsic vulnerabilities. Significance: 
The ASPSCR1::TFE3 fusion propels the growth of alveolar soft part sarcoma  by 
activating transcriptional programs that regulate proliferation, angiogenesis, 
mitochondrial biogenesis, and differentiation and can be therapeutically 
targeted to improve treatment.

©2024 American Association for Cancer Research.

DOI: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-23-2115
PMCID: PMC11250573
PMID: 38657118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: COMPETING INTERESTS Y.L. is on the Safety Data 
Board of Advenchen Laboratories, LLC. The remaining authors declare no potential 
conflicts of interest.