---
reference_id: "PMID:23648600"
title: Inner ear disorders.
authors:
- Smouha E
journal: NeuroRehabilitation
year: '2013'
doi: 10.3233/NRE-130868
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Inner ear disorders.
**Authors:** Smouha E
**Journal:** NeuroRehabilitation (2013)
**DOI:** [10.3233/NRE-130868](https://doi.org/10.3233/NRE-130868)

## Content

1. NeuroRehabilitation. 2013;32(3):455-62. doi: 10.3233/NRE-130868.

Inner ear disorders.

Smouha E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, The Mount Sinai School of 
Medicine, Box 1189, 1 Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA. 
eric.smouha@mssm.edu

OBJECTIVES: To present a framework for the diagnosis and treatment of inner ear 
disorders, with an emphasis on problems common to neuro-rehabilitation.
INTRODUCTION: Disorders of the inner ear can cause hearing loss, tinnitus, 
vertigo and imbalance. Hearing loss can be conductive, sensorineural, or mixed; 
conductive hearing loss arises from the ear canal or middle ear, while 
sensorineural hearing loss arises from the inner ear or auditory nerve. Vertigo 
is a hallucination of motion, and is the cardinal symptom of vestibular system 
disease. It should be differentiated from other causes of dizziness: gait 
imbalance, disequilibrium, lightheadedness (pre-syncope). Vertigo can be caused 
by problems in the inner ear or central nervous system.
METHODS: The diagnosis of inner ear disorders begins with a targeted physical 
examination. The initial work-up of hearing loss is made by audiometry, and 
vertigo by electronystagmography (ENG). Supplemental tests and MRI are obtained 
when clinically indicated.
RESULTS: The clinical pattern and duration of vertigo are the most important 
clinical features in the diagnosis. Common inner ear causes of vertigo include: 
vestibular neuritis (sudden, unilateral vestibular loss), Meniere's disease 
(episodic vertigo), benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV), and bilateral 
vestibular loss. Common central nervous system causes of vertigo include: post 
concussion syndrome, cervical vertigo, vestibular migraine, cerebrovascular 
disease, and acoustic neuroma.
CONCLUSION: A basic knowledge of vestibular physiology, coupled with a 
understanding of common vestibular syndromes, will lead to correct diagnosis and 
treatment in most cases.

DOI: 10.3233/NRE-130868
PMID: 23648600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]