---
reference_id: "PMID:34539759"
title: GM1 Gangliosidosis-A Mini-Review.
authors:
- Nicoli ER
- Annunziata I
- "d'Azzo A"
- Platt FM
- Tifft CJ
- Stepien KM
journal: Front Genet
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.734878
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GM1 Gangliosidosis-A Mini-Review.
**Authors:** Nicoli ER, Annunziata I, d'Azzo A, Platt FM, Tifft CJ, Stepien KM
**Journal:** Front Genet (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2021.734878](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2021.734878)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2021 Sep 3;12:734878. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2021.734878. eCollection
 2021.

GM1 Gangliosidosis-A Mini-Review.

Nicoli ER(1), Annunziata I(2), d'Azzo A(2)(3), Platt FM(4), Tifft CJ(1)(5), 
Stepien KM(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Glycosphingolipid and Glycoprotein Disorders Unit, Medical Genetics Branch, 
National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, MD, United States.
(2)Department of Genetics, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, 
United States.
(3)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, College of Graduate Health Sciences, 
University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN, United States.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(5)Office of the Director, National Human Genome Research Institute, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States.
(6)Adult Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, 
Salford, United Kingdom.
(7)Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology and Gastroenterology, University of 
Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.

GM1 gangliosidosis is a progressive, neurosomatic, lysosomal storage disorder 
caused by mutations in the GLB1 gene encoding the enzyme β-galactosidase. Absent 
or reduced β-galactosidase activity leads to the accumulation of β-linked 
galactose-containing glycoconjugates including the glycosphingolipid (GSL) 
GM1-ganglioside in neuronal tissue. GM1-gangliosidosis is classified into three 
forms [Type I (infantile), Type II (late-infantile and juvenile), and Type III 
(adult)], based on the age of onset of clinical symptoms, although the disorder 
is really a continuum that correlates only partially with the levels of residual 
enzyme activity. Severe neurocognitive decline is a feature of Type I and II 
disease and is associated with premature mortality. Most of the disease-causing 
β-galactosidase mutations reported in the literature are clustered in exons 2, 
6, 15, and 16 of the GLB1 gene. So far 261 pathogenic variants have been 
described, missense/nonsense mutations being the most prevalent. There are five 
mouse models of GM1-gangliosidosis reported in the literature generated using 
different targeting strategies of the Glb1 murine locus. Individual models 
differ in terms of age of onset of the clinical, biochemical, and pathological 
signs and symptoms, and overall lifespan. However, they do share the major 
abnormalities and neurological symptoms that are characteristic of the most 
severe forms of GM1-gangliosidosis. These mouse models have been used to study 
pathogenic mechanisms, to identify biomarkers, and to evaluate therapeutic 
strategies. Three GLB1 gene therapy trials are currently recruiting Type I and 
Type II patients (NCT04273269, NCT03952637, and NCT04713475) and Type II and 
Type III patients are being recruited for a trial utilizing the glucosylceramide 
synthase inhibitor, venglustat (NCT04221451).

Copyright © 2021 Nicoli, Annunziata, d’Azzo, Platt, Tifft and Stepien.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2021.734878
PMCID: PMC8446533
PMID: 34539759

Conflict of interest statement: Ad’A holds the Jewelers for Children Endowed 
Chair in Genetics and Gene Therapy. The remaining authors declare that the 
research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial 
relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.