---
reference_id: "PMID:34243078"
title: "Efficacy, safety and factors associated with disease progression in patients with unresectable (stage III) or distant metastatic (stage IV) BRAF V600-mutant melanoma: An open label, non-randomized, phase IIIb study of trametinib in combination with dabrafenib."
authors:
- Saiag P
- Robert C
- Grob JJ
- Mortier L
- Dereure O
- Lebbe C
- Mansard S
- Grange F
- Neidhardt EM
- Lesimple T
- Machet L
- Bedane C
- Maillard H
- Dalac-Rat S
- Nardin C
- Szenik A
- Denden A
- Dutriaux C
journal: Eur J Cancer
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2021.05.031
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Humans
- "Imidazoles/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Male
- "Melanoma/drug therapy, genetics, mortality, pathology"
- Middle Aged
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Staging
- "Oximes/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- Prospective Studies
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- "Pyridones/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Pyrimidinones/administration & dosage, adverse effects"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy, safety and factors associated with disease progression in patients with unresectable (stage III) or distant metastatic (stage IV) BRAF V600-mutant melanoma: An open label, non-randomized, phase IIIb study of trametinib in combination with dabrafenib.
**Authors:** Saiag P, Robert C, Grob JJ, Mortier L, Dereure O, Lebbe C, Mansard S, Grange F, Neidhardt EM, Lesimple T, Machet L, Bedane C, Maillard H, Dalac-Rat S, Nardin C, Szenik A, Denden A, Dutriaux C
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejca.2021.05.031](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2021.05.031)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer. 2021 Sep;154:57-65. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2021.05.031. Epub 2021
Jul  6.

Efficacy, safety and factors associated with disease progression in patients
with unresectable (stage III) or distant metastatic (stage IV) BRAF V600-mutant
melanoma: An open label, non-randomized, phase IIIb study of trametinib in
combination with dabrafenib.

Saiag P(1), Robert C(2), Grob JJ(3), Mortier L(4), Dereure O(5), Lebbe C(6),
Mansard S(7), Grange F(8), Neidhardt EM(9), Lesimple T(10), Machet L(11), Bedane
C(12), Maillard H(11), Dalac-Rat S(13), Nardin C(14), Szenik A(15), Denden
A(16), Dutriaux C(17).

Author information:
(1)University of Paris-Saclay, UVSQ, EA4340, Boulogne-Billancourt 92100, France;
APHP Hôpital Ambroise Paré, Department of Dermatology, F 92100,
Boulogne-Billancourt, France. Electronic address: philippe.saiag@uvsq.fr.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Aix-Marseille University, APHM, University
Hospital Timone, Marseille, France.
(4)Université de Lille, INSERM U 1189, Service de Dermatologie, CHU Lille, Lille
59000, France.
(5)Department of Dermatology, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(6)Université de Paris, INSERM U976, Team 1, HIPI, Paris 75010, France; AP-HP
Hopital Saint Louis, Service de Dermatologie, Paris 75010, France.
(7)Department of Dermatology, CHU Estaing, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(8)Department of Dermatology, CHU Reims, Reims, France.
(9)Department of Medical Oncology, Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France.
(10)Department of Medical Oncology, Eugene Marquis Center, Rennes, France.
(11)Department of Dermatology, CHRU de Tours et Université François Rabelais de
Tours, Tours, France.
(12)Department of Dermatology, CHU Limoges, Limoges, France.
(13)Department of Dermatology, CHU Le Mans, Le Mans, France.
(14)Department of Dermatology, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France.
(15)Department of Dermatology, CHU de Besançon, Besançon, France.
(16)Department of Medical Oncology, Novartis Pharma S.A.S.-France,
Rueil-Malmaison, France.
(17)Department of Dermatology, CHU Bordeaux Hôpital St. André, Bordeaux, France.

BACKGROUND: BRAF and MEK inhibitors combination, including dabrafenib (D) and
trametinib (T) have transformed the treatment of BRAF V600-mutant advanced
melanoma patients, including patients with brain metastasis (BM). In a large
phase IIIb, single-arm, open-label, multicenter French study, we assessed
safety, response to treatment, progression-free survival (PFS) and factors
associated with progression, and stratified the population into risk groups.
METHODS: Patients with unresectable, advanced, BRAF V600-mutant melanoma were
included, including those with the presence of BM, Eastern Cooperative Oncology
Group Performance Status (ECOG PS) ≤2, elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) or
previous melanoma treatments. Responses were determined locally, without central
review. PFS was estimated using the Kaplan-Meier analysis and modelled with
multivariate Cox model. Risk subgroups were identified using a regression tree
analysis.
RESULTS: Between March 2015 and November 2016, 856 patients received at least
one D + T dose. Overall, 92% had stage IV melanoma, 38% ECOG PS ≥1, 32% BM and
37.5% elevated LDH. Median PFS was 8.02 months (95% confidence interval [CI]
7.33-8.77). Significant factors associated with lower PFS were ECOG PS ≥1,
elevated LDH, ≥3 metastatic sites and presence of BM. Patients with <3
metastatic sites, ECOG = 0 and no BM had the highest probability of PFS at 6
months (83%, 95% CI 76-87) and 12 months (56%, 95% CI 47-64), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the largest prospective study in advanced BRAF V600-mutant
melanoma patients treated with D + T, conducted in conditions close to
'real-world practice'. We confirm previous findings that LDH, ECOG PS and ≥3
metastatic sites are associated with shorter PFS, but the real-world setting
introduces BM as a major prognostic factor.

Copyright © 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2021.05.031
PMID: 34243078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
