---
reference_id: "PMID:35743185"
title: CRISPR/Cas9-Mediated Constitutive Loss of VCP (Valosin-Containing Protein) Impairs Proteostasis and Leads to Defective Striated Muscle Structure and Function In Vivo.
authors:
- Voisard P
- Diofano F
- Glazier AA
- Rottbauer W
- Just S
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3390/ijms23126722
keywords:
- "Adenosine Triphosphatases/genetics, metabolism"
- Animals
- CRISPR-Cas Systems
- "Cell Cycle Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Frontotemporal Dementia/genetics, metabolism"
- "Muscle, Skeletal/metabolism"
- "Muscle, Striated/metabolism"
- Mutation
- "Myositis, Inclusion Body/genetics, metabolism"
- Proteostasis/genetics
- "Valosin Containing Protein/genetics, metabolism"
- "Zebrafish/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CRISPR/Cas9-Mediated Constitutive Loss of VCP (Valosin-Containing Protein) Impairs Proteostasis and Leads to Defective Striated Muscle Structure and Function In Vivo.
**Authors:** Voisard P, Diofano F, Glazier AA, Rottbauer W, Just S
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms23126722](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms23126722)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2022 Jun 16;23(12):6722. doi: 10.3390/ijms23126722.

CRISPR/Cas9-Mediated Constitutive Loss of VCP (Valosin-Containing Protein)
Impairs Proteostasis and Leads to Defective Striated Muscle Structure and
Function In Vivo.

Voisard P(1), Diofano F(1), Glazier AA(1), Rottbauer W(2), Just S(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine II, University of Ulm,
Albert-Einstein-Allee 23, 89081 Ulm, Germany.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine II, University of Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee
23, 89081 Ulm, Germany.

Valosin-containing protein (VCP) acts as a key regulator of cellular protein
homeostasis by coordinating protein turnover and quality control. Mutations in
VCP lead to (cardio-)myopathy and neurodegenerative diseases such as inclusion
body myopathy with Paget's disease of the bone and frontotemporal dementia
(IBMPFD) or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). To date, due to embryonic
lethality, no constitutive VCP knockout animal model exists. Here, we generated
a constitutive CRISPR/Cas9-induced vcp knockout zebrafish model. Similar to the
phenotype of vcp morphant knockdown zebrafish embryos, we found that vcp-null
embryos displayed significantly impaired cardiac and skeletal muscle function.
By ultrastructural analysis of skeletal muscle cells and cardiomyocytes, we
observed severely disrupted myofibrillar organization and accumulation of
inclusion bodies as well as mitochondrial degeneration. vcp knockout was
associated with a significant accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins, suggesting
impaired proteasomal function. Additionally, markers of unfolded protein
response (UPR)/ER-stress and autophagy-related mTOR signaling were elevated in
vcp-deficient embryos, demonstrating impaired proteostasis in VCP-null
zebrafish. In conclusion, our findings demonstrate the successful generation of
a stable constitutive vcp knockout zebrafish line that will enable
characterization of the detailed mechanistic underpinnings of vcp loss,
particularly the impact of disturbed protein homeostasis on organ development
and function in vivo.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms23126722
PMCID: PMC9223409
PMID: 35743185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
