---
reference_id: "PMID:38929485"
title: Currently Available Treatment Modalities for Uterine Fibroids.
authors:
- Micić J
- Macura M
- Andjić M
- Ivanović K
- Dotlić J
- Micić DD
- Arsenijević V
- Stojnić J
- Bila J
- Babić S
- Šljivančanin U
- Stanišić DM
- Dokić M
journal: Medicina (Kaunas)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/medicina60060868
keywords:
- Humans
- "Leiomyoma/therapy, surgery"
- Female
- "Uterine Neoplasms/therapy, surgery, complications"
- Hysterectomy/methods
- Uterine Artery Embolization/methods
- Uterine Myomectomy/methods
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Currently Available Treatment Modalities for Uterine Fibroids.
**Authors:** Micić J, Macura M, Andjić M, Ivanović K, Dotlić J, Micić DD, Arsenijević V, Stojnić J, Bila J, Babić S, Šljivančanin U, Stanišić DM, Dokić M
**Journal:** Medicina (Kaunas) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/medicina60060868](https://doi.org/10.3390/medicina60060868)

## Content

1. Medicina (Kaunas). 2024 May 26;60(6):868. doi: 10.3390/medicina60060868.

Currently Available Treatment Modalities for Uterine Fibroids.

Micić J(1)(2), Macura M(1), Andjić M(1), Ivanović K(1), Dotlić J(1)(2), Micić 
DD(2)(3), Arsenijević V(2)(3), Stojnić J(1)(2), Bila J(1)(2), Babić S(1), 
Šljivančanin U(1), Stanišić DM(1)(2), Dokić M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Clinic of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Clinical Center of Serbia, 
11000 Belgrade, Serbia.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia.
(3)Clinic of Emergency Surgery, Emergency Center, University Clinical Center of 
Serbia, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia.

Uterine fibroids (leiomyomas and myomas) are the most common benign 
gynecological condition in patients presenting with abnormal uterine bleeding, 
pelvic masses causing pressure or pain, infertility and obstetric complications. 
Almost a third of women with fibroids need treatment due to symptoms.
OBJECTIVES: In this review we present all currently available treatment 
modalities for uterine fibroids.
METHODS: An extensive search for the available data regarding surgical, medical 
and other treatment options for uterine fibroids was conducted.
REVIEW: Nowadays, treatment for fibroids is intended to control symptoms while 
preserving future fertility. The choice of treatment depends on the patient's 
age and fertility and the number, size and location of the fibroids. Current 
management strategies mainly involve surgical interventions (hysterectomy and 
myomectomy hysteroscopy, laparoscopy or laparotomy). Other surgical and 
non-surgical minimally invasive techniques include interventions performed under 
radiologic or ultrasound guidance (uterine artery embolization and occlusion, 
myolysis, magnetic resonance-guided focused ultrasound surgery, radiofrequency 
ablation of fibroids and endometrial ablation). Medical treatment options for 
fibroids are still restricted and available medications (progestogens, combined 
oral contraceptives andgonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists and antagonists) 
are generally used for short-term treatment of fibroid-induced bleeding. 
Recently, it was shown that SPRMs could be administered intermittently long-term 
with good results on bleeding and fibroid size reduction. Novel medical 
treatments are still under investigation but with promising results.
CONCLUSIONS: Treatment of fibroids must be individualized based on the presence 
and severity of symptoms and the patient's desire for definitive treatment or 
fertility preservation.

DOI: 10.3390/medicina60060868
PMCID: PMC11205795
PMID: 38929485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.