---
reference_id: "PMID:14764923"
title: Circulating angiogenic factors and the risk of preeclampsia.
authors:
- Levine RJ
- Maynard SE
- Qian C
- Lim KH
- England LJ
- Yu KF
- Schisterman EF
- Thadhani R
- Sachs BP
- Epstein FH
- Sibai BM
- Sukhatme VP
- Karumanchi SA
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa031884
keywords:
- Adult
- Biomarkers/blood
- Body Mass Index
- Case-Control Studies
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- Female
- Gestational Age
- Humans
- Logistic Models
- Odds Ratio
- Placenta Growth Factor
- "Pre-Eclampsia/blood, diagnosis"
- Pregnancy/blood
- Pregnancy Proteins/blood
- Risk Factors
- "Statistics, Nonparametric"
- Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor A/blood
- Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor Receptor-1/blood
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Circulating angiogenic factors and the risk of preeclampsia.
**Authors:** Levine RJ, Maynard SE, Qian C, Lim KH, England LJ, Yu KF, Schisterman EF, Thadhani R, Sachs BP, Epstein FH, Sibai BM, Sukhatme VP, Karumanchi SA
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa031884](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa031884)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2004 Feb 12;350(7):672-83. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa031884. Epub 2004 
Feb 5.

Circulating angiogenic factors and the risk of preeclampsia.

Levine RJ(1), Maynard SE, Qian C, Lim KH, England LJ, Yu KF, Schisterman EF, 
Thadhani R, Sachs BP, Epstein FH, Sibai BM, Sukhatme VP, Karumanchi SA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Statistics, and Prevention Research, National 
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Department of Health and Human 
Services, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. levinerj@mail.nih.gov

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2004 Feb 12;350(7):641-2. doi: 10.1056/NEJMp038241.
    N Engl J Med. 2004 May 6;350(19):2003-4; author reply 2003-4. doi: 
10.1056/NEJM200405063501918.

BACKGROUND: The cause of preeclampsia remains unclear. Limited data suggest that 
excess circulating soluble fms-like tyrosine kinase 1 (sFlt-1), which binds 
placental growth factor (PlGF) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), 
may have a pathogenic role.
METHODS: We performed a nested case-control study within the Calcium for 
Preeclampsia Prevention trial, which involved healthy nulliparous women. Each 
woman with preeclampsia was matched to one normotensive control. A total of 120 
pairs of women were randomly chosen. Serum concentrations of angiogenic factors 
(total sFlt-1, free PlGF, and free VEGF) were measured throughout pregnancy; 
there were a total of 655 serum specimens. The data were analyzed 
cross-sectionally within intervals of gestational age and according to the time 
before the onset of preeclampsia.
RESULTS: During the last two months of pregnancy in the normotensive controls, 
the level of sFlt-1 increased and the level of PlGF decreased. These changes 
occurred earlier and were more pronounced in the women in whom preeclampsia 
later developed. The sFlt-1 level increased beginning approximately five weeks 
before the onset of preeclampsia. At the onset of clinical disease, the mean 
serum level in the women with preeclampsia was 4382 pg per milliliter, as 
compared with 1643 pg per milliliter in controls with fetuses of similar 
gestational age (P<0.001). The PlGF levels were significantly lower in the women 
who later had preeclampsia than in the controls beginning at 13 to 16 weeks of 
gestation (mean, 90 pg per milliliter vs. 142 pg per milliliter, P=0.01), with 
the greatest difference occurring during the weeks before the onset of 
preeclampsia, coincident with the increase in the sFlt-1 level. Alterations in 
the levels of sFlt-1 and free PlGF were greater in women with an earlier onset 
of preeclampsia and in women in whom preeclampsia was associated with a 
small-for-gestational-age infant.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased levels of sFlt-1 and reduced levels of PlGF predict the 
subsequent development of preeclampsia.

Copyright 2004 Massachusetts Medical Society

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa031884
PMID: 14764923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]