---
reference_id: "PMID:34680514"
title: "Bilateral Adrenal Hyperplasia: Pathogenesis and Treatment."
authors:
- Chevalier B
- Vantyghem MC
- Espiard S
journal: Biomedicines
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/biomedicines9101397
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Bilateral Adrenal Hyperplasia: Pathogenesis and Treatment.
**Authors:** Chevalier B, Vantyghem MC, Espiard S
**Journal:** Biomedicines (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/biomedicines9101397](https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines9101397)

## Content

1. Biomedicines. 2021 Oct 5;9(10):1397. doi: 10.3390/biomedicines9101397.

Bilateral Adrenal Hyperplasia: Pathogenesis and Treatment.

Chevalier B(1), Vantyghem MC(1)(2), Espiard S(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Diabetology, Metabolism and Nutrition, CHU 
Lille, F-59000 Lille, France.
(2)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), U1190, 
European Genomic Institute for Diabetes (EGID), CHU Lille, F-59000 Lille, 
France.

Bilateral adrenal hyperplasia is a rare cause of Cushing's syndrome. 
Micronodular adrenal hyperplasia, including the primary pigmented micronodular 
adrenal dysplasia (PPNAD) and the isolated micronodular adrenal hyperplasia 
(iMAD), can be distinguished from the primary bilateral macronodular adrenal 
hyperplasia (PBMAH) according to the size of the nodules. They both lead to 
overt or subclinical CS. In the latter case, PPNAD is usually diagnosed after a 
systematic screening in patients presenting with Carney complex, while for 
PBMAH, the diagnosis is often incidental on imaging. Identification of causal 
genes and genetic counseling also help in the diagnoses. This review discusses 
the last decades' findings on genetic and molecular causes of bilateral adrenal 
hyperplasia, including the several mechanisms altering the PKA pathway, the 
recent discovery of ARMC5, and the role of the adrenal paracrine regulation. 
Finally, the treatment of bilateral adrenal hyperplasia will be discussed, 
focusing on current data on unilateral adrenalectomy.

DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines9101397
PMCID: PMC8533142
PMID: 34680514

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.