---
reference_id: "PMID:20053864"
title: Iconic decay in schizophrenia.
authors:
- Hahn B
- Kappenman ES
- Robinson BM
- Fuller RL
- Luck SJ
- Gold JM
journal: Schizophr Bull
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbp164
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Iconic decay in schizophrenia.
**Authors:** Hahn B, Kappenman ES, Robinson BM, Fuller RL, Luck SJ, Gold JM
**Journal:** Schizophr Bull (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1093/schbul/sbp164](https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbp164)

## Content

1. Schizophr Bull. 2011 Sep;37(5):950-7. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbp164. Epub 2010
Jan  6.

Iconic decay in schizophrenia.

Hahn B(1), Kappenman ES, Robinson BM, Fuller RL, Luck SJ, Gold JM.

Author information:
(1)Maryland Psychiatric Research Center, University of Maryland School of 
Medicine, P.O. Box 21247, Baltimore, MD 21228, USA. bhahn@mprc.umaryland.edu

Working memory impairment is considered a core deficit in schizophrenia, but the 
precise nature of this deficit has not been determined. Multiple lines of 
evidence implicate deficits at the encoding stage. During encoding, information 
is held in a precategorical sensory store termed iconic memory, a literal image 
of the stimulus with high capacity but rapid decay. Pathologically increased 
iconic decay could reduce the number of items that can be transferred into 
working memory before the information is lost and could thus contribute to the 
working memory deficit seen in the illness. The current study used a partial 
report procedure to test the hypothesis that patients with schizophrenia (n = 
37) display faster iconic memory decay than matched healthy control participants 
(n = 28). Six letters, arranged in a circle, were presented for 50 ms. Following 
a variable delay of 0-1000 ms, a central arrow cue indicated the item to be 
reported. In both patients and control subjects, recall accuracy decreased with 
increasing cue delay, reflecting decay of the iconic representation of the 
stimulus array. Patients displayed impaired memory performance across all cue 
delays, consistent with an impairment in working memory, but the rate of iconic 
memory decay did not differ between patients and controls. This provides clear 
evidence against faster loss of iconic memory representations in schizophrenia, 
ruling out iconic decay as an underlying source of the working memory impairment 
in this population. Thus, iconic decay rate can be added to a growing list of 
unimpaired cognitive building blocks in schizophrenia.

DOI: 10.1093/schbul/sbp164
PMCID: PMC3160233
PMID: 20053864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]