---
reference_id: PMID:22231231
title: "Mechanisms of joint damage in gout: evidence from cellular and imaging studies."
authors:
- McQueen FM
- Chhana A
- Dalbeth N
journal: Nat Rev Rheumatol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2011.207
keywords:
- "Arthritis/diagnosis, drug therapy, etiology"
- "Bone and Bones/metabolism, pathology"
- "Cartilage, Articular/metabolism, pathology"
- Chronic Disease
- Cytokines/metabolism
- Diagnostic Imaging/methods
- Disease Progression
- "Gout/complications, diagnosis, drug therapy"
- Gout Suppressants/therapeutic use
- Humans
- "Hyperuricemia/complications, drug therapy"
- "Joints/pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms of joint damage in gout: evidence from cellular and imaging studies.
**Authors:** McQueen FM, Chhana A, Dalbeth N
**Journal:** Nat Rev Rheumatol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrrheum.2011.207](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrrheum.2011.207)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2012 Jan 10;8(3):173-81. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2011.207.

Mechanisms of joint damage in gout: evidence from cellular and imaging studies.

McQueen FM(1), Chhana A, Dalbeth N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Pathology, University of Auckland, Park 
Road, Grafton, Auckland 1023, New Zealand. f.mcqueen@auckland.ac.nz

The clinical course of gout is initially characterized by acute self-limited 
joint inflammation, but long-standing disease is often associated with chronic 
inflammation followed by the development of erosive joint damage, which can 
result in long-term functional impairment. Preventing joint damage is now a 
major focus of therapeutic intervention in gout. New light has been shed on the 
mechanisms leading to cartilage and bone damage in patients with this disease. 
Here, we discuss basic science studies focusing on the cellular immunology of 
bone and cartilage in gout and the effects of monosodium urate crystals on 
signaling pathways, cytokine release and the function of osteoclasts, 
osteoblasts and chondrocytes. We then explore the use of advanced imaging 
modalities (including MRI, ultrasonography, CT and dual-energy CT) to 
investigate pathology in gout, as they provide new ways to visualize joint 
tissues. These modalities vary in their ability to detect the various 
pathological features of gout and have different clinical applications. Imaging 
provides information about the inflammatory nature of the joint lesion, position 
and size of tophaceous deposits, and extent of bone and cartilage damage. 
Imaging is also increasingly being used to monitor the progression of joint 
damage and regression of tophi with effective urate-lowering therapy.

DOI: 10.1038/nrrheum.2011.207
PMID: 22231231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]