---
reference_id: "PMID:37752496"
title: Treat-to-target strategies for the management of familial Mediterranean Fever in children.
authors:
- Ehlers L
- Rolfes E
- Lieber M
- Müller D
- Lainka E
- Gohar F
- Klaus G
- Girschick H
- Hörstermann J
- Kümmerle-Deschner J
- Brunner J
- Palm-Beden K
- Tenbrock K
- von Wrangel L
- Faßhauer M
- Blank N
- Trauzeddel R
- von Stuckrad ASL
- Higgins S
- Welzel T
- Lutz T
- Hentgen V
- Foell D
- Wittkowski H
- Kallinich T
journal: Pediatr Rheumatol Online J
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s12969-023-00875-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treat-to-target strategies for the management of familial Mediterranean Fever in children.
**Authors:** Ehlers L, Rolfes E, Lieber M, Müller D, Lainka E, Gohar F, Klaus G, Girschick H, Hörstermann J, Kümmerle-Deschner J, Brunner J, Palm-Beden K, Tenbrock K, von Wrangel L, Faßhauer M, Blank N, Trauzeddel R, von Stuckrad ASL, Higgins S, Welzel T, Lutz T, Hentgen V, Foell D, Wittkowski H, Kallinich T
**Journal:** Pediatr Rheumatol Online J (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12969-023-00875-y](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12969-023-00875-y)

## Content

1. Pediatr Rheumatol Online J. 2023 Sep 26;21(1):108. doi: 
10.1186/s12969-023-00875-y.

Treat-to-target strategies for the management of familial Mediterranean Fever in 
children.

Ehlers L(1), Rolfes E(1), Lieber M(1), Müller D(2), Lainka E(3), Gohar F(4), 
Klaus G(5), Girschick H(6), Hörstermann J(7), Kümmerle-Deschner J(8), Brunner 
J(9), Palm-Beden K(4), Tenbrock K(10), von Wrangel L(11), Faßhauer M(12), Blank 
N(13), Trauzeddel R(14), von Stuckrad ASL(1), Higgins S(15), Welzel T(8)(16), 
Lutz T(17), Hentgen V(18), Foell D(19), Wittkowski H(19), Kallinich 
T(20)(21)(22).

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Pulmonology, Immunology and Critical Care Medicine, 
Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität 
Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Department of Paediatrics, Division of Gastroenterology, Nephrology and 
Metabolic Diseases, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of 
Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Department of Paediatrics II, University Hospital Essen, Children's Hospital, 
Essen, Germany.
(4)Clinic of Paediatric and Adolescent Rheumatology, St. Josef-Stift 
Sendenhorst, Northwest German Center for Rheumatology, Sendenhorst, Germany.
(5)KfH Center of Paediatric Nephrology, Department of Paediatric Nephrology, 
Marburg, Germany.
(6)Vivantes Klinikum Friedrichshain, Children's Hospital, Berlin, Germany.
(7)Deutsches Rheuma-Forschungszentrum (DRFZ), An Institute of the Leibniz 
Association, Berlin, Germany.
(8)Autoinflammation Reference Center Tübingen (arcT), Division of Paediatric 
Rheumatology, Department of Paediatrics, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, 
Germany.
(9)Department of Paediatrics, Medical University Innsbruck, Danube Private 
University, Innsbruck, Krems, Austria.
(10)Department of Paediatric Pneumology, Allergology and Immunology, RWTH 
Aachen, Aachen, Germany.
(11)Patient representative, Berlin, Germany.
(12)ImmunoDeficiencyCenter Leipzig (IDCL), Hospital St. Georg GmbH Leipzig, 
Academic Teaching Hospital of the University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(13)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Rheumatology, Internal Medicine V, 
University Hospital of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
(14)Department of Paediatrics, Helios Klinikum Berlin-Buch, Berlin, Germany.
(15)Paediatric medical practice Hürthpark, Hürth, Germany.
(16)Paediatric Pharmacology and Pharmacometrics, University Children's Hospital 
Basel (UKBB), University Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(17)Center for Rheumatology, Paediatric Rheumatology, Heidelberg, Germany.
(18)Department of Paediatrics, National Reference Center for Auto-inflammatory 
Diseases and Amyloidosis, CEREMAIA, Versailles Hospital, Versailles, France.
(19)Department of Paediatric Rheumatology and Immunology, University Hospital 
Münster, Münster, Germany.
(20)Department of Paediatric Pulmonology, Immunology and Critical Care Medicine, 
Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität 
Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany. 
tilmann.kallinich@charite.de.
(21)Deutsches Rheuma-Forschungszentrum (DRFZ), An Institute of the Leibniz 
Association, Berlin, Germany. tilmann.kallinich@charite.de.
(22)Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany. 
tilmann.kallinich@charite.de.

BACKGROUND: The objective of this initiative was to develop a treat-to-target 
(T2T) approach for the management of patients with Familial Mediterranean Fever 
(FMF), including the definition of a complex treatment target, and establish 
strategies that improve patient care and long-term outcome.
METHODS: An initial set of statements as well as a flow chart visualising the 
proposed concept was developed. To adapt the preliminary statements to the 
current state of knowledge, a systematic literature search was performed and the 
modified statements were subject to a Delphi approach. To ensure the 
applicability of the statements in daily practice, an online survey was 
conducted among paediatric rheumatologists in Germany. In addition, data from 
the national AID-NET registry were analysed with respect to therapeutic 
response.
RESULTS: This T2T initiative yielded a total of 26 statements guiding FMF 
management with respect to diagnosis, treatment targets, treatment strategies 
and monitoring. The online survey identified cut-off values for inflammatory 
markers indicating treatment intensification and appropriate measures in case of 
colchicine intolerance or non-adherence. The analysis of data derived from the 
national AID-NET showed that colchicine therapy was successfully terminated in 
61% of patients (27 out of 44) with heterozygous MEFV mutations. 
Multidimensional treatment targets incorporating objective and subjective 
reported outcome measures were developed. These provide the basis for 
stratifying patients into the following treatment paths: continue colchicine, 
persisting attacks / inflammation, colchicine intolerance, persisting arthritis, 
colchicine reduction and adjustment/reduction of biologics.
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed consensus treatment plan for the management of FMF 
incorporates multidimensional targets allowing transparent treatment decisions, 
which will promote personalised disease management and increase adherence to 
therapy.

© 2023. BioMed Central Ltd., part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1186/s12969-023-00875-y
PMCID: PMC10521475
PMID: 37752496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Lisa Ehlers has no conflicts of interest to 
declare. Elisabeth Rolfes has no conflicts of interest to declare. Mareike 
Lieber is a member of the following medical society: GKJR. Dominik Müller has no 
conflicts of interest to declare. Elke Lainka received consulting fees from 
Mirum and Albireo. Faekah Gohar has no conflicts of interest to declare. Günter 
Klaus has no conflicts of interest to declare. Hermann Girschick was involved in 
the development of treatment guidelines of the following societies: DGKJ. Jana 
Hörstermann has no conflicts of interest to declare. Jasmin Kümmerle-Deschner 
received consulting fees, honoraria and research grants from Novartis and SOBI, 
and is a member of the following medical societies: GKJR, DGRh, PRES, ISSAID. 
Jürgen Brunner received honoraria for presenting at industrial symposia and is a 
member of the following medical societies: DGKJ, ÖGKJ, ÖGR, GKJR, DGPI. 
Katharina Palm-Beden has no conflicts of interest to declare. Klaus Tenbrock 
received consulting fees from Pfizer and Novartis, a research grant from Pfizer, 
and was involved in the development of treatment guidelines of the following 
societies: GKJR. Lusine von Wrangel has no conflicts of interest to declare. 
Maria Faßhauer has no conflicts of interest to declare. Norbert Blank received 
consulting fees, honoraria and research grants from Novartis and SOBI, and is a 
member of the following medical societies: DGRh, DNSS, ISA. Ralf Trauzeddel 
received consulting fees from Novartis and was involved in the development of a 
treatment guideline of the following society: AWMF. Anne Sae Lim von Stuckrad 
has no conflicts of interest to declare. Sonja Higgins has no conflicts of 
interest to declare. Tatjana Welzel has no conflicts of interest to declare. 
Thomas Lutz is a member of the following medical societies: GKJR, DGKJ, DGPI. 
Véronique Hentgen has received consulting fees and honoraria from Novartis and 
SOBI, is a member of the steering committee of the JIRcohort which received 
public and private funding for research, and is involved in the development of 
French guidelines on behalf of the Haute Autorité de Santé (HAS). She is a 
member of the following medical societies:SOFREMIP, PReS and ISSAID. Dirk Foell 
received research funding from Novartis and Sobi, honoraria from Novartis and 
Sobi, and is a member of the following medical societies: GKJR, API, ISSAID, 
PReS, GPGE, and DGKJ. Helmut Wittkowski received research funding from Takeda, 
honoraria from Novartis and Takeda, travel grants from Octapharma and 
CSL-Behring, and is a member of the following medical societies: GKJR, API. 
Tilmann Kallinich is a member of the following medical societies: GKJR and DGPI.