---
reference_id: "PMID:35763248"
title: Prevention and Treatment of Monkeypox.
authors:
- Rizk JG
- Lippi G
- Henry BM
- Forthal DN
- Rizk Y
journal: Drugs
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1007/s40265-022-01742-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prevention and Treatment of Monkeypox.
**Authors:** Rizk JG, Lippi G, Henry BM, Forthal DN, Rizk Y
**Journal:** Drugs (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40265-022-01742-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40265-022-01742-y)

## Content

1. Drugs. 2022 Jun;82(9):957-963. doi: 10.1007/s40265-022-01742-y. Epub 2022 Jun 
28.

Prevention and Treatment of Monkeypox.

Rizk JG(1), Lippi G(2), Henry BM(3), Forthal DN(4)(5), Rizk Y(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Health Services Research, University of 
Maryland, Baltimore, School of Pharmacy, 220 Arch Street, 12th Floor, Room 
01-409-E, Baltimore, MD, 21201, USA. john.rizk@umaryland.edu.
(2)Section of Clinical Biochemistry, University of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(3)The Heart Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, OH, USA.
(4)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of 
California, Irvine, School of Medicine, Irvine, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, University of California, 
Irvine, School of Medicine, Irvine, CA, USA.
(6)Division of Family Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Lebanese 
American University School of Medicine, Beirut, Lebanon.

Erratum in
    Drugs. 2022 Aug;82(12):1343. doi: 10.1007/s40265-022-01767-3.

Comment in
    Int J Surg. 2022 Sep;105:106898. doi: 10.1016/j.ijsu.2022.106898.
    Int J Surg. 2022 Nov;107:106971. doi: 10.1016/j.ijsu.2022.106971.

Human monkeypox is a zoonotic orthopoxvirus with presentation similar to 
smallpox. Monkeypox is transmitted incidentally to humans when they encounter 
infected animals. Reports have shown that the virus can also be transmitted 
through direct contact (sexual or skin-to-skin), respiratory droplets, and via 
fomites such as towels and bedding. Multiple medical countermeasures are 
stockpiled for orthopoxviruses such as monkeypox. Two vaccines are currently 
available, JYNNEOSTM (live, replication incompetent vaccinia virus) and 
ACAM2000® (live, replication competent vaccinia virus). While most cases of 
monkeypox will have mild and self-limited disease, with supportive care being 
typically sufficient, antivirals (e.g. tecovirimat, brincidofovir, cidofovir) 
and vaccinia immune globulin intravenous (VIGIV) are available as treatments. 
Antivirals can be considered in severe disease, immunocompromised patients, 
pediatrics, pregnant and breastfeeding women, complicated lesions, and when 
lesions appear near the mouth, eyes, and genitals. The purpose of this short 
review is to describe each of these countermeasures.

© 2022. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-022-01742-y
PMCID: PMC9244487
PMID: 35763248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None: JGR, GL, BMH, DNF, YR report they have no 
conflicts of interest to disclose relative to this research.