---
reference_id: "PMID:25646852"
title: "Intracranial atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor: current management and a single institute experience of 15 patients from north India."
authors:
- Biswas A
- Julka PK
- Bakhshi S
- Suri A
- Rath GK
journal: Acta Neurochir (Wien)
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s00701-015-2355-2
keywords:
- "Brain Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology, radiotherapy, surgery"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- India
- Infant
- Male
- "Rhabdoid Tumor/drug therapy, pathology, radiotherapy, surgery"
- "Teratoma/drug therapy, pathology, radiotherapy, surgery"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intracranial atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor: current management and a single institute experience of 15 patients from north India.
**Authors:** Biswas A, Julka PK, Bakhshi S, Suri A, Rath GK
**Journal:** Acta Neurochir (Wien) (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00701-015-2355-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00701-015-2355-2)

## Content

1. Acta Neurochir (Wien). 2015 Apr;157(4):589-96. doi: 10.1007/s00701-015-2355-2.
 Epub 2015 Feb 3.

Intracranial atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor: current management and a single
institute experience of 15 patients from north India.

Biswas A(1), Julka PK, Bakhshi S, Suri A, Rath GK.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Radiotherapy, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India, dr_ahitagni@yahoo.co.in.

OBJECTIVE: We intended to assess the clinicopathological features and treatment
outcome in patients of intracranial atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor (AT/RT), a
rare malignant tumor of the brain.
METHODS: Medical records were reviewed and clinical data collected on AT/RT in a
6-year period (2006-2012). Overall survival was analyzed by Kaplan-Meier method.
Univariate analysis of factors predictive of overall survival was done by
log-rank test.
RESULTS: Fifteen patients met the study criterion (male:female = 4:1). Median
age at presentation was 5 years (range, 0.8-8 years). Presenting complaints
included vomiting (73.33 %), headache (46.67 %), orbital symptoms (33.33 %),
motor impairment (26.67 %), gait abnormality (20 %), and seizure (20 %). Median
duration of symptoms was noted to be 2 months (range, 0.5-6 months). On
contrast-enhanced MRI of brain, tumor location was supratentorial in 60 %
patients and infratentorial in 40 % of patients. Cystic component and
hydrocephalus were noted in 73.33 % patients each, whereas contrast enhancement
and calcification were discerned in 53.33 and 40 % of the patients,
respectively. All patients underwent tumor resection-gross total (26.67 %),
near-total (13.33 %) and subtotal (60 %). Histopathology was confirmative of
AT/RT with MIB-1 labeling index varying from 11 to 85 % (median 45 %). There was
a lack of immunostaining for INI-1 protein, suggesting INI-1gene mutation or
deletion. Adjuvant radiation (36 Gray/20 fractions/4 weeks to entire neuraxis
followed by local boost 20 Gray/10 fractions/2 weeks) was started in six
patients (40 %) and completed in five patients. Young age at presentation and
poor performance status precluded the use of radiation in the remainder.
Systemic chemotherapy was administered in ten (66.67 %) patients. Median number
of cycles given was three (range, 1-12) with ICE (ifosfamide, carboplatin,
etoposide) and VAC (vincristine, dactinomycin, cyclophosphamide) being the
common regimens (26.67 and 20 %, respectively). After a median follow-up of 8.33
months (mean, 12.27 months), median overall survival was noted to be 10 months.
At last follow-up, two patients are in complete response, one patient is on
treatment, three patients are alive with evidence of disease, and nine patients
expired due to disease progression. The 1- and 2-year actuarial rate of overall
survival was noted to be 48.1 and 24.1 %, respectively. On univariate analysis,
extent of surgery (p = 0.0149), use of craniospinal radiation (p = 0.0087), and
MIB1 labeling index (p = 0.0034) were significant predictors of overall survival
while age (≥5 years versus <5 years) was of borderline significance (p = 0.08).
CONCLUSIONS: Median survival of 10 months reflects the aggressive biology of
this rare neoplasm. Maximal safe resection followed by craniospinal irradiation
and systemic chemotherapy with ICE or VAC regimen is a reasonable treatment
strategy in this uncommon malignancy.

DOI: 10.1007/s00701-015-2355-2
PMID: 25646852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
