---
reference_id: "PMID:18618014"
title: Keratinocyte-specific Smad2 ablation results in increased epithelial-mesenchymal transition during skin cancer formation and progression.
authors:
- Hoot KE
- Lighthall J
- Han G
- Lu SL
- Li A
- Ju W
- Kulesz-Martin M
- Bottinger E
- Wang XJ
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1172/JCI33713
keywords:
- Animals
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/etiology, genetics, pathology, secondary"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Disease Progression
- Epithelium/pathology
- "Fluorescent Antibody Technique, Direct"
- Gene Deletion
- Humans
- Keratinocytes/metabolism
- Mesoderm/pathology
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "RNA, Small Interfering/metabolism"
- Retrospective Studies
- "Skin Neoplasms/etiology, genetics, pathology"
- "Smad2 Protein/deficiency, genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Keratinocyte-specific Smad2 ablation results in increased epithelial-mesenchymal transition during skin cancer formation and progression.
**Authors:** Hoot KE, Lighthall J, Han G, Lu SL, Li A, Ju W, Kulesz-Martin M, Bottinger E, Wang XJ
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI33713](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI33713)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2008 Aug;118(8):2722-32. doi: 10.1172/JCI33713.

Keratinocyte-specific Smad2 ablation results in increased epithelial-mesenchymal
transition during skin cancer formation and progression.

Hoot KE(1), Lighthall J, Han G, Lu SL, Li A, Ju W, Kulesz-Martin M, Bottinger E,
Wang XJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, Oregon 97239-2999, USA.

TGF-beta and its signaling mediators, Smad2, -3, and -4, are involved with tumor
suppression and promotion functions. Smad4-/- mouse epidermis develops
spontaneous skin squamous cell carcinomas (SCCs), and Smad3-/- mice are
resistant to carcinogen-induced skin cancer; however, the role of Smad2 in skin
carcinogenesis has not been explored. In the present study, we found that Smad2
and Smad4, but not Smad3, were frequently lost in human SCCs. Mice with
keratinocyte-specific Smad2 deletion exhibited accelerated formation and
malignant progression of chemically induced skin tumors compared with WT mice.
Consistent with the loss of Smad2 in poorly differentiated human SCCs, Smad2-/-
tumors were poorly differentiated and underwent epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) prior to spontaneous Smad4 loss. Reduced E-cadherin and
activation of its transcriptional repressor Snail were also found in Smad2-/-
mouse epidermis and occurred more frequently in Smad2-negative human SCCs than
in Smad2-positive SCCs. Knocking down Snail abrogated Smad2 loss-associated EMT,
suggesting that Snail upregulation is a major mediator of Smad2 loss-associated
EMT. Furthermore, Smad2 loss led to a significant increase in Smad4 binding to
the Snail promoter, and knocking down either Smad3 or Smad4 in keratinocytes
abrogated Smad2 loss-associated Snail overexpression. Our data suggest that
enhanced Smad3/Smad4-mediated Snail transcription contributed to Smad2
loss-associated EMT during skin carcinogenesis.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI33713
PMCID: PMC2447925
PMID: 18618014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
