---
reference_id: "PMID:26298188"
title: Estimation of reproduction number and probable vector density of the first autochthonous dengue outbreak in Japan in the last 70 years.
authors:
- Furuya H
journal: Environ Health Prev Med
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s12199-015-0488-9
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Estimation of reproduction number and probable vector density of the first autochthonous dengue outbreak in Japan in the last 70 years.
**Authors:** Furuya H
**Journal:** Environ Health Prev Med (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12199-015-0488-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12199-015-0488-9)

## Content

1. Environ Health Prev Med. 2015 Nov;20(6):466-71. doi:
10.1007/s12199-015-0488-9.  Epub 2015 Aug 23.

Estimation of reproduction number and probable vector density of the first 
autochthonous dengue outbreak in Japan in the last 70 years.

Furuya H(1).

Author information:
(1)Basic Clinical Science and Public Health, Tokai University School of 
Medicine, 143 Shimokasuya, Isehara-shi, Kanagawa, 259-1193, Japan. 
furuya@is.icc.u-tokai.ac.jp.

OBJECTIVES: The first autochthonous case of dengue fever in Japan since 1945 was 
reported on August 27, 2014. Infection was transmitted by Aedes albopictus 
mosquitoes in Tokyo's Yoyogi Park. A total of 65 cases with no history of 
overseas travel and who may have been infected around the park were reported as 
of September 5, 2014. To quantify infection risk of the local epidemic, the 
reproduction number and vector density per person at the onset of the epidemic 
were estimated.
METHODS: The estimated probability distribution and the number of female 
mosquitoes per person (MPP) were determined from the data of the initial 
epidemic.
RESULTS: The estimated distribution R(0i) for the initial epidemic was fitted to 
a Gamma distribution using location parameter 4.25, scale parameter 0.19, and 
shape parameter 7.76 with median 7.78 and IQR (7.21-8.40). The MPP was fitted to 
a normal distribution with mean 5.71 and standard deviation 0.53.
CONCLUSIONS: Both estimated reproduction number and vector density per person at 
the onset of the epidemic were higher than previously reported values. These 
results indicate the potential for dengue outbreaks in places with elevated 
vector density per person, even in dengue non-endemic countries. To investigate 
the cause of this outbreak, further studies will be needed, including 
assessments of social, behavioral, and environmental factors that may have 
contributed to this epidemic by altering host and vector conditions in the park.

DOI: 10.1007/s12199-015-0488-9
PMCID: PMC4626459
PMID: 26298188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]