---
reference_id: "PMID:36451860"
title: Single-cell atlases link macrophages and CD8(+) T-cell subpopulations to disease progression and immunotherapy response in urothelial carcinoma.
authors:
- Liang Y
- Tan Y
- Guan B
- Guo B
- Xia M
- Li J
- Shi Y
- Yu Z
- Zhang Q
- Liu D
- Yang X
- Hao J
- Gong Y
- Shakeel M
- Zhou L
- Ci W
- Li X
journal: Theranostics
year: '2022'
doi: 10.7150/thno.77281
keywords:
- Humans
- "Carcinoma, Transitional Cell"
- Urinary Bladder Neoplasms/drug therapy
- Immunotherapy
- Immunologic Factors
- CD8-Positive T-Lymphocytes
- Disease Progression
- Macrophages
- "Immune Checkpoint Inhibitors/pharmacology, therapeutic use"
- Immunosuppressive Agents
- Tumor Microenvironment
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Single-cell atlases link macrophages and CD8(+) T-cell subpopulations to disease progression and immunotherapy response in urothelial carcinoma.
**Authors:** Liang Y, Tan Y, Guan B, Guo B, Xia M, Li J, Shi Y, Yu Z, Zhang Q, Liu D, Yang X, Hao J, Gong Y, Shakeel M, Zhou L, Ci W, Li X
**Journal:** Theranostics (2022)
**DOI:** [10.7150/thno.77281](https://doi.org/10.7150/thno.77281)

## Content

1. Theranostics. 2022 Nov 14;12(18):7745-7759. doi: 10.7150/thno.77281.
eCollection  2022.

Single-cell atlases link macrophages and CD8(+) T-cell subpopulations to disease
progression and immunotherapy response in urothelial carcinoma.

Liang Y(1), Tan Y(1)(2), Guan B(3)(4), Guo B(1)(2), Xia M(3)(4), Li J(1)(2), Shi
Y(1), Yu Z(1)(2), Zhang Q(1)(2), Liu D(5), Yang X(5), Hao J(5), Gong Y(3)(4)(6),
Shakeel M(7), Zhou L(3)(4)(6), Ci W(1)(2)(8), Li X(3)(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Genomic and Precision Medicine, Beijing Institute of
Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences and China National Center for
Bioinformation, Beijing 100101, China.
(2)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
(3)Department of Urology, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 100034,
China.
(4)Institute of Urology, Peking University, Beijing 100034, China.
(5)Core Facility for Protein Research, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy
of Science, Beijing 100101, China.
(6)National Urological Cancer Center, Beijing Key Laboratory of Urogenital
Diseases (Male) Molecular Diagnosis and Treatment Center, Beijing, 100034,
China.
(7)Jamil-ur-Rahman Center for Genome Research, Dr. Panjwani Center for Molecular
Medicine and Drug Research, ICCBS, University of Karachi, Karachi, Pakistan.
(8)Institute for Stem Cell and Regeneration, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 100101, China.

Rationale: Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) have revolutionized the
management of locally advanced or metastatic urothelial carcinoma. Strikingly,
compared to urothelial carcinoma of the bladder (UCB), upper tract urothelial
carcinoma (UTUC) has a higher response rate to ICIs. The stratification of
patients most likely to benefit from ICI therapy remains a major clinical
challenge. Methods: In this study, we performed the first single-cell RNA
sequencing (scRNA-seq) study of 13 surgical tissue specimens from 12 patients
with UTUC. The key results were validated by the analysis of two independent
cohorts with bulk RNA-seq data for UCB (n = 404) and UTUC (n = 158) and one
cohort of patients with metastatic urothelial carcinoma (mUC) who were treated
with atezolizumab (n = 348). Results: Using scRNA-seq, we observed a higher
proportion of tumor-infiltrating immune cells in locally advanced UTUC. Similar
prognostically relevant intrinsic basal and luminal-like epithelial subtypes
were found in both UTUC and UCB, although UTUC is predominantly of the luminal
subtype. We also discovered that immunosuppressive macrophages and exhausted
T-cell subpopulations were enriched in the basal subtype and showed enhanced
interactions. Furthermore, we developed a gene expression signature (Macro-C3
score) capturing the immunosuppressive macrophages that better predicts outcomes
than the currently established subtypes. We also developed a computational
method to model immune evasion, and the Macro-C3 score predicted therapeutic
response of mUC treated with first-line anti-PD-L1 inhibitors in patients with
lower basal scores. Conclusions: Overall, the distinct microenvironment and
Macro-C3 score provide an explanation for ICI efficacy in urothelial carcinoma
and reveal new candidate regulators of immune evasion, suggesting potential
therapeutic targets for improving antitumor immunity in the basal subtype.

© The author(s).

DOI: 10.7150/thno.77281
PMCID: PMC9706581
PMID: 36451860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interest exists.
