---
reference_id: "PMID:37994022"
title: A rare case of Swyer syndrome from Pakistan in a young girl with primary amenorrhea and 46XY genotype.
authors:
- Jawed I
- Javed AA
- Johar SA
- Mirza DN
- Abdani AA
- Khan AA
journal: Womens Health (Lond)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1177/17455057231213270
keywords:
- Male
- Female
- Humans
- Young Adult
- Adult
- "Amenorrhea/genetics, complications"
- Pakistan
- "Gonadal Dysgenesis, 46,XY/genetics, complications, diagnosis"
- Genotype
- Ovarian Neoplasms
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A rare case of Swyer syndrome from Pakistan in a young girl with primary amenorrhea and 46XY genotype.
**Authors:** Jawed I, Javed AA, Johar SA, Mirza DN, Abdani AA, Khan AA
**Journal:** Womens Health (Lond) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1177/17455057231213270](https://doi.org/10.1177/17455057231213270)

## Content

1. Womens Health (Lond). 2023 Jan-Dec;19:17455057231213270. doi: 
10.1177/17455057231213270.

A rare case of Swyer syndrome from Pakistan in a young girl with primary 
amenorrhea and 46XY genotype.

Jawed I(1), Javed AA(2), Johar SA(1), Mirza DN(3), Abdani AA(4), Khan AA(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Dow University of Health Sciences, Karachi, 
Pakistan.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Rawalpindi Medical College, Islamabad, 
Pakistan.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Ziauddin University, Karachi, Pakistan.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Karachi Institute of Medical Sciences, 
Karachi, Pakistan.
(5)Department of Medicine and Allied Specialties, Hayatabad Medical Complex, 
Peshawar, Pakistan.

Swyer syndrome is a condition where individuals with a 46XY karyotype, typically 
associated with males, display complete gonadal dysgenesis and lack testicular 
differentiation. This results from a mutation in the SRY gene, which is 
essential for testis development. As a consequence, affected individuals who 
appear phenotypically female have male chromosomes but do not develop functional 
testes. As a result, there is an absence of testosterone that leads to lack of 
masculinization and the presence of female genitalia. This article describes a 
20-year-old female from Pakistan who exhibited primary amenorrhea. On 
examination, she possessed a typical female physique but lacked breast growth 
and axillary hair. She had scant pubic hair with female-type external genitalia. 
The pelvic imaging showed a underdeveloped uterus, along with small ovaries and 
fallopian tubes. Her karyotype came out to be 46XY. The examination and 
radiological results indicated Swyer syndrome. During laparoscopy, the patient's 
uterus was found to be infantile, while the fallopian tubes were healthy. Streak 
gonads were also present, and due to the risk of gonadoblastoma, they were 
surgically removed. Hormone replacement therapy was started to induce pubertal 
development and optimize bone mineral accumulation.

DOI: 10.1177/17455057231213270
PMCID: PMC10666715
PMID: 37994022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.