---
reference_id: "PMID:11850821"
title: Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) activates Stat3 and protects hematopoietic cells from cell death.
authors:
- Zamo A
- Chiarle R
- Piva R
- Howes J
- Fan Y
- Chilosi M
- Levy DE
- Inghirami G
journal: Oncogene
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1205152
keywords:
- Anaplastic Lymphoma Kinase
- Animals
- Apoptosis
- Cell Line
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/immunology, metabolism"
- "Hematopoietic Stem Cells/enzymology, metabolism"
- Humans
- Immunohistochemistry
- Janus Kinase 3
- "Lymphoma, Large-Cell, Anaplastic/enzymology, metabolism, pathology"
- Phosphorylation
- "Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/analysis, immunology, metabolism, physiology"
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-bcl-2/biosynthesis
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins pp60(c-src)/physiology
- Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases
- STAT3 Transcription Factor
- "Trans-Activators/immunology, metabolism"
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured"
- Up-Regulation
- bcl-X Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) activates Stat3 and protects hematopoietic cells from cell death.
**Authors:** Zamo A, Chiarle R, Piva R, Howes J, Fan Y, Chilosi M, Levy DE, Inghirami G
**Journal:** Oncogene (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1038/sj.onc.1205152](https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.onc.1205152)

## Content

1. Oncogene. 2002 Feb 7;21(7):1038-47. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1205152.

Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) activates Stat3 and protects hematopoietic
cells from cell death.

Zamo A(1), Chiarle R, Piva R, Howes J, Fan Y, Chilosi M, Levy DE, Inghirami G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Kaplan Comprehensive Cancer Center, New York
University School of Medicine, 550 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

The anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene is characteristically translocated in
Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphomas (ALCL) and the juxtaposition of the ALK gene to
multiple partners results in its constitutive protein tyrosine kinase activity.
We show here that expression of activated ALK induces the constitutive
phosphorylation of Stat3 in transfected cells as well as in primary human ALCLs.
Furthermore, immunohistochemical studies demonstrate that among distinct human B
and T cell lymphomas, activation of Stat3 nuclear translocation is uniquely
associated with ALK expression. NPM-ALK also binds and activates Jak3; however,
Jak3 is not required for Stat3 activation or for cell transformation in vitro.
Moreover, src family kinases are not necessary for NPM-ALK-mediated Stat3
activation or transformation, suggesting that Stat3 may be phosphorylated
directly by ALK. To evaluate relevant targets of ALK-activated Stat3, we
investigated the regulation of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-x(L) and its role
in cell survival in NPM-ALK positive cells. NPM-ALK expression caused enhanced
Bcl-x(L) transcription, largely mediated by Stat3. Increased expression of
Bcl-x(L) provided sufficient anti-apoptotic signals to protect cells from
treatment with specific inhibitors of the Jaks/Stat pathway or the Brc-Abl
kinase. These studies support a pathogenic mechanism whereby stimulation of
anti-apoptotic signals through activation of Stat3 contributes to the successful
outgrowth of ALK positive tumor cells.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.onc.1205152
PMID: 11850821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
