---
reference_id: "PMID:18166449"
title: "Hepatoblastoma with a low serum alpha-fetoprotein level at diagnosis: the SIOPEL group experience."
authors:
- De Ioris M
- Brugieres L
- Zimmermann A
- Keeling J
- Brock P
- Maibach R
- Pritchard J
- Shafford L
- Zsiros J
- Czaudzerna P
- Perilongo G
journal: Eur J Cancer
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2007.11.022
keywords:
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/therapeutic use
- Combined Modality Therapy
- Disease-Free Survival
- Female
- "Hepatoblastoma/blood, pathology, therapy"
- Humans
- Infant
- "Infant, Newborn"
- "Liver Neoplasms/blood, pathology, therapy"
- Male
- Treatment Outcome
- alpha-Fetoproteins/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatoblastoma with a low serum alpha-fetoprotein level at diagnosis: the SIOPEL group experience.
**Authors:** De Ioris M, Brugieres L, Zimmermann A, Keeling J, Brock P, Maibach R, Pritchard J, Shafford L, Zsiros J, Czaudzerna P, Perilongo G
**Journal:** Eur J Cancer (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejca.2007.11.022](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejca.2007.11.022)

## Content

1. Eur J Cancer. 2008 Mar;44(4):545-50. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2007.11.022. Epub
2007  Dec 31.

Hepatoblastoma with a low serum alpha-fetoprotein level at diagnosis: the SIOPEL 
group experience.

De Ioris M(1), Brugieres L, Zimmermann A, Keeling J, Brock P, Maibach R, 
Pritchard J, Shafford L, Zsiros J, Czaudzerna P, Perilongo G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Oncology, Institut Gustave Roussy, 39, Rue Camille 
Desmoulins, 94805 Villejuif, France.

AIM OF THE STUDY: To investigate the characteristics of patients with 
hepatoblastoma and low serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) at diagnosis.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Inclusion of all 21 patients accrued onto SIOPEL trials, 
whose serum AFP was <100ng/ml at diagnosis. Slides of all 15 patients with 
available histological material were centrally reviewed.
RESULTS: Median age: 10 months. Disease extension at diagnosis: PRETEXT group: 
II (3 patients), III (10 patients) and IV (8 patients). Extra-hepatic extension: 
8 patients. Multifocal tumour: 8 patients. Histology at review: wholly 
epithelial subtype: 11/15 patients including nine with a small-cell 
undifferentiated histology.
OUTCOME: only 9 patients achieved a partial response and 16 died. Median 
survival: 4.4 months. Two-year overall survival: 24% (confidence interval 
10-45%).
CONCLUSION: This study clearly identifies patients with hepatoblastoma and low 
serum AFP at diagnosis as a high-risk subgroup with extensive disease at 
diagnosis, poor response to chemotherapy and a poor outcome.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejca.2007.11.022
PMID: 18166449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]