---
reference_id: "PMID:26612104"
title: Cardiac and Non-Cardiac Abnormalities in Heterotaxy Syndrome.
authors:
- Mishra S
journal: Indian J Pediatr
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s12098-015-1925-x
keywords:
- "Congenital Abnormalities/classification, diagnostic imaging, physiopathology"
- Disease Management
- Early Diagnosis
- Hemodynamics
- "Heterotaxy Syndrome/diagnosis, physiopathology, therapy"
- Humans
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac and Non-Cardiac Abnormalities in Heterotaxy Syndrome.
**Authors:** Mishra S
**Journal:** Indian J Pediatr (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12098-015-1925-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12098-015-1925-x)

## Content

1. Indian J Pediatr. 2015 Dec;82(12):1135-46. doi: 10.1007/s12098-015-1925-x.
Epub  2015 Nov 26.

Cardiac and Non-Cardiac Abnormalities in Heterotaxy Syndrome.

Mishra S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, JAYPEE Hospital, Sector 128, Noida, Uttar
Pradesh, India. smitamishra4321@gmail.com.

Thoraco-abdominal viscera have unique morphological asymmetry, unlike the body's
external organs. Heterotaxy syndrome is a disorder in which there is a loss of
normal left to right asymmetry of thoraco-abdominal viscera and their naturally
proscribed spatial relationship. It has multiple anatomical alterations,
culminating into physiological and hemodynamic consequences. It is divided into
two groups on the basis of morphology of the two atrial appendages. These
subgroups are - 1) Isomerism of right atrial appendage (asplenia syndrome); 2)
Isomerism of left atrial appendage (polysplenia syndrome); Patients from group
I, usually have severe cardiac malformations and present early. They may have
duct dependent lesions and eventually may undergo Fontan surgery. However,
extracardiac anomalies are more common in group II. All the patients must be
evaluated in detail to rule out anomalies like gut-malrotation. Patients must be
provided with special care for their susceptibility to infection due to absence
of spleen or presence of splenic malfunction. Majority of these patients may
have genetic link and may present in families. Hence, genetic evaluation is
necessary before assuming long term outcome.

DOI: 10.1007/s12098-015-1925-x
PMID: 26612104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
