---
reference_id: "PMID:20964584"
title: "Endocrine disorders: causes of hyponatremia not to neglect."
authors:
- Liamis G
- Milionis HJ
- Elisaf M
journal: Ann Med
year: '2011'
doi: 10.3109/07853890.2010.530680
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endocrine disorders: causes of hyponatremia not to neglect.
**Authors:** Liamis G, Milionis HJ, Elisaf M
**Journal:** Ann Med (2011)
**DOI:** [10.3109/07853890.2010.530680](https://doi.org/10.3109/07853890.2010.530680)

## Content

1. Ann Med. 2011 May;43(3):179-87. doi: 10.3109/07853890.2010.530680. Epub 2010
Oct  22.

Endocrine disorders: causes of hyponatremia not to neglect.

Liamis G(1), Milionis HJ, Elisaf M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Ioannina, 
Ioannina, Greece.

Hyponatremia is a common electrolyte abnormality with the potential for 
significant morbidity and mortality. Endocrine disorders, including adrenal 
deficiency and hypothyroidism, are uncommon causes of hyponatremia. Primary 
adrenal insufficiency (i.e. Addison's disease) may well be recognized by clear 
hall-marks of the disease, such as pigmentation, salt craving, hypotension, and 
concomitant hyperkalemia. Addison's disease is an important diagnosis not to be 
missed since the consequences can be grave. On the other hand, hypothyroidism 
and secondary adrenocortical insufficiency originating from diseases of the 
hypothalamus and/or pituitary (hypopituitarism) require a high index of 
suspicion, because the clinical signs can be quite subtle. This review focuses 
on clinical and pathophysiological aspects of hyponatremia due to endocrine 
disorders.

DOI: 10.3109/07853890.2010.530680
PMID: 20964584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]