---
reference_id: PMID:36580747
title: Investigating the possible mechanisms of autonomic dysfunction post-COVID-19.
authors:
- Jammoul M
- Naddour J
- Madi A
- Reslan MA
- Hatoum F
- Zeineddine J
- Abou-Kheir W
- Lawand N
journal: Auton Neurosci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.autneu.2022.103071
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Investigating the possible mechanisms of autonomic dysfunction post-COVID-19.
**Authors:** Jammoul M, Naddour J, Madi A, Reslan MA, Hatoum F, Zeineddine J, Abou-Kheir W, Lawand N
**Journal:** Auton Neurosci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autneu.2022.103071](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autneu.2022.103071)

## Content

1. Auton Neurosci. 2023 Mar;245:103071. doi: 10.1016/j.autneu.2022.103071. Epub 
2022 Dec 24.

Investigating the possible mechanisms of autonomic dysfunction post-COVID-19.

Jammoul M(1), Naddour J(1), Madi A(2), Reslan MA(3), Hatoum F(4), Zeineddine 
J(4), Abou-Kheir W(1), Lawand N(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, Cell Biology and Physiological Sciences, Faculty of 
Medicine, American University of Beirut, Lebanon.
(2)Department of Biomedicine, Neuroscience and Advanced Diagnostics (BIND), 
University of Palermo, 90127 Palermo, Italy.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, 
American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon.
(4)Faculty of Medicine, American University of Beirut, Lebanon.
(5)Department of Anatomy, Cell Biology and Physiological Sciences, Faculty of 
Medicine, American University of Beirut, Lebanon; Department of Neurology, 
Faculty of Medicine, American University of Beirut, Lebanon. Electronic address: 
Alchaer@sbcglobal.net.

Patients with long COVID suffer from many neurological manifestations that 
persist for 3 months following infection by SARS-CoV-2. Autonomic dysfunction 
(AD) or dysautonomia is one complication of long COVID that causes patients to 
experience fatigue, dizziness, syncope, dyspnea, orthostatic intolerance, 
nausea, vomiting, and heart palpitations. The pathophysiology behind AD onset 
post-COVID is largely unknown. As such, this review aims to highlight the 
potential mechanisms by which AD occurs in patients with long COVID. The first 
proposed mechanism includes the direct invasion of the hypothalamus or the 
medulla by SARS-CoV-2. Entry to these autonomic centers may occur through the 
neuronal or hematogenous routes. However, evidence so far indicates that 
neurological manifestations such as AD are caused indirectly. Another mechanism 
is autoimmunity whereby autoantibodies against different receptors and 
glycoproteins expressed on cellular membranes are produced. Additionally, 
persistent inflammation and hypoxia can work separately or together to promote 
sympathetic overactivation in a bidirectional interaction. Renin-angiotensin 
system imbalance can also drive AD in long COVID through the downregulation of 
relevant receptors and formation of autoantibodies. Understanding the 
pathophysiology of AD post-COVID-19 may help provide early diagnosis and better 
therapy for patients.

Copyright © 2022. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autneu.2022.103071
PMCID: PMC9789535
PMID: 36580747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None.