---
reference_id: "PMID:39729982"
title: "Adenomatous Polyposis Coli Gene Mutations, Risk Factors, and Long-term Outcomes Associated With Desmoid Tumors in Patients With Familial Adenomatous Polyposis After Colectomy in Japan."
authors:
- Kojima T
- Kurachi K
- Iwaizumi M
- Tatsuta K
- Sugiyama K
- Akai T
- Sakata M
- Morita Y
- Kikuchi H
- Hiramatsu Y
- Takeuchi H
journal: J Clin Gastroenterol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1097/MCG.0000000000002071
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Adenomatous Polyposis Coli Gene Mutations, Risk Factors, and Long-term Outcomes Associated With Desmoid Tumors in Patients With Familial Adenomatous Polyposis After Colectomy in Japan.
**Authors:** Kojima T, Kurachi K, Iwaizumi M, Tatsuta K, Sugiyama K, Akai T, Sakata M, Morita Y, Kikuchi H, Hiramatsu Y, Takeuchi H
**Journal:** J Clin Gastroenterol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1097/MCG.0000000000002071](https://doi.org/10.1097/MCG.0000000000002071)

## Content

1. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2025 Aug 1;59(7):583-591. doi: 
10.1097/MCG.0000000000002071.

Adenomatous Polyposis Coli Gene Mutations, Risk Factors, and Long-term Outcomes 
Associated With Desmoid Tumors in Patients With Familial Adenomatous Polyposis 
After Colectomy in Japan.

Kojima T(1), Kurachi K(1), Iwaizumi M(2), Tatsuta K(1), Sugiyama K(1), Akai 
T(1), Sakata M(1), Morita Y(1)(3), Kikuchi H(1), Hiramatsu Y(1)(4), Takeuchi 
H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine.
(3)Division of Surgical Care, Morimachi.
(4)Department of Perioperative Functioning Care and Support, Hamamatsu 
University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, Japan.

GOALS: To clarify the characteristics of desmoid tumors in Japanese patients 
with familial adenomatous polyposis after colectomy.
BACKGROUND: Few comprehensive reports have been published on desmoid tumors in 
Asian patients with familial adenomatous polyposis.
STUDY: This retrospective study included the data of 81 patients with familial 
adenomatous polyposis who underwent surgery between 1978 and 2021. The 
adenomatous polyposis coli gene mutation sites, risk factors, and long-term 
outcomes associated with desmoid tumors in Japanese patients with familial 
adenomatous polyposis after colectomy were analyzed.
RESULTS: No association was observed between the gene mutation sites and desmoid 
tumor development in 40 patients who underwent genetic analyses. The rate of 
desmoid tumor development was 30.3% in 66 patients. Multivariate analysis 
revealed that age below 32 years at colectomy (hazard ratio = 5.491, 95% 
confidence interval 1.820-16.50, P < 0.001) and familial adenomatous 
polyposis-related malignancies other than colorectal cancer (hazard ratio = 
5.574, 95% confidence interval 2.075-14.98, P < 0.001) were independent risk 
factors for desmoid tumor development following colectomy. The 10-year 
disease-specific survival and overall survival rates for desmoid tumors were 
92.9% and 76.9%, respectively. The median surveillance duration was 90 months.
CONCLUSIONS: Adenomatous polyposis coli gene mutation sites alone were not 
considered a factor for delaying or avoiding colectomy to prevent desmoid tumors 
in Japanese patients with familial adenomatous polyposis. The timing of 
colectomy and careful surveillance should be considered for managing patients at 
a high risk of developing desmoid tumors. Desmoid tumors in patients with 
familial adenomatous polyposis did not significantly impact prognosis, and 
pharmacological treatments are important for disease control.

Copyright © 2024 The Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

DOI: 10.1097/MCG.0000000000002071
PMCID: PMC12225722
PMID: 39729982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]