---
reference_id: "PMID:22706301"
title: Exome sequencing identifies GATA1 mutations resulting in Diamond-Blackfan anemia.
authors:
- Sankaran VG
- Ghazvinian R
- Do R
- Thiru P
- Vergilio JA
- Beggs AH
- Sieff CA
- Orkin SH
- Nathan DG
- Lander ES
- Gazda HT
journal: J Clin Invest
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1172/JCI63597
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Exome sequencing identifies GATA1 mutations resulting in Diamond-Blackfan anemia.
**Authors:** Sankaran VG, Ghazvinian R, Do R, Thiru P, Vergilio JA, Beggs AH, Sieff CA, Orkin SH, Nathan DG, Lander ES, Gazda HT
**Journal:** J Clin Invest (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1172/JCI63597](https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI63597)

## Content

1. J Clin Invest. 2012 Jul;122(7):2439-43. doi: 10.1172/JCI63597. Epub 2012 Jun
18.

Exome sequencing identifies GATA1 mutations resulting in Diamond-Blackfan 
anemia.

Sankaran VG(1), Ghazvinian R, Do R, Thiru P, Vergilio JA, Beggs AH, Sieff CA, 
Orkin SH, Nathan DG, Lander ES, Gazda HT.

Author information:
(1)Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2012 Jul;122(7):2346-9. doi: 10.1172/JCI63989.

Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) is a hypoplastic anemia characterized by impaired 
production of red blood cells, with approximately half of all cases attributed 
to ribosomal protein gene mutations. We performed exome sequencing on two 
siblings who had no known pathogenic mutations for DBA and identified a mutation 
in the gene encoding the hematopoietic transcription factor GATA1. This 
mutation, which occurred at a splice site of the GATA1 gene, impaired production 
of the full-length form of the protein. We further identified an additional 
patient carrying a distinct mutation at the same splice site of the GATA1 gene. 
These findings provide insight into the pathogenesis of DBA, showing that the 
reduction in erythropoiesis associated with the disease can arise from causes 
other than defects in ribosomal protein genes. These results also illustrate the 
multifactorial role of GATA1 in human hematopoiesis.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI63597
PMCID: PMC3386831
PMID: 22706301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]