---
reference_id: "PMID:30783751"
title: Repair of type IV laryngotracheoesophageal cleft (LTEC) on ECMO.
authors:
- Kawahara I
- Maeda K
- Samejima Y
- Kajihara K
- Uemura K
- Nomura K
- Isono K
- Morita K
- Fukuzawa H
- Nakao M
- Yokoi A
journal: Pediatr Surg Int
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1007/s00383-019-04455-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Repair of type IV laryngotracheoesophageal cleft (LTEC) on ECMO.
**Authors:** Kawahara I, Maeda K, Samejima Y, Kajihara K, Uemura K, Nomura K, Isono K, Morita K, Fukuzawa H, Nakao M, Yokoi A
**Journal:** Pediatr Surg Int (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00383-019-04455-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00383-019-04455-8)

## Content

1. Pediatr Surg Int. 2019 May;35(5):565-568. doi: 10.1007/s00383-019-04455-8.
Epub  2019 Feb 19.

Repair of type IV laryngotracheoesophageal cleft (LTEC) on ECMO.

Kawahara I(1), Maeda K(2), Samejima Y(1), Kajihara K(1), Uemura K(1), Nomura 
K(1), Isono K(1), Morita K(1), Fukuzawa H(1), Nakao M(1), Yokoi A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Kobe Children's Hospital, 1-6-7 Minatojima 
Minami, Chuou-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0047, Japan.
(2)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Kobe Children's Hospital, 1-6-7 Minatojima 
Minami, Chuou-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0047, Japan. ko.maeda@mac.com.

PURPOSE: A type IV laryngotracheoesophageal cleft (LTEC) is a very rare 
congenital malformation. Type IV LTEC that extends to the carina have poor 
prognosis and are difficult to manage. We present our experience with surgical 
repair in such a case using extracorporeal membranous oxygenation (ECMO).
METHODS: A male infant, who was diagnosed with Goldenhar syndrome, showed severe 
dyspnea and dysphagia. Laryngoscopy indicated the presence of LTEC. The patient 
was transferred to our institute for radical operation 26 days after birth. 
Prior to surgery, a balloon catheter was inserted in the cardiac region of 
stomach through the lower esophagus to block air leakage, to maintain positive 
pressure ventilation. We also performed observations with a rigid bronchoscope 
to assess extent of the cleft, and diagnosed the patient with type IV LTEC. 
After bronchoscopy, we could intubate the tracheal tube just above the carina. 
Under ECMO, repair of the cleft was performed by an anterior approach via median 
sternotomy.
RESULTS: The patient was intubated via nasotracheal tube and paralysis was 
maintained for 2 weeks, using a muscle relaxant for the first 3 days. Two weeks 
after surgery, rigid bronchoscopy showed that the repair had been completed, and 
the tracheal tube was successfully extubated without tracheotomy.
CONCLUSIONS: Although insertion of a balloon catheter is a very simple method, 
it can separate the respiratory and digestive tracts. This method allowed for 
positive pressure ventilation and prevented displacement of the endotracheal 
tube until ECMO was established. As a result, we safely performed the operation 
and the post-operative course was excellent.

DOI: 10.1007/s00383-019-04455-8
PMID: 30783751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]