---
reference_id: "PMID:32582191"
title: "Infectious Triggers in Periodontitis and the Gut in Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA): A Complex Story About Association and Causality."
authors:
- Möller B
- Kollert F
- Sculean A
- Villiger PM
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2020'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01108
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Infectious Triggers in Periodontitis and the Gut in Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA): A Complex Story About Association and Causality.
**Authors:** Möller B, Kollert F, Sculean A, Villiger PM
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2020)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2020.01108](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2020.01108)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2020 Jun 3;11:1108. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01108. eCollection 
2020.

Infectious Triggers in Periodontitis and the Gut in Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA): A 
Complex Story About Association and Causality.

Möller B(1), Kollert F(1), Sculean A(2), Villiger PM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department for Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergology, 
Inselspital-University Hospital of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Periodontology, School of Dental Medicine, University of Bern, 
Bern, Switzerland.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic immune mediated inflammatory disease of 
unknown origin, which is predominantly affecting the joints. Antibodies against 
citrullinated peptides are a rather specific immunological hallmark of this 
heterogeneous entity. Furthermore, certain sequences of the third hypervariable 
region of human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DR class II major histocompatibility 
(MHC) molecules, the so called "shared epitope" sequences, appear to promote 
autoantibody positive types of RA. However, MHC-II molecule and other genetic 
associations with RA could not be linked to immune responses against specific 
citrullinated peptides, nor do genetic factors fully explain the origin of RA. 
Consequently, non-genetic factors must play an important role in the complex 
interaction of endogenous and exogenous disease factors. Tobacco smoking was the 
first environmental factor that was associated with onset and severity of RA. 
Notably, smoking is also an established risk factor for oral diseases. 
Furthermore, smoking is associated with extra-articular RA manifestations such 
as interstitial lung disease in anatomical proximity to the airway mucosa, but 
also with subcutaneous rheumatoid nodules. In the mouth, Porphyromonas 
gingivalis is a periodontal pathogen with unique citrullinating capacity of 
foreign microbial antigens as well as candidate RA autoantigens. Although the 
original hypothesis that this single pathogen is causative for RA remained 
unproven, epidemiological as well as experimental evidence linking periodontitis 
(PD) with RA is rapidly accumulating. Other periopathogens such as 
Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans and Prevotella intermedia were also 
proposed to play a specific immunodominant role in context of RA. However, 
demonstration of T cell reactivity against citrullinated, MHC-II presented 
autoantigens from RA synovium coinciding with immunity against Prevotella copri 
(Pc.), a gut microbe attracted attention to another mucosal site, the intestine. 
Pc. was accumulated in the feces of clinically healthy subjects with citrulline 
directed immune responses and was correlated with RA onset. In conclusion, we 
retrieved more than one line of evidence for mucosal sites and different 
microbial taxa to be potentially involved in the development of RA. This review 
gives an overview of infectious agents and mucosal pathologies, and discusses 
the current evidence for causality between different exogenous or mucosal 
factors and systemic inflammation in RA.

Copyright © 2020 Möller, Kollert, Sculean and Villiger.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2020.01108
PMCID: PMC7283532
PMID: 32582191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]