---
reference_id: "PMID:33341814"
title: Hyperinflammation and Immune Response Generation in COVID-19.
authors:
- Mishra KP
- Singh AK
- Singh SB
journal: Neuroimmunomodulation
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1159/000513198
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hyperinflammation and Immune Response Generation in COVID-19.
**Authors:** Mishra KP, Singh AK, Singh SB
**Journal:** Neuroimmunomodulation (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1159/000513198](https://doi.org/10.1159/000513198)

## Content

1. Neuroimmunomodulation. 2020;27(2):80-86. doi: 10.1159/000513198. Epub 2020 Dec
 18.

Hyperinflammation and Immune Response Generation in COVID-19.

Mishra KP(1), Singh AK(1), Singh SB(2).

Author information:
(1)Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO)-HQ, New Delhi, India.
(2)National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER), 
Hyderabad, India, sbsdrdo@gmail.com.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) that causes 
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has affected millions of people 
worldwide. The pathophysiology of this virus is not very clearly known, thus, 
enormous efforts are being made by the scientific community to delineate its 
evading mechanism. In this review, we have summarized the hyperinflammation and 
humoral and cell-mediated immune response generated in human body after 
infection with the SARS-CoV-2 virus. The inflammatory response generated after 
infection by increased proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines, and complement 
proteins activation may likely contribute to disease severity. We also discussed 
the other factors that may affect immunity and could be important comorbidities 
in the disease severity and outcome.

© 2020 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000513198
PMCID: PMC7801965
PMID: 33341814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
declare.