---
reference_id: "PMID:35321042"
title: "Congenital Hypertrophy of the Retinal Pigment Epithelium (CHRPE) as a Screening Marker for Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP): Systematic Literature Review and Screening Recommendations."
authors:
- Bonnet LA
- Conway RM
- Lim LA
journal: Clin Ophthalmol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.2147/OPTH.S354761
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Congenital Hypertrophy of the Retinal Pigment Epithelium (CHRPE) as a Screening Marker for Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP): Systematic Literature Review and Screening Recommendations.
**Authors:** Bonnet LA, Conway RM, Lim LA
**Journal:** Clin Ophthalmol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.2147/OPTH.S354761](https://doi.org/10.2147/OPTH.S354761)

## Content

1. Clin Ophthalmol. 2022 Mar 15;16:765-774. doi: 10.2147/OPTH.S354761.
eCollection  2022.

Congenital Hypertrophy of the Retinal Pigment Epithelium (CHRPE) as a Screening 
Marker for Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP): Systematic Literature Review 
and Screening Recommendations.

Bonnet LA(1), Conway RM(1), Lim LA(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

PURPOSE: Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) has an almost 100% colorectal 
cancer risk warranting early detection in gene carriers. This study presents 
congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE) as a highly 
specific phenotypical marker for FAP that can be used in screening at-risk 
individuals. Screening recommendations including morphological subclassification 
were formulated with supporting literature.
METHODS: A systematic literature review with a comprehensive search strategy was 
conducted using online databases. Manual searches of bibliographies and 
reference lists were also performed. Studies meeting inclusion criteria were 
graded with respect to their hierarchy of evidence and strength of 
recommendations according to the National Health and Medical Research Council 
(NHMRC) guidelines of Australia.
RESULTS: Almost 4500 participants were analysed across 28 included studies. The 
mean specificity of CHRPE as a phenotypical screening marker of FAP was 89% 
(standard deviation (SD); 14) with a mean sensitivity of 79% (SD; 8). The mean 
prevalence of CHRPE amongst FAP participants; at-risk participants were found to 
be 76% (SD; 24) and 37% (SD; 21) respectively. Bilateralism and multiple lesion 
number ≥3 are features highly specific for FAP.
CONCLUSION: CHRPE was found to be a non-invasive, rapid, early phenotypical 
screening marker of FAP. Clinical recognition further allows increased gene 
analysis efficiency. The absence of CHRPE alone cannot exclude FAP. Our 
screening recommendations provide guidance to clinicians on evidence based CHRPE 
assessment. We would advocate inclusion of ocular examinations as part of a 
three-pronged approach, along with endoscopy and genetic testing, for efficient, 
timely FAP assessment in at-risk individuals.

© 2022 Bonnet et al.

DOI: 10.2147/OPTH.S354761
PMCID: PMC8934868
PMID: 35321042

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no conflicts of interest in 
this work.