---
reference_id: "PMID:25981758"
title: Lumacaftor-Ivacaftor in Patients with Cystic Fibrosis Homozygous for Phe508del CFTR.
authors:
- Wainwright CE
- Elborn JS
- Ramsey BW
- Marigowda G
- Huang X
- Cipolli M
- Colombo C
- Davies JC
- De Boeck K
- Flume PA
- Konstan MW
- McColley SA
- McCoy K
- McKone EF
- Munck A
- Ratjen F
- Rowe SM
- Waltz D
- Boyle MP
- TRAFFIC Study Group
- TRANSPORT Study Group
journal: N Engl J Med
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1409547
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lumacaftor-Ivacaftor in Patients with Cystic Fibrosis Homozygous for Phe508del CFTR.
**Authors:** Wainwright CE, Elborn JS, Ramsey BW, Marigowda G, Huang X, Cipolli M, Colombo C, Davies JC, De Boeck K, Flume PA, Konstan MW, McColley SA, McCoy K, McKone EF, Munck A, Ratjen F, Rowe SM, Waltz D, Boyle MP, TRAFFIC Study Group, TRANSPORT Study Group
**Journal:** N Engl J Med (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1056/NEJMoa1409547](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1409547)

## Content

1. N Engl J Med. 2015 Jul 16;373(3):220-31. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1409547. Epub 2015
 May 17.

Lumacaftor-Ivacaftor in Patients with Cystic Fibrosis Homozygous for Phe508del 
CFTR.

Wainwright CE(1), Elborn JS, Ramsey BW, Marigowda G, Huang X, Cipolli M, Colombo 
C, Davies JC, De Boeck K, Flume PA, Konstan MW, McColley SA, McCoy K, McKone EF, 
Munck A, Ratjen F, Rowe SM, Waltz D, Boyle MP; TRAFFIC Study Group; TRANSPORT 
Study Group.

Collaborators: Gibson R, Rowe S, Boyle M, Clancy J, Donaldson S, Moss R, Walker 
S, Powers M, Escobar H, Berdella M, Froh D, Vender R, Fracchia M, McColley S, 
Moffett K, Nasr S, Taylor-Cousar J, Rogers J, Shay G, Brown P, Dorkin H, Zanni 
R, Fink R, Omlor G, Meyer K, Naureckas E, Worth H, Roberts D, Whittaker-LeClair 
L, Dozor A, Rao A, Rolfe M, Amaro-Galvez R, Berlinski A, Calimano F, Chin T, 
Conrad D, Daines C, Epstein C, Green D, Ischander M, Keens T, Lascano J, 
Martinez J, McWilliams B, Sauder A, Stone A, Sudhakar R, Weatherly M, Ludwig B, 
Ratjen F, Tullis E, Chilvers M, Michael R, Aaron S, Hebestreit H, Zimmermann T, 
Drevinek P, Staab D, Bittenglova R, Homola L, Riethmueller J, van Koningsbrugge 
S, Wirtz H, Doney D, Carroll M, Nash E, Withers N, Smyth A, Rault G, Hubert D, 
Sermet-Gaudelus I, Bakker M, Reix P, Durieu I, Weiss L, Heijerman H, Merkus P, 
Weersink E, McNally P, McKone E, Greally P, Selvadurai H, Greville H, Middleton 
P, Wark P, Braggion C, Cipolli M, Colombo C, Gagliardini R, Lucidi V, Minicucci 
L, Quattrucci S, Hjelte L, Hollsing A, Gilljam M, Ahrens R, McCoy K, Aitken M, 
Konstan M, Pilewski J, Billings J, Rubenstein R, Faro A, Anbar R, Frederick C, 
Liou T, Colombo J, Montgomery G, Anstead M, Millard S, Miller A, Barto T, Biller 
J, Vauthy P, Zuckerman J, Rosen J, Schultz K, DiMango E, Fiel S, Flume P, Ren C, 
Royall J, Salathe M, Schmidt H, Lapin C, Stokes D, Dovey M, O'Sullivan B, 
Accurso F, Cannon C, McCarthy M, Kissner D, McNamara J, Heidarian-Raissy H, Egan 
M, Hardy K, Hoag J, Majure JM, Mermis J, Morrissey B, Reyes De La Rocha S, 
Scanlin T, Schaeffer D, Sepulveda P, Wallace J, Wooldridge J, Wilcox P, Lands L, 
Rabin H, Brown N, Tuemmler B, Griese M, Mainz J, Ballmann M, Gleiber W, Pressler 
T, Huber R, Naehrlich L, Fischer R, Davies J, Doe S, Hilliard T, Pecham D, 
Walshaw M, Lee T, Munck A, De Boeck K, Chiron R, Bobolie H, De Baets F, Knoop C, 
Bremont F, Fayon M, Reynaud-Gaubert M, Wizla N, Gartner S, Jover AS, Roldan Jde 
G, Serisier D, Wainwright C, Bell S, Thompson P, Clements B, Ellemunter H, 
Feizelmeier H.

Author information:
(1)From Queensland Children's Medical Research Institute, Royal Children's 
Hospital, Lady Cilento Children's Hospital, and University of Queensland School 
of Medicine, Brisbane, Australia (C.E.W.); Queens University of Belfast, Belfast 
(J.S.E.), and Royal Brompton and Harefield NHS Foundation Trust and Imperial 
College London, London (J.C.D.) - all in the United Kingdom; Seattle Children's 
Hospital and University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle (B.W.R.); 
Vertex Pharmaceuticals, Boston (G.M., X.H., D.W.); Cystic Fibrosis Center, 
Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Integrata, Verona (M.C.), and Fondazione IRCCS 
Ca' Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, University of Milan, Milan (C.C.) - 
both in Italy; University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium (K.D.B.); 
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston (P.A.F.); Case Western Reserve 
University School of Medicine, Rainbow Babies and Children's Hospital, Cleveland 
(M.W.K.), and the Department of Pediatrics, Pulmonary Division, Nationwide 
Children's Hospital and Ohio State University, Columbus (K.M.) - both in Ohio; 
Stanley Manne Children's Research Institute, Northwestern University Feinberg 
School of Medicine, Chicago (S.A.M.); St. Vincent's University Hospital and 
University College Dublin School of Medicine, Dublin (E.F.M.); Hôpital Robert 
Debré, Paediatric Gastroenterology and Respiratory Department, CF Center, 
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Université Paris 7, Paris (A.M.); 
Division of Respiratory Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Physiology, and 
Experimental Medicine, Hospital for Sick Children, University of Toronto, 
Toronto (F.R.); University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham (S.M.R.); and 
Johns Hopkins Medicine, Baltimore (M.P.B.).

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2015 Jul 16;373(3):274-6. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe1504059.
    Lancet Respir Med. 2015 Jul;3(7):e20. doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(15)00234-9.
    N Engl J Med. 2015 Oct 29;373(18):1783-4. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1510466.
    N Engl J Med. 2015 Oct 29;373(18):1783. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc1510466.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2016 Mar 1;193(5):569-71. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201509-1734RR.
    MMW Fortschr Med. 2015 Nov 5;157(19):34. doi: 10.1007/s15006-015-3723-9.

BACKGROUND: Cystic fibrosis is a life-limiting disease that is caused by 
defective or deficient cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator 
(CFTR) protein activity. Phe508del is the most common CFTR mutation.
METHODS: We conducted two phase 3, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
studies that were designed to assess the effects of lumacaftor (VX-809), a CFTR 
corrector, in combination with ivacaftor (VX-770), a CFTR potentiator, in 
patients 12 years of age or older who had cystic fibrosis and were homozygous 
for the Phe508del CFTR mutation. In both studies, patients were randomly 
assigned to receive either lumacaftor (600 mg once daily or 400 mg every 12 
hours) in combination with ivacaftor (250 mg every 12 hours) or matched placebo 
for 24 weeks. The primary end point was the absolute change from baseline in the 
percentage of predicted forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) at week 24.
RESULTS: A total of 1108 patients underwent randomization and received study 
drug. The mean baseline FEV1 was 61% of the predicted value. In both studies, 
there were significant improvements in the primary end point in both 
lumacaftor-ivacaftor dose groups; the difference between active treatment and 
placebo with respect to the mean absolute improvement in the percentage of 
predicted FEV1 ranged from 2.6 to 4.0 percentage points (P<0.001), which 
corresponded to a mean relative treatment difference of 4.3 to 6.7% (P<0.001). 
Pooled analyses showed that the rate of pulmonary exacerbations was 30 to 39% 
lower in the lumacaftor-ivacaftor groups than in the placebo group; the rate of 
events leading to hospitalization or the use of intravenous antibiotics was 
lower in the lumacaftor-ivacaftor groups as well. The incidence of adverse 
events was generally similar in the lumacaftor-ivacaftor and placebo groups. The 
rate of discontinuation due to an adverse event was 4.2% among patients who 
received lumacaftor-ivacaftor versus 1.6% among those who received placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: These data show that lumacaftor in combination with ivacaftor 
provided a benefit for patients with cystic fibrosis homozygous for the 
Phe508del CFTR mutation. (Funded by Vertex Pharmaceuticals and others; TRAFFIC 
and TRANSPORT ClinicalTrials.gov numbers, NCT01807923 and NCT01807949.).

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1409547
PMCID: PMC4764353
PMID: 25981758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]