---
reference_id: "PMID:37435162"
title: "Can we forecast poor outcome in herpes simplex and varicella zoster encephalitis? A narrative review."
authors:
- Abbuehl LS
- Hofmann E
- Hakim A
- Dietmann A
journal: Front Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1130090
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Can we forecast poor outcome in herpes simplex and varicella zoster encephalitis? A narrative review.
**Authors:** Abbuehl LS, Hofmann E, Hakim A, Dietmann A
**Journal:** Front Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fneur.2023.1130090](https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2023.1130090)

## Content

1. Front Neurol. 2023 Jun 26;14:1130090. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1130090. 
eCollection 2023.

Can we forecast poor outcome in herpes simplex and varicella zoster 
encephalitis? A narrative review.

Abbuehl LS(1), Hofmann E(2), Hakim A(3), Dietmann A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, University of 
Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(2)Department of Infectious Diseases, Inselspital, Bern University Hospital, 
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(3)Institute of Diagnostic and Interventional Neuroradiology, Inselspital, Bern 
University Hospital, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

Herpes simplex virus (HSV) and varicella zoster virus (VZV) are among the most 
commonly diagnosed infectious causes of sporadic encephalitis worldwide. Despite 
treatment, mortality and morbidity rates remain high, especially for HSV 
encephalitis. This review is intended to provide an overview of the existing 
scientific literature on this topic from the perspective of a clinician who is 
confronted with serious decisions about continuation or withdrawal of 
therapeutic interventions. We performed a literature review searching two 
databases and included 55 studies in the review. These studies documented or 
investigated specifically outcome and predictive parameters of outcome of HSV 
and/or VZV encephalitis. Two reviewers independently screened and reviewed 
full-text articles meeting the inclusion criteria. Key data were extracted and 
presented as a narrative summary. Both, HSV and VZV encephalitis have mortality 
rates between 5 and 20% and complete recovery rates range from 14 to 43% for HSV 
and 33 to 49% for VZV encephalitis. Prognostic factors for both VZV and HSV 
encephalitis are older age and comorbidity, as well as severity of disease and 
extent of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) lesions on admission, and delay in 
treatment initiation for HSV encephalitis. Although numerous studies are 
available, the main limiting factors are the inconsistent patient selection and 
case definitions as well as the non-standardised outcome measures, which hampers 
the comparability of the studies. Therefore, larger and standardised 
observational studies applying validated case definitions and outcome measures 
including quality of life assessment are required to provide solid evidence to 
answer the research question.

Copyright © 2023 Abbuehl, Hofmann, Hakim and Dietmann.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2023.1130090
PMCID: PMC10331601
PMID: 37435162

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.