---
reference_id: "PMID:39452676"
title: Overview of the Current Challenges in Pulmonary Coccidioidomycosis.
authors:
- Fayed MA
- Evans TM
- Almasri E
- Bilello KL
- Libke R
- Peterson MW
journal: J Fungi (Basel)
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/jof10100724
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Overview of the Current Challenges in Pulmonary Coccidioidomycosis.
**Authors:** Fayed MA, Evans TM, Almasri E, Bilello KL, Libke R, Peterson MW
**Journal:** J Fungi (Basel) (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/jof10100724](https://doi.org/10.3390/jof10100724)

## Content

1. J Fungi (Basel). 2024 Oct 18;10(10):724. doi: 10.3390/jof10100724.

Overview of the Current Challenges in Pulmonary Coccidioidomycosis.

Fayed MA(1), Evans TM(1), Almasri E(1), Bilello KL(1), Libke R(2), Peterson 
MW(1).

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Critical Care Division, University of California San Francisco, 
Fresno Campus, Fresno, CA 93701, USA.
(2)Infectious Disease Division, University of California San Francisco, Fresno 
Campus, Fresno, CA 93701, USA.

Coccidioidomycosis is a disease caused by soil fungi of the genus Coccidioides, 
divided genetically into Coccidioides immitis (California isolates) and 
Coccidioides posadasii (isolates outside California). Coccidioidomycosis is 
transmitted through the inhalation of fungal spores, arthroconidia, which can 
cause disease in susceptible mammalian hosts, including humans. 
Coccidioidomycosis is endemic to the western part of the United States of 
America, including the central valley of California, Arizona, New Mexico, and 
parts of western Texas. Cases have been reported in other regions in different 
states, and endemic pockets are present in these states. The incidence of 
reported cases of coccidioidomycosis has notably increased since it became 
reportable in 1995. Clinically, the infection ranges from asymptomatic to fatal 
disease due to pneumonia or disseminated states. The recognition of 
coccidioidomycosis can be challenging, as it frequently mimics bacterial 
community-acquired pneumonia. The diagnosis of coccidioidomycosis is frequently 
dependent on serologic testing, the results of which can take several days or 
longer to obtain. Coccidioidomycosis continues to present challenges for 
clinicians, and suspected cases can be easily missed. The challenges of 
coccidioidomycosis disease, from presentation to diagnosis to treatment, remain 
a hurdle for clinicians, and further research is needed to address these 
challenges.

DOI: 10.3390/jof10100724
PMCID: PMC11508864
PMID: 39452676

Conflict of interest statement: The author declares no conflicts of interest.