---
reference_id: "PMID:30844206"
title: Anaplastic Thyroid Cancer.
authors:
- Menon G
- Kashyap S
- Naing PT
- Mathias PM
- Giwa AO
year: '2026'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Anaplastic Thyroid Cancer.
**Authors:** Menon G, Kashyap S, Naing PT, Mathias PM, Giwa AO

## Content

1. Anaplastic Thyroid Cancer.

Menon G, Kashyap S(1), Naing PT(2), Mathias PM, Giwa AO(3).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2026 
Jan–.
2024 Oct 29.

Author information:
(1)Beckley Appalachian Regional Healthcare Hospital
(2)Northwell Health
(3)University of Cincinnati College of Medicine

Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma is a rare, aggressive malignant tumor accounting 
for 2% to 3% of all thyroid gland neoplasms. In contrast to differentiated 
thyroid malignancies such as papillary and follicular thyroid cancers, 
anaplastic thyroid cancer is undifferentiated. Furthermore, anaplastic thyroid 
cancer is highly locally invasive, with a propensity for early lymph node 
positivity and distant metastatic disease. Anaplastic thyroid cancer typically 
presents as a rapidly growing anterior neck mass and may have compressive 
symptoms early in the disease. The diagnosis is typically made by fine needle 
aspiration cytology, although a core needle biopsy is more sensitive and 
specific. All patients with anaplastic thyroid cancer should be assessed for 
systemic disease. While patients with locoregional disease can occasionally be 
cured, the disease is uniformly fatal with distant spread. Treatment can include 
surgery, radiation, chemotherapy, and, more recently, targeted therapy. Recent 
advances in molecular diagnostics have identified several mutations that could 
be targeted in the future.

Copyright © 2026, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 30844206

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Gopal Menon declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Sarang Kashyap 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: Phyu Thin Naing declares no relevant financial relationships with 
ineligible companies. Disclosure: Priyanka Mathias declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Al Giwa declares 
no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies.