---
reference_id: "PMID:31999206"
title: Age of onset as an influencing factor for disease severity in children with familial Mediterranean fever.
authors:
- Tanatar A
- Karadağ ŞG
- Çakan M
- Sönmez HE
- Ayaz NA
journal: Mod Rheumatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1080/14397595.2020.1719594
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Age of onset as an influencing factor for disease severity in children with familial Mediterranean fever.
**Authors:** Tanatar A, Karadağ ŞG, Çakan M, Sönmez HE, Ayaz NA
**Journal:** Mod Rheumatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1080/14397595.2020.1719594](https://doi.org/10.1080/14397595.2020.1719594)

## Content

1. Mod Rheumatol. 2021 Jan;31(1):219-222. doi: 10.1080/14397595.2020.1719594.
Epub  2020 Jan 30.

Age of onset as an influencing factor for disease severity in children with 
familial Mediterranean fever.

Tanatar A(1), Karadağ ŞG(1), Çakan M(1), Sönmez HE(1), Ayaz NA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Rheumatology, Kanuni Sultan Süleyman Research and 
Training Hospital, University of Health Sciences, Istanbul, Turkey.

OBJECTIVES: To define the demographic, clinical and genetic features of familial 
Mediterranean fever (FMF) patients with early disease onset and to compare them 
with late-onset FMF patients.
METHODS: Patients were divided into two groups according to the age of disease 
onset: group 1 includes the patients who had their first attack ≤3 years of age; 
group 2 consisted of patients who had their first attack >3 years of age. 
Furthermore, we compared the proportion of patients fulfilling the three 
diagnostic criteria among two groups.
RESULTS: Of 1687 patients, 761 had first FMF attack at ≤3 years of age while 926 
patients presented with their first manifestation of FMF at >3 years. Delay in 
diagnosis, fever and peritonitis were significantly higher in group 1. Frequency 
of arthritis, erysipelas-like erythema, non-nephrotic proteinuria, incomplete 
attacks, chronic arthritis, arthralgia and mean colchicine dose were 
significantly higher in group 2. Mean Pras score was higher and the presence of 
M694V mutation was more frequent in group 1. The percentage of children 
diagnosed according to Tel-Hashomer and pediatric criteria was significantly 
higher in group 1 than group 2. However, both groups meet Livneh criteria 
similarly.
CONCLUSION: Although patients with early disease onset seem to have more severe 
disease course, they are more likely to have a delay in diagnosis. To avoid the 
diagnostic delay, clinicians should be aware of the findings of FMF in early 
age.

DOI: 10.1080/14397595.2020.1719594
PMID: 31999206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]