---
reference_id: "PMID:27529325"
title: RNA toxicity induced by expanded CAG repeats in Huntington's disease.
authors:
- Martí E
journal: Brain Pathol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1111/bpa.12427
content_type: abstract_only
---

# RNA toxicity induced by expanded CAG repeats in Huntington's disease.
**Authors:** Martí E
**Journal:** Brain Pathol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1111/bpa.12427](https://doi.org/10.1111/bpa.12427)

## Content

1. Brain Pathol. 2016 Nov;26(6):779-786. doi: 10.1111/bpa.12427.

RNA toxicity induced by expanded CAG repeats in Huntington's disease.

Martí E(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute for Science and 
Technology, Dr. Aiguader 88, Barcelona, 08003, Spain.
(2)Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Institut Hospital del Mar d'Investigacions Mediques (IMIM), Barcelona, 08003, 
Spain.
(4)Centro de Investigacion Biomedica en Red (CIBERESP), Madrid, Spain.

Huntington's disease (HD) belongs to the group of inherited polyglutamine 
(PolyQ) diseases caused by an expanded CAG repeat in the coding region of the 
Huntingtin (HTT) gene that results in an elongated polyQ stretch. Abnormal 
function and aggregation of the mutant protein has been typically delineated as 
the main molecular cause underlying disease development. However, the most 
recent advances have revealed novel pathogenic pathways directly dependent on an 
RNA toxic gain-of-function. Expanded CAG repeats within exon 1 of the HTT mRNA 
induce toxicity through mechanisms involving, at least in part, gene expression 
perturbations. This has important implications not only for basic and 
translational research in HD, but also for other types of diseases carrying the 
expanded CAG in other genes, which likely share pathogenic aspects. Here I will 
review the evidence and mechanisms underlying RNA toxicity in CAG repeat 
expansions, with particular focus on HD. These comprise abnormal subcellular 
localization of the transcripts containing the expanded CAG repeats; 
sequestration of several types of proteins by the expanded CAG repeat which 
results in defects of alternative splicing events and gene expression; and 
aberrant biogenesis and detrimental activity of small CAG repeated RNAs (sCAG) 
that produce altered gene silencing. Although these altered pathways have been 
detected in HD models, their contribution to disease development and progress 
requires further study.

© 2016 International Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/bpa.12427
PMCID: PMC8029335
PMID: 27529325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]