---
reference_id: "PMID:30481565"
title: Metabolic targeting synergizes with MAPK inhibition and delays drug resistance in melanoma.
authors:
- Brummer C
- Faerber S
- Bruss C
- Blank C
- Lacroix R
- Haferkamp S
- Herr W
- Kreutz M
- Renner K
journal: Cancer Lett
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2018.11.018
keywords:
- "Anti-Inflammatory Agents, Non-Steroidal/pharmacology"
- Antineoplastic Combined Chemotherapy Protocols/pharmacology
- Apoptosis/drug effects
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- Cell Proliferation/drug effects
- "Diclofenac/analogs & derivatives, pharmacology"
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/drug effects"
- Drug Synergism
- Energy Metabolism/drug effects
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Humans
- "Melanoma/drug therapy, enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- "Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinases/antagonists & inhibitors, metabolism"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/antagonists & inhibitors, genetics, metabolism"
- Signal Transduction/drug effects
- "Skin Neoplasms/drug therapy, enzymology, genetics, pathology"
- Time Factors
- Vemurafenib/pharmacology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Metabolic targeting synergizes with MAPK inhibition and delays drug resistance in melanoma.
**Authors:** Brummer C, Faerber S, Bruss C, Blank C, Lacroix R, Haferkamp S, Herr W, Kreutz M, Renner K
**Journal:** Cancer Lett (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.canlet.2018.11.018](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.canlet.2018.11.018)

## Content

1. Cancer Lett. 2019 Feb 1;442:453-463. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2018.11.018. Epub
2018 Nov 24.

Metabolic targeting synergizes with MAPK inhibition and delays drug resistance
in melanoma.

Brummer C(1), Faerber S(2), Bruss C(1), Blank C(3), Lacroix R(3), Haferkamp
S(4), Herr W(1), Kreutz M(2), Renner K(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, University Hospital of Regensburg,
Regensburg, Germany.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine III, University Hospital of Regensburg,
Regensburg, Germany; Regensburg Center for Interventional Immunology (RCI),
Regensburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology and Division of Molecular Oncology &
Immunology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital of Regensburg, Regensburg,
Germany.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine III, University Hospital of Regensburg,
Regensburg, Germany; Regensburg Center for Interventional Immunology (RCI),
Regensburg, Germany. Electronic address: kathrin.renner-sattler@ukr.de.

Tumors, including melanomas, frequently show an accelerated glucose metabolism.
Mutations in the v-Raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B (BRAF), detected
in about 50% of all melanomas, result in further enhancement of glycolysis.
Therefore anti-metabolic substances might enhance the impact of RAF inhibitors.
We have identified the two non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
diclofenac and lumiracoxib being able to restrict energy metabolism in human
melanoma cells by targeting lactate release and oxidative phosphorylation
(OXPHOS). In combination with the RAF inhibitor vemurafenib strong synergism was
observed: Diclofenac as well as lumiracoxib increased the anti-glycolytic impact
of vemurafenib and prevented RAF-inhibitor induced metabolic reprogramming
towards OXPHOS. Consequently, both NSAIDs sensitized melanoma cells to
vemurafenib triggered proliferation arrest and enhanced the anti-tumor effect of
RAF inhibitors from cytostatic to cytotoxic. Furthermore the addition of NSAIDs
delayed the onset of RAF inhibitor resistance, most likely by counteracting the
upregulation of MITF. Our data suggest that selected NSAIDs could be a promising
combination partner for MAPK pathway inhibitors for the treatment of BRAFV600E
mutated melanomas.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2018.11.018
PMID: 30481565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
