---
reference_id: "PMID:41456629"
title: "Hsp70/CHIP E3 ligase complex triggers K149-linked ubiquitination and degradation of BEST1 mutants p.P233L and p.P346H, impairing chloride channel function and retinal integrity."
authors:
- Zhou Z
- Tian H
- Ma N
- Fang W
- Lu Q
- Huiyang
- HaiyingTian
- Tang Y
- Tian L
- Jia X
- Zhang Y
- Li Y
- Zhu X
- Yu Q
- Zhou D
journal: Cell Signal
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2025.112343
keywords:
- Animals
- Ubiquitination
- "Bestrophins/metabolism, genetics"
- Dogs
- Humans
- Madin Darby Canine Kidney Cells
- HSP70 Heat-Shock Proteins/metabolism
- Ubiquitin-Protein Ligases/metabolism
- Zebrafish
- "Chloride Channels/metabolism, genetics"
- "Retinal Pigment Epithelium/metabolism, pathology"
- "Retina/metabolism, pathology"
- Mutation
- Proteolysis
- "Vitelliform Macular Dystrophy/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hsp70/CHIP E3 ligase complex triggers K149-linked ubiquitination and degradation of BEST1 mutants p.P233L and p.P346H, impairing chloride channel function and retinal integrity.
**Authors:** Zhou Z, Tian H, Ma N, Fang W, Lu Q, Huiyang, HaiyingTian, Tang Y, Tian L, Jia X, Zhang Y, Li Y, Zhu X, Yu Q, Zhou D
**Journal:** Cell Signal (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cellsig.2025.112343](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cellsig.2025.112343)

## Content

1. Cell Signal. 2026 Mar;139:112343. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2025.112343. Epub
2025  Dec 26.

Hsp70/CHIP E3 ligase complex triggers K149-linked ubiquitination and degradation
of BEST1 mutants p.P233L and p.P346H, impairing chloride channel function and
retinal integrity.

Zhou Z(1), Tian H(2), Ma N(3), Fang W(4), Lu Q(5), Huiyang(6), HaiyingTian(7),
Tang Y(8), Tian L(8), Jia X(9), Zhang Y(2), Li Y(2), Zhu X(10), Yu Q(10), Zhou
D(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, the Affiliated Hospital of Guizhou
Medical University, Guiyang, Guizhou 550004, PR China; Clinical laboratory
department, Hospital of Qianxinan Prefecture, Xingyi, Guizhou 562400, PR China;
Clinical Research Center, The Affiliated Hospital of Guizhou Medical University,
Guiyang, Guizhou 55004, PR China.
(2)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, the Affiliated Hospital of Guizhou
Medical University, Guiyang, Guizhou 550004, PR China; Clinical Research Center,
The Affiliated Hospital of Guizhou Medical University, Guiyang, Guizhou 55004,
PR China.
(3)Department of Vascular and Thyroid Surgery, Guizhou Provincial People's
Hospital, Guiyang 550002, PR China.
(4)School of Clinical Laboratory Science, Guizhou Medical University, Guiyang,
Guizhou 550004, PR China.
(5)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, the Affiliated Hospital of Guizhou
Medical University, Guiyang, Guizhou 550004, PR China.
(6)Clinical Research Center, The Affiliated Hospital of Guizhou Medical
University, Guiyang, Guizhou 55004, PR China.
(7)Department of Ultrasound Medicine, Guizhou Provincial People's Hospital,
Guiyang, Guiyang, Guizhou 550002, PR China.
(8)Key Laboratory of Thermoregulation and Inflammation of Sichuan Higher
Education Institutes, Department of Physiology, Chengdu Medical College,
Chengdu, Sichuan 610500, PR China.
(9)Key Laboratory of Non-coding RNA and Drug Discovery at Chengdu Medical
College of Sichuan Province, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Chengdu Medical
College, Chengdu 610500, Sichuan, China.
(10)Department of Ophthalmology, Guizhou Provincial People's Hospital, Guiyang,
550002, Guizhou, China.
(11)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, the Affiliated Hospital of Guizhou
Medical University, Guiyang, Guizhou 550004, PR China; Clinical Research Center,
The Affiliated Hospital of Guizhou Medical University, Guiyang, Guizhou 55004,
PR China; Key Laboratory of Endemic and Ethnic Diseases, Ministry of Education &
Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology of Guizhou Province, Guizhou Medical
University, Guiyang 550004, Guizhou, China. Electronic address:
081023094@fudan.edu.cn.

Erratum in
    Cell Signal. 2026 May;141:112370. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2026.112370.

The mechanisms underlying ubiquitination-mediated degradation of
bestrophinopathy-causing mutants and their in vivo effects on retinal pigment
epithelium (RPE) localization and retinal structure remain poorly understood.
Furthermore, the upstream signaling cascade that induces degradation of these
mutants and the detailed ubiquitination mechanism are unknown. Here, we report a
c.1037C > A (p.P346H) mutation and a c.698C > T (p.P233L) mutation that
co-segregate with the phenotypes of pedigrees affected by RP50 and Best
vitelliform macular dystrophy (BVMD), respectively. The BEST1 mutants p.P233L
and p.P346H reduced chloride channel activity and induced mislocalization of
bestrophin-1 in polarized MDCK II cells, significantly affecting the channel
activity of wild-type bestrophin-1. Lys149 was identified as the site
responsible for ubiquitination of p.P346H- and p.P233L-bestrophin-1, mediated by
Hsp70 and the C-terminal Hsp70-interacting protein (CHIP). Mutant bestrophin-1
proteins p.P346H and p.P233L undergo ubiquitination and degradation, preventing
their localization to the cell membrane of MDCK II cells and the RPE of
zebrafish, thereby reducing chloride channel activity. Mislocalization of mutant
bestrophin-1 to the RPE impaired the multicellular layered structure of the
retina. Our study reveals a ubiquitination signaling pathway mediated by Hsp70
and CHIP that depends on Lys149 of bestrophin-1. Aberrant activation of this
pathway leads to loss of function in the p.P233L and p.P346H mutants and
triggers retinopathy.

Copyright © 2025 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2025.112343
PMID: 41456629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors
declare that they have no competing interests.
