---
reference_id: "PMID:18178630"
title: A microduplication of the long range SHH limb regulator (ZRS) is associated with triphalangeal thumb-polysyndactyly syndrome.
authors:
- Klopocki E
- Ott CE
- Benatar N
- Ullmann R
- Mundlos S
- Lehmann K
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1136/jmg.2007.055699
keywords:
- Animals
- Base Pairing
- Base Sequence
- Chromosome Breakage
- Chromosome Segregation
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 7/genetics"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Fingers/abnormalities
- Gene Duplication
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Hedgehog Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Nucleic Acid Hybridization
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Regulatory Sequences, Nucleic Acid/genetics"
- Syndactyly/genetics
- Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A microduplication of the long range SHH limb regulator (ZRS) is associated with triphalangeal thumb-polysyndactyly syndrome.
**Authors:** Klopocki E, Ott CE, Benatar N, Ullmann R, Mundlos S, Lehmann K
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmg.2007.055699](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmg.2007.055699)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2008 Jun;45(6):370-5. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2007.055699. Epub 2008 Jan
 4.

A microduplication of the long range SHH limb regulator (ZRS) is associated with
triphalangeal thumb-polysyndactyly syndrome.

Klopocki E(1), Ott CE, Benatar N, Ullmann R, Mundlos S, Lehmann K.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Medizinische Genetik, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Berlin, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Sonic hedgehog (SHH) plays an important role in defining the
anterior-posterior axis in the developing limbs. A highly conserved non-coding
sequence about approximately 1 Mb upstream from the sonic hedgehog gene (SHH)
was shown to be a long range regulator for SHH expression in the limb bud. Point
mutations within this non-coding regulatory region designated ZRS lead to
ectopic expression of Shh in the anterior margin of the limb bud, as shown in
mice, and cause the human triphalangeal thumb and polysyndactyly (TPT-PS)
phenotype. Even though this association is well established, its molecular
mechanism remains unclear.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We investigated a large pedigree with variable TPT-PS. A
single nucleotide exchange within the SHH limb regulator sequence was excluded,
but locus specific microsatellite marker analyses confirmed a linkage to this
region. Subsequently, array comparative genomic hybridisation (array CGH) was
carried out using a submegabase whole human genome tiling path bacterial
artificial chromosome (BAC) array revealing a microduplication in 7q36.3 in
affected individuals. A duplicated region of 588,819 bp comprising the ZRS was
identified by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) and direct
sequencing.
CONCLUSION: A novel microduplication in 7q36.3 results in a similar TPT-PS
phenotype as caused by single nucleotide alterations in the ZRS, the limb
specific SHH regulatory element. Duplications can be added to the growing list
of mechanisms that cause abnormalities of long range transcriptional control.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2007.055699
PMID: 18178630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
