---
reference_id: "PMID:36573678"
title: The forgotten threat of cholera in Syria.
authors:
- Al-Abdulla O
- Alaref M
journal: J Water Health
year: '2022'
doi: 10.2166/wh.2022.262
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The forgotten threat of cholera in Syria.
**Authors:** Al-Abdulla O, Alaref M
**Journal:** J Water Health (2022)
**DOI:** [10.2166/wh.2022.262](https://doi.org/10.2166/wh.2022.262)

## Content

1. J Water Health. 2022 Dec;20(12):1755-1760. doi: 10.2166/wh.2022.262.

The forgotten threat of cholera in Syria.

Al-Abdulla O(1), Alaref M(1).

Author information:
(1)Strategic Research Center (Öz SRC), Gaziantep, Turkey E-mail: 
info@strategicresearchcenter.com.

Cholera is an ancient disease that persists as an issue of public health in many 
conflict-affected countries worldwide. Cholera is a diarrheal infection caused 
by ingested water or food contaminated with the bacterium Vibrio cholerae. On 10 
September 2022, the Ministry of Health in Syria declared a cholera outbreak. 
Poor water and sanitation systems, disease surveillance breakdown, the collapse 
of the health system, and deteriorated socioeconomic conditions are potential 
risk factors for the outbreak's spread. Identifying the context-related factors 
associated with the spread of disease is a core to developing practical response 
mechanisms. In this study, we suggested a multisectoral approach that addresses 
context-specific elements contributing to the cholera outbreak spread in Syria; 
public health determinants, geopolitics, risk factors, and pandemic fatigue.

DOI: 10.2166/wh.2022.262
PMID: 36573678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]