---
reference_id: "PMID:36756665"
title: Clinical phenotype, treatment strategy and pregnancy outcome of non-criteria obstetric antiphospholipid syndrome.
authors:
- Li J
- Hou Y
- Zhang L
- Li F
- Liu Q
- Li Y
- Shen H
- Xiong Z
- Huang L
- Qiao C
journal: Am J Reprod Immunol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1111/aji.13684
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical phenotype, treatment strategy and pregnancy outcome of non-criteria obstetric antiphospholipid syndrome.
**Authors:** Li J, Hou Y, Zhang L, Li F, Liu Q, Li Y, Shen H, Xiong Z, Huang L, Qiao C
**Journal:** Am J Reprod Immunol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1111/aji.13684](https://doi.org/10.1111/aji.13684)

## Content

1. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2023 Jun;89(6):e13684. doi: 10.1111/aji.13684. Epub 2023 
Mar 9.

Clinical phenotype, treatment strategy and pregnancy outcome of non-criteria 
obstetric antiphospholipid syndrome.

Li J(1)(2)(3)(4), Hou Y(1)(3)(4), Zhang L(1)(3)(4), Li F(1)(3)(4), Liu 
Q(1)(3)(4), Li Y(1)(3)(4), Shen H(1)(3)(4), Xiong Z(1)(3)(4), Huang L(1)(3)(4), 
Qiao C(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical 
University, Shenyang, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Reproductive and Genetic Medicine, National Health 
Commission, Shenyang, China.
(3)Key Laboratory of Maternal-Fetal Medicine of Liaoning Province, Shenyang, 
China.
(4)Research Center of China Medical University Birth Cohort, Shenyang, China.

PROBLEM: To illustrate the clinical features, treatment strategy, and pregnancy 
outcome of patients with obstetric antiphospholipid syndrome (OAPS), 
non-criteria obstetric antiphospholipid syndrome (NC-OAPS) METHOD OF STUDY: A 
single-center nested case-control study was designed. Patients with a diagnosis 
of OAPS and NC-OAPS were enrolled. The medical history, coagulation status, and 
antibody profile data were collected. Patients were given standard 
anticoagulation therapy with or without glucocorticoids (GC) and/or 
hydroxychloroquine (HCQ) during pregnancy and were observed for their pregnancy 
outcome.
RESULTS: A total of 47 patients with OAPS and 120 patients with NC-OAPS were 
finally included, of whom 55 patients met the clinical criteria (subgroup C) and 
65 met the laboratory criteria (subgroup L). Pregnancy morbidity showed 
significant differences: gravida, pregnancy loss in OAPS versus NC-OAPS. The 
coagulation function was not significantly different between OAPS and NC-OAPS 
groups, while TT and FIB were significantly higher in the subgroup C. 
Thromboelastography (TEG) results showed a significantly lower ANGEL in the 
NC-OAPS group, a higher ANGEL and lower EPL, LY30 in the subgroup L. No 
differences between groups were observed in treatment strategy. The pregnancy 
outcomes were not significantly different between NC-OAPS and OAPS groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinical and laboratory differences were found between OAPS and 
NC-OAPS groups in this study. Patients in different subgroups of NC-OAPS could 
be identified with different clinical phenotypes. A relatively hypercoagulable 
status existed in the OAPS group compared to NC-OAPS, and also in the subgroup 
L.

© 2023 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/aji.13684
PMID: 36756665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]