---
reference_id: "PMID:39854231"
title: Variants in the SOX9 transactivation middle domain induce axial skeleton dysplasia and scoliosis.
authors:
- Wang L
- Liu Z
- Zhao S
- Xu K
- Aceves V
- Qiu C
- Feng HC
- Bian F
- He J
- Song CJ
- Troutwine B
- Liu L
- Ma S
- Niu Y
- Wang S
- Yuan S
- Li X
- Zhao L
- Liu X
- Qiu G
- Wu Z
- Deciphering disorders Involving Scoliosis and COmorbidities (DISCO) study group
- Zhang TJ
- Gray RS
- Wu N
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2313978121
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Variants in the SOX9 transactivation middle domain induce axial skeleton dysplasia and scoliosis.
**Authors:** Wang L, Liu Z, Zhao S, Xu K, Aceves V, Qiu C, Feng HC, Bian F, He J, Song CJ, Troutwine B, Liu L, Ma S, Niu Y, Wang S, Yuan S, Li X, Zhao L, Liu X, Qiu G, Wu Z, Deciphering disorders Involving Scoliosis and COmorbidities (DISCO) study group, Zhang TJ, Gray RS, Wu N
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.2313978121](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2313978121)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2025 Jan 28;122(4):e2313978121. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.2313978121. Epub 2025 Jan 24.

Variants in the SOX9 transactivation middle domain induce axial skeleton 
dysplasia and scoliosis.

Wang L(#)(1)(2)(3), Liu Z(#)(4)(5)(6), Zhao S(#)(1)(3), Xu K(#)(1)(3)(7), Aceves 
V(5), Qiu C(2), Feng HC(4), Bian F(4), He J(4), Song CJ(5), Troutwine B(5), Liu 
L(1)(3), Ma S(5), Niu Y(3)(7)(8), Wang S(1)(3)(7), Yuan S(2), Li X(3)(7)(8), 
Zhao L(3)(7)(8), Liu X(2), Qiu G(1)(3)(7), Wu Z(3)(7)(8); Deciphering disorders 
Involving Scoliosis and COmorbidities (DISCO) study group; Zhang TJ(1)(3)(7), 
Gray RS(5), Wu N(1)(3)(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, State Key Laboratory of Complex Severe and 
Rare Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing 100730, China.
(2)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan 
250012, Shandong, China.
(3)Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Innovation and Application for Skeletal 
Health Medical Care, Beijing 100730, China.
(4)Center for Craniofacial Molecular Biology, Herman Ostrow School of Dentistry, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033.
(5)Department of Nutritional Sciences, Dell Pediatric Research Institute, The 
University of Texas at Austin, Dell Medical School, Austin, TX 78723.
(6)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Keck School of Medicine, University of 
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033.
(7)Key Laboratory of Big Data for Spinal Deformities, Chinese Academy of Medical 
Sciences, Beijing 100730, China.
(8)Medical Research Center, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Peking Union 
Medical College, and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100730, China.
(#)Contributed equally

Update of
    medRxiv. 2023 May 30:2023.05.29.23290174. doi: 10.1101/2023.05.29.23290174.

SOX9 is a crucial transcriptional regulator of cartilage development and 
homeostasis. Dysregulation of SOX9 is associated with a wide spectrum of 
skeletal disorders, including campomelic dysplasia, acampomelic campomelic 
dysplasia, and scoliosis. Yet how SOX9 variants contribute to the spectrum of 
axial skeletal disorders is not well understood. Here, we report four pathogenic 
variants of SOX9 identified in a cohort of patients with congenital vertebral 
malformations. We report a pathogenic missense variant in the transactivation 
middle (TAM) domain of SOX9 associated with mild skeletal dysplasia and 
scoliosis. We isolated a Sox9 mutant mouse with an in-frame microdeletion in the 
TAM domain (Sox9Asp272del), which exhibits skeletal dysplasia including kinked 
tails, rib cage anomalies, and scoliosis in homozygous mutants. We find that 
both the human missense and the mouse microdeletion mutations resulted in 
reduced SOX9 protein stability in cell culture, while Sox9Asp272del mutant mice 
show decreased SOX9 expression in the growth plate and annulus fibrosus tissues 
of the spine. This reduction in SOX9 expression was correlated with the 
reduction of extracellular matrix components, such as tenascin-X and the 
Adhesion G-protein coupled receptor ADGRG6. In summary, our work identified and 
modeled a pathologic variant of SOX9 within the TAM domain and demonstrated its 
importance for SOX9 protein stability. Our work demonstrates that SOX9 stability 
is important for the regulation of ADGRG6 expression, which is a known regulator 
of postnatal spine homeostasis, underscoring the essential role of SOX9 dosage 
in a spectrum of axial skeleton dysplasia in humans.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.2313978121
PMCID: PMC11789016
PMID: 39854231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests statement:The authors 
declare no competing interest.