---
reference_id: "PMID:39240417"
title: "Towards an understanding of physical activity-induced post-exertional malaise: Insights into microvascular alterations and immunometabolic interactions in post-COVID condition and myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome."
authors:
- Haunhorst S
- Dudziak D
- Scheibenbogen C
- Seifert M
- Sotzny F
- Finke C
- Behrends U
- Aden K
- Schreiber S
- Brockmann D
- Burggraf P
- Bloch W
- Ellert C
- Ramoji A
- Popp J
- Reuken P
- Walter M
- Stallmach A
- Puta C
journal: Infection
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s15010-024-02386-8
keywords:
- Humans
- "Fatigue Syndrome, Chronic/immunology, physiopathology, metabolism"
- "COVID-19/complications, immunology, physiopathology, metabolism"
- Exercise/physiology
- SARS-CoV-2
- Microcirculation
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Towards an understanding of physical activity-induced post-exertional malaise: Insights into microvascular alterations and immunometabolic interactions in post-COVID condition and myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome.
**Authors:** Haunhorst S, Dudziak D, Scheibenbogen C, Seifert M, Sotzny F, Finke C, Behrends U, Aden K, Schreiber S, Brockmann D, Burggraf P, Bloch W, Ellert C, Ramoji A, Popp J, Reuken P, Walter M, Stallmach A, Puta C
**Journal:** Infection (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s15010-024-02386-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s15010-024-02386-8)

## Content

1. Infection. 2025 Feb;53(1):1-13. doi: 10.1007/s15010-024-02386-8. Epub 2024 Sep
 6.

Towards an understanding of physical activity-induced post-exertional malaise:
Insights into microvascular alterations and immunometabolic interactions in
post-COVID condition and myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome.

Haunhorst S(1)(2), Dudziak D(3), Scheibenbogen C(4), Seifert M(4)(5), Sotzny
F(4), Finke C(6), Behrends U(7)(8)(9), Aden K(10)(11), Schreiber S(11),
Brockmann D(12), Burggraf P(13), Bloch W(14), Ellert C(15)(16), Ramoji
A(17)(18), Popp J(17)(18), Reuken P(19), Walter M(20)(21), Stallmach A(19), Puta
C(22)(23)(24).

Author information:
(1)Department of Sports Medicine and Health Promotion,
Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, Wöllnitzer Straße 42, 07749, Jena, Germany.
(2)Center for Interdisciplinary Prevention of Diseases Related to Professional
Activities, Jena, Germany.
(3)Institute of Immunology, Jena University Hospital/
Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, Jena, Germany.
(4)Institute of Medical Immunology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin,
Corporate Member of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt Universität Zu Berlin,
and Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany.
(5)German Center for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), Partner Site Berlin,
Berlin, Germany.
(6)Department of Neurology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Corporate Member
of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität Zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(7)Children's Hospital, School of Medicine, Technical University of Munich,
Munich, Germany.
(8)German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Berlin, Germany.
(9)AGV Research Unit Gene Vectors, Helmholtz Munich (HMGU), Munich, Germany.
(10)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Kiel University and University
Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(11)Department of Internal Medicine I, Kiel University and University Medical
Center Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(12)Center Synergy of Systems, TU Dresden University of Technology, Dresden,
Germany.
(13)mHealth Pioneers GmbH, Körtestraße 10, 10967, Berlin, Germany.
(14)Department for Molecular and Cellular Sports Medicine, Institute for
Cardiovascular Research and Sports Medicine, German Sport University Cologne,
Cologne, Germany.
(15), Landarztnetz Lahn-Dill, Wetzlar, Germany.
(16)Initiative Long COVID Deutschland, Lemgo, Germany.
(17)Institute of Physical Chemistry (IPC) and Abbe Center of Photonics (ACP),
Member of the Leibniz Centre for Photonics in Infection Research (LPI),
Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, Jena, Germany.
(18)Leibniz Institute of Photonic Technology, Member of Leibniz Health
Technologies, Member of the Leibniz Centre for Photonics in Infection Research
(LPI), Jena, Germany.
(19)Department for Internal Medicine IV (Gastroenterology, Hepatology and
Infectious Diseases), Jena University Hospital, Jena, Germany.
(20)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Jena Center for Mental Health,
Jena University Hospital, Jena, Germany.
(21)German Center for Mental Health (DZPG), Partner Site Jena, Jena, Germany.
(22)Department of Sports Medicine and Health Promotion,
Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, Wöllnitzer Straße 42, 07749, Jena, Germany.
christian.puta@uni-jena.de.
(23)Department for Internal Medicine IV (Gastroenterology, Hepatology and
Infectious Diseases), Jena University Hospital, Jena, Germany.
christian.puta@uni-jena.de.
(24)Center for Sepsis Control and Care (CSCC), Jena University
Hospital/Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, Jena, Germany.
christian.puta@uni-jena.de.

BACKGROUND: A considerable number of patients who contracted SARS-CoV-2 are
affected by persistent multi-systemic symptoms, referred to as Post-COVID
Condition (PCC). Post-exertional malaise (PEM) has been recognized as one of the
most frequent manifestations of PCC and is a diagnostic criterion of myalgic
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). Yet, its underlying
pathomechanisms remain poorly elucidated.
PURPOSE AND METHODS: In this review, we describe current evidence indicating
that key pathophysiological features of PCC and ME/CFS are involved in physical
activity-induced PEM.
RESULTS: Upon physical activity, affected patients exhibit a reduced systemic
oxygen extraction and oxidative phosphorylation capacity. Accumulating evidence
suggests that these are mediated by dysfunctions in mitochondrial capacities and
microcirculation that are maintained by latent immune activation, conjointly
impairing peripheral bioenergetics. Aggravating deficits in tissue perfusion and
oxygen utilization during activities cause exertional intolerance that are
frequently accompanied by tachycardia, dyspnea, early cessation of activity and
elicit downstream metabolic effects. The accumulation of molecules such as
lactate, reactive oxygen species or prostaglandins might trigger local and
systemic immune activation. Subsequent intensification of bioenergetic
inflexibilities, muscular ionic disturbances and modulation of central nervous
system functions can lead to an exacerbation of existing pathologies and
symptoms.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s15010-024-02386-8
PMCID: PMC11825644
PMID: 39240417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Competing interests: The authors
have no competing interests to declare that are relevant to the content of this
article.
