---
reference_id: "PMID:36703963"
title: "Role of inflammation, immunity, and oxidative stress in hypertension: New insights and potential therapeutic targets."
authors:
- Zhang Z
- Zhao L
- Zhou X
- Meng X
- Zhou X
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1098725
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of inflammation, immunity, and oxidative stress in hypertension: New insights and potential therapeutic targets.
**Authors:** Zhang Z, Zhao L, Zhou X, Meng X, Zhou X
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2022.1098725](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.1098725)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2023 Jan 10;13:1098725. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1098725. 
eCollection 2022.

Role of inflammation, immunity, and oxidative stress in hypertension: New 
insights and potential therapeutic targets.

Zhang Z(1), Zhao L(1), Zhou X(1), Meng X(1), Zhou X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, Fuwai Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular 
Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, 
Beijing, China.

Hypertension is regarded as the most prominent risk factor for cardiovascular 
diseases, which have become a primary cause of death, and recent research has 
demonstrated that chronic inflammation is involved in the pathogenesis of 
hypertension. Both innate and adaptive immunity are now known to promote the 
elevation of blood pressure by triggering vascular inflammation and 
microvascular remodeling. For example, as an important part of innate immune 
system, classically activated macrophages (M1), neutrophils, and dendritic cells 
contribute to hypertension by secreting inflammatory cy3tokines. In particular, 
interferon-gamma (IFN-γ) and interleukin-17 (IL-17) produced by activated T 
lymphocytes contribute to hypertension by inducing oxidative stress injury and 
endothelial dysfunction. However, the regulatory T cells and alternatively 
activated macrophages (M2) may have a protective role in hypertension. Although 
inflammation is related to hypertension, the exact mechanisms are complex and 
unclear. The present review aims to reveal the roles of inflammation, immunity, 
and oxidative stress in the initiation and evolution of hypertension. We 
envisage that the review will strengthen public understanding of the 
pathophysiological mechanisms of hypertension and may provide new insights and 
potential therapeutic strategies for hypertension.

Copyright © 2023 Zhang, Zhao, Zhou, Meng and Zhou.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1098725
PMCID: PMC9871625
PMID: 36703963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.