---
reference_id: "PMID:25759469"
title: A mutation in FRIZZLED2 impairs Wnt signaling and causes autosomal dominant omodysplasia.
authors:
- Saal HM
- Prows CA
- Guerreiro I
- Donlin M
- Knudson L
- Sund KL
- Chang CF
- Brugmann SA
- Stottmann RW
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv088
keywords:
- Adult
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Amino Acid Substitution
- "Bone and Bones/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Exome
- Facies
- Female
- "Frizzled Receptors/chemistry, genetics, metabolism"
- Gene Expression
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Humans
- "Humerus/abnormalities, metabolism"
- Infant
- "Metacarpal Bones/abnormalities, metabolism"
- Mutation
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnosis, genetics, metabolism"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Protein Binding
- Protein Transport
- Radiography
- Wnt Signaling Pathway
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A mutation in FRIZZLED2 impairs Wnt signaling and causes autosomal dominant omodysplasia.
**Authors:** Saal HM, Prows CA, Guerreiro I, Donlin M, Knudson L, Sund KL, Chang CF, Brugmann SA, Stottmann RW
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/ddv088](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddv088)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Jun 15;24(12):3399-409. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv088. Epub 2015
 Mar 10.

A mutation in FRIZZLED2 impairs Wnt signaling and causes autosomal dominant 
omodysplasia.

Saal HM(1), Prows CA(2), Guerreiro I(1), Donlin M(1), Knudson L(1), Sund KL(1), 
Chang CF(3), Brugmann SA(3), Stottmann RW(4).

Author information:
(1)Division of Human Genetics.
(2)Division of Human Genetics, Division of Patient Services.
(3)Division of Developmental Biology and Division of Plastic Surgery, Cincinnati 
Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, MLC 7016, Cincinnati, OH 
45229, USA.
(4)Division of Human Genetics, Division of Developmental Biology and 
rolf.stottmann@cchmc.org.

Autosomal dominant omodysplasia is a rare skeletal dysplasia characterized by 
short humeri, radial head dislocation, short first metacarpals, facial 
dysmorphism and genitourinary anomalies. We performed next-generation 
whole-exome sequencing and comparative analysis of a proband with omodysplasia, 
her unaffected parents and her affected daughter. We identified a de novo 
mutation in FRIZZLED2 (FZD2) in the proband and her daughter that was not found 
in unaffected family members. The FZD2 mutation (c.1644G>A) changes a tryptophan 
residue at amino acid 548 to a premature stop (p.Trp548*). This altered protein 
is still produced in vitro, but we show reduced ability of this mutant form of 
FZD2 to interact with its downstream target DISHEVELLED. Furthermore, expressing 
the mutant form of FZD2 in vitro is not able to facilitate the cellular response 
to canonical Wnt signaling like wild-type FZD2. We therefore conclude that the 
FRIZZLED2 mutation is a de novo, novel cause for autosomal dominant 
omodysplasia.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddv088
PMCID: PMC4834928
PMID: 25759469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]