---
reference_id: "PMID:18481527"
title: "Beyond the ecological: biological invasions alter natural selection on a native plant species."
authors:
- Lau JA
journal: Ecology
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1890/06-1999.1
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Beyond the ecological: biological invasions alter natural selection on a native plant species.
**Authors:** Lau JA
**Journal:** Ecology (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1890/06-1999.1](https://doi.org/10.1890/06-1999.1)

## Content

1. Ecology. 2008 Apr;89(4):1023-31. doi: 10.1890/06-1999.1.

Beyond the ecological: biological invasions alter natural selection on a native 
plant species.

Lau JA(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Population Biology, One Shields Avenue, University of California, 
Davis, California 95616, USA. jenlau@msu.edu

Biological invasions can have strong ecological effects on native communities by 
altering ecosystem functions, species interactions, and community composition. 
Even though these ecological effects frequently impact the population dynamics 
and fitness of native species, the evolutionary consequences of biological 
invasions have received relatively little attention. Here, I show that invasions 
impose novel selective pressures on a native plant species. By experimentally 
manipulating community composition, I found that the exotic plant Medicago 
polymorpha and the exotic herbivore Hypera brunneipennis alter the strength and, 
in some instances, the direction of natural selection on the competitive ability 
and anti-herbivore defenses of the native plant Lotus wrangelianus. Furthermore, 
the community composition of exotics influenced which traits were favored. For 
example, high densities of the exotic herbivore Hypera selected for increased 
resistance to herbivores in the native Lotus; however, when Medicago also was 
present, selection on this defense was eliminated. In contrast, selection on 
tolerance, another plant defense trait, was highest when both Hypera and 
Medicago were present at high densities. Thus, multiple exotic species may 
interact to influence the evolutionary trajectories of native plant populations, 
and patterns of selection may change as additional exotic species invade the 
community.

DOI: 10.1890/06-1999.1
PMID: 18481527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]