---
reference_id: "PMID:38042445"
title: Mef2c regulates bone mass through Sost-dependent and -independent mechanisms.
authors:
- Morfin C
- Sebastian A
- Wilson SP
- Amiri B
- Murugesh DK
- Hum NR
- Christiansen BA
- Loots GG
journal: Bone
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2023.116976
keywords:
- Hyperostosis
- Gene Expression Regulation
- MEF2 Transcription Factors/genetics
- Osteoblasts/metabolism
- Bone and Bones/metabolism
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing/genetics, metabolism"
- Mice
- Animals
- Osteogenesis/genetics
- Syndactyly
- Electron Transport Complex IV/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mef2c regulates bone mass through Sost-dependent and -independent mechanisms.
**Authors:** Morfin C, Sebastian A, Wilson SP, Amiri B, Murugesh DK, Hum NR, Christiansen BA, Loots GG
**Journal:** Bone (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.bone.2023.116976](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bone.2023.116976)

## Content

1. Bone. 2024 Feb;179:116976. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2023.116976. Epub 2023 Nov 30.

Mef2c regulates bone mass through Sost-dependent and -independent mechanisms.

Morfin C(1), Sebastian A(2), Wilson SP(2), Amiri B(2), Murugesh DK(2), Hum
NR(2), Christiansen BA(3), Loots GG(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Natural Sciences, University of California, Merced, CA, United
States; Physical and Life Sciences Directorate, Lawrence Livermore, National
Laboratories, Livermore, CA, United States; Department of Orthopaedic Surgery,
University of California Davis Health, Sacramento, CA, United States.
(2)Physical and Life Sciences Directorate, Lawrence Livermore, National
Laboratories, Livermore, CA, United States.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of California Davis Health,
Sacramento, CA, United States.
(4)School of Natural Sciences, University of California, Merced, CA, United
States; Physical and Life Sciences Directorate, Lawrence Livermore, National
Laboratories, Livermore, CA, United States; Department of Orthopaedic Surgery,
University of California Davis Health, Sacramento, CA, United States. Electronic
address: gloots@ucdavis.edu.

Mef2c is a transcription factor that mediates key cellular behaviors that
promote endochondral ossification and bone formation. Previously, Mef2c has been
shown to regulate Sost transcription via its osteocyte-specific enhancer, ECR5,
and conditional deletions of Mef2cfl/fl with either Col1-Cre or Dmp1-Cre
produced generalized high bone mass (HBM) consistent with Van Buchem Disease
phenotypes. However, Sost-/-; Mef2cfl/fl; Dmp1-Cre mice produced a significantly
higher bone mass phenotype that Sost-/- alone suggesting that Mef2c modulates
bone mass through additional mechanisms, independent of Sost. To identify new
Mef2c transcriptional targets important in bone metabolism, we profiled gene
expression by single-cell RNA sequencing in subpopulations of cells isolated
from Mef2cfl/fl; Dmp1-Cre and Mef2cfl/fl; Bglap-Cre femurs, both strains
exhibiting similar high bone mass phenotypes. However, we found Mef2cfl/fl;
Bglap-Cre to also display a growth plate defect characterized by an expansion of
several osteoprogenitor subpopulations. Differential gene expression analysis
identified a total of 96 up- and 2434 down- regulated genes in Mef2cfl/fl;
Bglap-Cre and 176 up- and 1041 down- regulated genes in Mef2cfl/fl; Dmp1-Cre
bone cell subpopulations compared to wildtype mice. Mef2c deletion affected the
transcriptomes across several cell types including mesenchymal progenitors (MP),
osteoprogenitors (OSP), osteoblast (OB), and osteocyte (OCY) subpopulations.
Several energy metabolism genes such as Uqcrb, Ndufv2, Ndufs3, Ndufa13, Ndufb9,
Ndufb5, Cox6a1, Cox5a, Atp5o, Atp5g2, Atp5b, Atp5 were significantly down
regulated in Mef2c-deficient OBs and OCYs, in both strains. Binding motif
analysis of promoter regions of differentially expressed genes identified Mef2c
binding in Bone Sialoprotein (BSP/Ibsp), a gene known to cause increased
trabecular BV/TV in the femurs of Ibsp-/- mice. Immunohistochemical analysis
confirmed the absence of Ibsp protein in OBs and OCYs. These findings suggests
that the HBM in Sost-/-; Mef2cfl/fl; Dmp1-Cre is caused by a multitude of
transcriptional changes in genes that regulate bone formation, two of which are
Sost and Ibsp.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2023.116976
PMID: 38042445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest None. Authors
have nothing to disclose.
