---
reference_id: "PMID:20806172"
title: "[Early diagnosis of skin cancer]."
authors:
- Kolm I
- Hofbauer G
- Braun RP
journal: Ther Umsch
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1024/0040-5930/a000077
keywords:
- "Basal Cell Carcinoma/diagnosis, etiology, pathology, prevention & control"
- "Carcinoma, Squamous Cell/diagnosis, etiology, pathology, prevention & control"
- Dermoscopy
- Early Diagnosis
- Humans
- "Melanoma/diagnosis, etiology, pathology, prevention & control"
- "Microscopy, Confocal"
- Photography
- "Precancerous Conditions/diagnosis, pathology, prevention & control"
- Risk Factors
- Skin/pathology
- "Skin Neoplasms/diagnosis, etiology, pathology, prevention & control"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Early diagnosis of skin cancer].
**Authors:** Kolm I, Hofbauer G, Braun RP
**Journal:** Ther Umsch (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1024/0040-5930/a000077](https://doi.org/10.1024/0040-5930/a000077)

## Content

1. Ther Umsch. 2010 Sep;67(9):439-46. doi: 10.1024/0040-5930/a000077.

[Early diagnosis of skin cancer].

[Article in German]

Kolm I(1), Hofbauer G, Braun RP.

Author information:
(1)Dermatologische Klinik, Universitätsspital Zürich, Gloriastrasse 31 CH,
Zurich.

The skin is the most affected organ by cancer. The incidence rates of skin
cancer are steadily increasing, both for melanoma and non-melanoma skin cancers
(squamous cell carcinoma, basal cell carcinoma). Over 90 % of the death cases
from skin cancers attribute to melanoma. Survival from melanoma is strongly
related to tumour thickness. Therefore early detection is the most important
step to improve prognosis. In the last years a number of new non invasive
techniques for the early diagnosis of melanoma have been developed which are
superior to the naked eye examination. In this overview article we present some
non-invasive diagnostic techniques like total body photography, digital
dermoscopy and confocal microscopy which in addition to dermoscopy assist the
dermatologist in differentiating nevi from early melanomas.Non-melanoma skin
cancer can be prevented by accurate sun protection. Early squamous cell
carcinomas and basal cell carcinomas can be treated either invasively or
non-invasively with excellent prognosis.

DOI: 10.1024/0040-5930/a000077
PMID: 20806172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
