---
reference_id: "PMID:22491411"
title: Activation of the hedgehog signaling pathway in the developing lens stimulates ectopic FoxE3 expression and disruption in fiber cell differentiation.
authors:
- Kerr CL
- Huang J
- Williams T
- West-Mays JA
journal: Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1167/iovs.12-9595
keywords:
- Alleles
- Animals
- Cell Death
- Cell Differentiation
- Cell Proliferation
- DNA/genetics
- "Ectoderm/embryology, metabolism"
- "Epithelial Cells/cytology, metabolism"
- "Eye Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Forkhead Transcription Factors/biosynthesis, genetics"
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- "Hedgehog Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Homeodomain Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics"
- In Situ Nick-End Labeling
- "Lens, Crystalline/embryology, metabolism"
- Mice
- "Mice, Mutant Strains"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Organogenesis/genetics
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-maf/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- "Tumor Suppressor Proteins/biosynthesis, genetics"
- Prospero-Related Homeobox 1 Protein
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Activation of the hedgehog signaling pathway in the developing lens stimulates ectopic FoxE3 expression and disruption in fiber cell differentiation.
**Authors:** Kerr CL, Huang J, Williams T, West-Mays JA
**Journal:** Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1167/iovs.12-9595](https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.12-9595)

## Content

1. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2012 Jun 5;53(7):3316-30. doi:
10.1167/iovs.12-9595.

Activation of the hedgehog signaling pathway in the developing lens stimulates
ectopic FoxE3 expression and disruption in fiber cell differentiation.

Kerr CL(1), Huang J, Williams T, West-Mays JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University Health
Sciences Centre, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

PURPOSE: The signaling pathways and transcriptional effectors responsible for
directing mammalian lens development provide key regulatory molecules that can
inform our understanding of human eye defects. The hedgehog genes encode
extracellular signaling proteins responsible for patterning and tissue formation
during embryogenesis. Signal transduction of this pathway is mediated through
activation of the transmembrane proteins smoothened and patched, stimulating
downstream signaling resulting in the activation or repression of hedgehog
target genes. Hedgehog signaling is implicated in eye development, and defects
in hedgehog signaling components have been shown to result in defects of the
retina, iris, and lens.
METHODS: We assessed the consequences of constitutive hedgehog signaling in the
developing mouse lens using Cre-LoxP technology to express the conditional M2
smoothened allele in the embryonic head and lens ectoderm.
RESULTS: Although initial lens development appeared normal, morphological
defects were apparent by E12.5 and became more significant at later stages of
embryogenesis. Altered lens morphology correlated with ectopic expression of
FoxE3, which encodes a critical gene required for human and mouse lens
development. Later, inappropriate expression of the epithelial marker Pax6, and
as well as fiber cell markers c-maf and Prox1 also occurred, indicating a
failure of appropriate lens fiber cell differentiation accompanied by altered
lens cell proliferation and cell death.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that the ectopic activation of downstream
effectors of the hedgehog signaling pathway in the mouse lens disrupts normal
fiber cell differentiation by a mechanism consistent with a sustained epithelial
cellular developmental program driven by FoxE3.

DOI: 10.1167/iovs.12-9595
PMCID: PMC3385968
PMID: 22491411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: C.L. Kerr, None; J. Huang, None; T.
Williams, None; J.A. West-Mays, None
