---
reference_id: "PMID:38474172"
title: Aland Island Eye Disease with Retinoschisis in the Clinical Spectrum of CACNA1F-Associated Retinopathy-A Case Report.
authors:
- Wyględowska-Promieńska D
- Świerczyńska M
- Śpiewak D
- Pojda-Wilczek D
- Tronina A
- Dorecka M
- Smędowski A
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25052928
keywords:
- Male
- Humans
- "Child, Preschool"
- Infant
- Middle Aged
- Retinoschisis
- "Calcium Channels, L-Type/metabolism"
- "Genetic Diseases, X-Linked/genetics"
- Retinal Diseases
- Retina/metabolism
- Mutation
- Night Blindness
- Myopia
- "Albinism, Ocular"
- Retinitis Pigmentosa
- "Eye Diseases, Hereditary"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Aland Island Eye Disease with Retinoschisis in the Clinical Spectrum of CACNA1F-Associated Retinopathy-A Case Report.
**Authors:** Wyględowska-Promieńska D, Świerczyńska M, Śpiewak D, Pojda-Wilczek D, Tronina A, Dorecka M, Smędowski A
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25052928](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25052928)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Mar 2;25(5):2928. doi: 10.3390/ijms25052928.

Aland Island Eye Disease with Retinoschisis in the Clinical Spectrum of
CACNA1F-Associated Retinopathy-A Case Report.

Wyględowska-Promieńska D(1)(2), Świerczyńska M(1)(2), Śpiewak D(2),
Pojda-Wilczek D(1)(2), Tronina A(2)(3), Dorecka M(1)(2), Smędowski A(1)(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medical Sciences in Katowice, Medical
University of Silesia, 40-514 Katowice, Poland.
(2)Kornel Gibiński University Clinical Center, 40-514 Katowice, Poland.
(3)Department of Pediatric Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medical Sciences in
Katowice, Medical University of Silesia, 40-514 Katowice, Poland.
(4)GlaucoTech Co., 40-282 Katowice, Poland.

Aland island eye disease (AIED), an incomplete form of X-linked congenital
stationary night blindness (CSNB2A), and X-linked cone-rod dystrophy type 3
(CORDX3) display many overlapping clinical findings. They result from mutations
in the CACNA1F gene encoding the α1F subunit of the Cav1.4 channel, which plays
a key role in neurotransmission from rod and cone photoreceptors to bipolar
cells. Case report: A 57-year-old Caucasian man who had suffered since his early
childhood from nystagmus, nyctalopia, low visual acuity and high myopia in both
eyes (OU) presented to expand the diagnostic process, because similar symptoms
had occurred in his 2-month-old grandson. Additionally, the patient was
diagnosed with protanomalous color vision deficiency, diffuse thinning, and
moderate hypopigmentation of the retina. Optical coherence tomography of the
macula revealed retinoschisis in the right eye and foveal hypoplasia in the left
eye. Dark-adapted (DA) 3.0 flash full-field electroretinography (ffERG)
amplitudes of a-waves were attenuated, and the amplitudes of b-waves were
abolished, which resulted in a negative pattern of the ERG. Moreover, the
light-adapted 3.0 and 3.0 flicker ffERG as well as the DA 0.01 ffERG were
consistent with severely reduced responses OU. Genetic testing revealed a
hemizygous form of a stop-gained mutation (c.4051C>T) in exon 35 of the CACNA1F
gene. This pathogenic variant has so far been described in combination with a
phenotype corresponding to CSNB2A and CORDX3. This report contributes to
expanding the knowledge of the clinical spectrum of CACNA1F-related disease.
Wide variability and the overlapping clinical manifestations observed within
AIED and its allelic disorders may not be explained solely by the consequences
of different mutations on proteins. The lack of distinct genotype-phenotype
correlations indicates the presence of additional, not yet identified,
disease-modifying factors.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25052928
PMCID: PMC10931673
PMID: 38474172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Author Adrian Smędowski was employed by the
company GlaucoTech Co. The remaining author declares that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
