---
reference_id: "PMID:29358272"
title: FAM46A mutations are responsible for autosomal recessive osteogenesis imperfecta.
authors:
- Doyard M
- Bacrot S
- Huber C
- Di Rocco M
- Goldenberg A
- Aglan MS
- Brunelle P
- Temtamy S
- Michot C
- Otaify GA
- Haudry C
- Castanet M
- Leroux J
- Bonnefont JP
- Munnich A
- Baujat G
- Lapunzina P
- Monnot S
- Ruiz-Perez VL
- Cormier-Daire V
journal: J Med Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2017-104999
keywords:
- Animals
- Bone Development/genetics
- Bone and Bones/pathology
- Consanguinity
- Female
- "Genes, Recessive/genetics"
- Homozygote
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mice
- Mutation
- "Osteoblasts/metabolism, pathology"
- "Osteogenesis Imperfecta/genetics, physiopathology"
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Polynucleotide Adenylyltransferase
- Proteins/genetics
- Exome Sequencing
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FAM46A mutations are responsible for autosomal recessive osteogenesis imperfecta.
**Authors:** Doyard M, Bacrot S, Huber C, Di Rocco M, Goldenberg A, Aglan MS, Brunelle P, Temtamy S, Michot C, Otaify GA, Haudry C, Castanet M, Leroux J, Bonnefont JP, Munnich A, Baujat G, Lapunzina P, Monnot S, Ruiz-Perez VL, Cormier-Daire V
**Journal:** J Med Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1136/jmedgenet-2017-104999](https://doi.org/10.1136/jmedgenet-2017-104999)

## Content

1. J Med Genet. 2018 Apr;55(4):278-284. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2017-104999. Epub 
2018 Jan 22.

FAM46A mutations are responsible for autosomal recessive osteogenesis 
imperfecta.

Doyard M(#)(1), Bacrot S(#)(1), Huber C(1), Di Rocco M(2), Goldenberg A(3), 
Aglan MS(4), Brunelle P(1), Temtamy S(4), Michot C(1), Otaify GA(4), Haudry 
C(1), Castanet M(5), Leroux J(6), Bonnefont JP(1), Munnich A(1), Baujat G(1), 
Lapunzina P(7)(8), Monnot S(1), Ruiz-Perez VL(8)(9), Cormier-Daire V(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, INSERM U1163, Université Paris-Descartes, 
Institut Imagine, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.
(2)Unit of Rare Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, Giannina Gaslini Institute, 
Genova, Italy.
(3)Department of Genetics, Centre Normand de Génomique Médicale et Médecine 
Personnalisée, CHU de Rouen, Rouen, France.
(4)Department of Clinical Genetics. Human Genetics and Genome Research Division, 
Centre of Excellence of Human Genetics, National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt.
(5)Department of Pediatric, CHU de Rouen, Rouen, France.
(6)Department of Pediatric Surgery, CHU de Rouen, Rouen, France.
(7)Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular (INGEMM), Hospital Universitario La 
Paz-IdiPaz, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(8)CIBER de enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Insitituto de Salud Carlos III, 
Madrid, Spain.
(9)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas de Madrid, Consejo Superior de 
Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Stüve-Wiedemann syndrome (SWS) is characterised by bowing of the 
lower limbs, respiratory distress and hyperthermia that are often responsible 
for early death. Survivors develop progressive scoliosis and spontaneous 
fractures. We previously identified LIFR mutations in most SWS cases, but 
absence of LIFR pathogenic changes in five patients led us to perform exome 
sequencing and to identify homozygosity for a FAM46A mutation in one case 
[p.Ser205Tyrfs*13]. The follow-up of this case supported a final diagnosis of 
osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), based on vertebral collapses and blue sclerae.
METHODS AND RESULTS: This prompted us to screen FAM46A in 25 OI patients with no 
known mutations.We identified a homozygous deleterious variant in FAM46A in two 
affected sibs with typical OI [p.His127Arg]. Another homozygous variant, 
[p.Asp231Gly], also classed as deleterious, was detected in a patient with type 
III OI of consanguineous parents using homozygosity mapping and exome 
sequencing.FAM46A is a member of the superfamily of nucleotidyltransferase fold 
proteins but its exact function is presently unknown. Nevertheless, there are 
lines of evidence pointing to a relevant role of FAM46A in bone development. By 
RT-PCR analysis, we detected specific expression of FAM46A in human osteoblasts 
andinterestingly, a nonsense mutation in Fam46a has been recently identified in 
an ENU-derived (N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea) mouse model characterised by decreased 
body length, limb, rib, pelvis, and skull deformities and reduced cortical 
thickness in long bones.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that FAM46A mutations are responsible for a severe form 
of OI with congenital bowing of the lower limbs and suggest screening this gene 
in unexplained OI forms.

© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of 
the article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless 
otherwise expressly granted.

DOI: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2017-104999
PMID: 29358272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.