---
reference_id: "PMID:41591732"
title: ​The association of GNAS defects with pro-inflammatory adipokine levels in pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1.
authors:
- Dong Y
- Yang Y
- Song A
- Jiang Y
- Li M
- Xia W
- Gong F
- Wang O
- Xing X
journal: J Endocrinol Invest
year: '2026'
doi: 10.1007/s40618-026-02817-3
content_type: abstract_only
---

# ​The association of GNAS defects with pro-inflammatory adipokine levels in pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1.
**Authors:** Dong Y, Yang Y, Song A, Jiang Y, Li M, Xia W, Gong F, Wang O, Xing X
**Journal:** J Endocrinol Invest (2026)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40618-026-02817-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40618-026-02817-3)

## Content

1. J Endocrinol Invest. 2026 Jan 27. doi: 10.1007/s40618-026-02817-3. Online
ahead  of print.

​The association of GNAS defects with pro-inflammatory adipokine levels in 
pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1.

Dong Y(#)(1), Yang Y(#)(1)(2), Song A(1), Jiang Y(1), Li M(1), Xia W(1), Gong 
F(3), Wang O(4), Xing X(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Key Laboratory of Endocrinology of National 
Health Commission, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of 
Medical Science & Peking Union Medical College, Dongcheng District, No.1 
Shuaifuyuan, Beijing, 100730, China.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Science & Peking Union Medical College, No.1 
Shuaifuyuan, Beijing, 100730, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Key Laboratory of Endocrinology of National 
Health Commission, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of 
Medical Science & Peking Union Medical College, Dongcheng District, No.1 
Shuaifuyuan, Beijing, 100730, China. fygong@sina.com.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, Key Laboratory of Endocrinology of National 
Health Commission, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of 
Medical Science & Peking Union Medical College, Dongcheng District, No.1 
Shuaifuyuan, Beijing, 100730, China. wang_ou2010@126.com.
(5)Department of Endocrinology, Key Laboratory of Endocrinology of National 
Health Commission, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of 
Medical Science & Peking Union Medical College, Dongcheng District, No.1 
Shuaifuyuan, Beijing, 100730, China. xiaopingxing@126.com.
(#)Contributed equally

DOI: 10.1007/s40618-026-02817-3
PMID: 41591732

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: Written informed consent for genetic analysis was obtained from all 
participants or their legal guardians. The study protocol complied with ethical 
standards as approved by the PUMCH Institutional Review Board (Ethics Approval 
Registration Number JS-3314), and all procedures were conducted in accordance 
with standard clinical guidelines. Conflict of interest: The authors affirm that 
the research was carried out without any commercial or financial affiliations 
that could be interpreted as potential conflicts of interest.