---
reference_id: "PMID:33765759"
title: A novel AAGAB mutation in a Peruvian family with punctate palmoplantar keratoderma.
authors:
- Gómez-García AC
- Salas-Alanís JC
- Bar-Fernandez N
- Mendoza-Meza R
- Díaz-Montes SM
- Fajardo-Ramírez OR
journal: Acta Dermatovenerol Alp Pannonica Adriat
year: '2021'
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Vesicular Transport/genetics"
- Aged
- Female
- Humans
- "Keratoderma, Palmoplantar/genetics"
- Mutation
- Peru
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel AAGAB mutation in a Peruvian family with punctate palmoplantar keratoderma.
**Authors:** Gómez-García AC, Salas-Alanís JC, Bar-Fernandez N, Mendoza-Meza R, Díaz-Montes SM, Fajardo-Ramírez OR
**Journal:** Acta Dermatovenerol Alp Pannonica Adriat (2021)

## Content

1. Acta Dermatovenerol Alp Pannonica Adriat. 2021 Mar;30(1):47-48.

A novel AAGAB mutation in a Peruvian family with punctate palmoplantar 
keratoderma.

Gómez-García AC(1), Salas-Alanís JC(2)(3), Bar-Fernandez N(1), Mendoza-Meza 
R(1), Díaz-Montes SM(4), Fajardo-Ramírez OR(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Peru National Police Hospital, Lima, Peru.
(2)Jalisco Dermatological Institute, Guadalajara, Mexico.
(3)Secretary of Health of the State of Nuevo León, Monterrey, Mexico.
(4)National Institute of Neoplastic Diseases, Lima, Peru.
(5)Instituto Tecnológico de Monterrey, Escuela de Medicina y Ciencias de la 
Salud, Monterrey, Mexico.

Buschke-Fischer-Brauer (BFB) disease is a rare keratoderma characterized by 
multiple hyperkeratotic lesions on the palms and soles, with an autosomal 
dominant pattern. In several countries, some genetic alterations have been 
associated with this clinical entity. A 68-year-old Peruvian woman presenting 
with hyperkeratotic lesions on both her palms and soles was diagnosed with BFB 
keratoderma. After sequencing of the genes that had previously been related to 
this disease, a mutation (c.249C>G) that was predicted to generate a termination 
codon (Tyr83*) was found in the alpha and gamma adaptin binding protein P34 gene 
(AAGAB). After treatment with 30% urea plus 10% salicylic acid, the patient 
experienced an improvement in her condition. Here we report a novel mutation in 
the AAGAB gene of a patient diagnosed with BFB keratoderma and a treatment that 
improved her symptoms.

PMID: 33765759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]