---
reference_id: "PMID:27568284"
title: Zika Virus Disrupts Phospho-TBK1 Localization and Mitosis in Human Neuroepithelial Stem Cells and Radial Glia.
authors:
- Onorati M
- Li Z
- Liu F
- Sousa AMM
- Nakagawa N
- Li M
- "Dell'Anno MT"
- Gulden FO
- Pochareddy S
- Tebbenkamp ATN
- Han W
- Pletikos M
- Gao T
- Zhu Y
- Bichsel C
- Varela L
- Szigeti-Buck K
- Lisgo S
- Zhang Y
- Testen A
- Gao XB
- Mlakar J
- Popovic M
- Flamand M
- Strittmatter SM
- Kaczmarek LK
- Anton ES
- Horvath TL
- Lindenbach BD
- Sestan N
journal: Cell Rep
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.08.038
keywords:
- "Brain/embryology, pathology, virology"
- Cell Death/drug effects
- "Centrosome/drug effects, metabolism"
- Fetus/virology
- Gene Expression Profiling
- Humans
- "Immunity, Innate/drug effects"
- "Microcephaly/pathology, virology"
- "Mitochondria/drug effects, metabolism"
- Mitosis/drug effects
- Neocortex/pathology
- "Neural Stem Cells/enzymology, immunology, ultrastructure, virology"
- "Neuroepithelial Cells/drug effects, immunology, ultrastructure, virology"
- "Neuroglia/pathology, ultrastructure, virology"
- "Neurons/drug effects, pathology, virology"
- Neuroprotective Agents/pharmacology
- Nucleosides/pharmacology
- Phosphorylation/drug effects
- Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology
- Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/metabolism
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins/metabolism
- Receptor Protein-Tyrosine Kinases/metabolism
- Spinal Cord/pathology
- "Transcription, Genetic/drug effects"
- Virus Replication/drug effects
- "Zika Virus/drug effects, pathogenicity, physiology, ultrastructure"
- "Zika Virus Infection/pathology, virology"
- Axl Receptor Tyrosine Kinase
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Zika Virus Disrupts Phospho-TBK1 Localization and Mitosis in Human Neuroepithelial Stem Cells and Radial Glia.
**Authors:** Onorati M, Li Z, Liu F, Sousa AMM, Nakagawa N, Li M, Dell'Anno MT, Gulden FO, Pochareddy S, Tebbenkamp ATN, Han W, Pletikos M, Gao T, Zhu Y, Bichsel C, Varela L, Szigeti-Buck K, Lisgo S, Zhang Y, Testen A, Gao XB, Mlakar J, Popovic M, Flamand M, Strittmatter SM, Kaczmarek LK, Anton ES, Horvath TL, Lindenbach BD, Sestan N
**Journal:** Cell Rep (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.celrep.2016.08.038](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2016.08.038)

## Content

1. Cell Rep. 2016 Sep 6;16(10):2576-2592. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.08.038. Epub
 2016 Aug 24.

Zika Virus Disrupts Phospho-TBK1 Localization and Mitosis in Human
Neuroepithelial Stem Cells and Radial Glia.

Onorati M(1), Li Z(1), Liu F(1), Sousa AMM(1), Nakagawa N(2), Li M(1), Dell'Anno
MT(3), Gulden FO(1), Pochareddy S(1), Tebbenkamp ATN(1), Han W(1), Pletikos
M(1), Gao T(1), Zhu Y(1), Bichsel C(1), Varela L(4), Szigeti-Buck K(4), Lisgo
S(5), Zhang Y(6), Testen A(2), Gao XB(4), Mlakar J(7), Popovic M(7), Flamand
M(8), Strittmatter SM(3), Kaczmarek LK(9), Anton ES(2), Horvath TL(10),
Lindenbach BD(11), Sestan N(12).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Kavli Institute for Neuroscience, Yale School
of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.
(2)UNC Neuroscience Center and the Department of Cell Biology and Physiology,
University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
(3)Cellular Neuroscience, Neurodegeneration and Repair Program, Departments of
Neurology and Neuroscience, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.
(4)Section of Comparative Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06510, USA.
(5)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne
NE13BZ, UK.
(6)Department of Pharmacology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510,
USA.
(7)Institute of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana,
Ljubljana 1000, Slovenia.
(8)Department of Virology, Institut Pasteur, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.
(9)Department of Pharmacology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510,
USA; Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Yale School of Medicine,
New Haven, CT 06510, USA.
(10)Department of Neuroscience and Kavli Institute for Neuroscience, Yale School
of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA; Section of Comparative Medicine, Yale
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA; Department of Obstetrics,
Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06510, USA; Yale Program in Integrative Cell Signaling and Neurobiology of
Metabolism, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA. Electronic
address: tamas.horvath@yale.edu.
(11)Department of Microbial Pathogenesis, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06510, USA. Electronic address: brett.lindenbach@yale.edu.
(12)Department of Neuroscience and Kavli Institute for Neuroscience, Yale School
of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA; Cellular Neuroscience, Neurodegeneration
and Repair Program, Departments of Neurology and Neuroscience, Yale School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA; Section of Comparative Medicine, Yale School
of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA; Departments of Genetics and Psychiatry,
Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA. Electronic address:
nenad.sestan@yale.edu.

The mechanisms underlying Zika virus (ZIKV)-related microcephaly and other
neurodevelopment defects remain poorly understood. Here, we describe the
derivation and characterization, including single-cell RNA-seq, of neocortical
and spinal cord neuroepithelial stem (NES) cells to model early human
neurodevelopment and ZIKV-related neuropathogenesis. By analyzing human NES
cells, organotypic fetal brain slices, and a ZIKV-infected micrencephalic brain,
we show that ZIKV infects both neocortical and spinal NES cells as well as their
fetal homolog, radial glial cells (RGCs), causing disrupted mitoses,
supernumerary centrosomes, structural disorganization, and cell death. ZIKV
infection of NES cells and RGCs causes centrosomal depletion and mitochondrial
sequestration of phospho-TBK1 during mitosis. We also found that nucleoside
analogs inhibit ZIKV replication in NES cells, protecting them from ZIKV-induced
pTBK1 relocalization and cell death. We established a model system of human
neural stem cells to reveal cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying
neurodevelopmental defects associated with ZIKV infection and its potential
treatment.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.08.038
PMCID: PMC5135012
PMID: 27568284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
