---
reference_id: "PMID:35880382"
title: "Pallidus Stimulation for Chorea-Acanthocytosis: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Individual Data."
authors:
- He W
- Li C
- Dong H
- Shao L
- Yin B
- Li D
- Ye L
- Hu P
- Zhang C
- Yi W
journal: J Mov Disord
year: '2022'
doi: 10.14802/jmd.22003
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pallidus Stimulation for Chorea-Acanthocytosis: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Individual Data.
**Authors:** He W, Li C, Dong H, Shao L, Yin B, Li D, Ye L, Hu P, Zhang C, Yi W
**Journal:** J Mov Disord (2022)
**DOI:** [10.14802/jmd.22003](https://doi.org/10.14802/jmd.22003)

## Content

1. J Mov Disord. 2022 Sep;15(3):197-205. doi: 10.14802/jmd.22003. Epub 2022 Jul
26.

Pallidus Stimulation for Chorea-Acanthocytosis: A Systematic Review and 
Meta-Analysis of Individual Data.

He W(1), Li C(1), Dong H(2), Shao L(1), Yin B(2), Li D(3), Ye L(1), Hu P(1), 
Zhang C(3), Yi W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, 
China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
(3)Department of Functional Neurosurgery, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

A significant proportion of patients with chorea-acanthocytosis (ChAc) fail to 
respond to standard therapies. Recent evidence suggests that globus pallidus 
internus (GPi) deep brain stimulation (DBS) is a promising treatment option; 
however, reports are few and limited by sample sizes. We conducted a systematic 
literature review to evaluate the clinical outcome of GPi-DBS for ChAc. PubMed, 
Embase, and Cochrane Library databases were searched for relevant articles 
published before August 2021. The improvement of multiple motor and nonmotor 
symptoms was qualitatively presented. Improvements in the Unified Huntington's 
Disease Rating Scale motor score (UHDRS-MS) were also analyzed during different 
follow-up periods. A multivariate linear regression analysis was conducted to 
identify potential predictors of clinical outcomes. Twenty articles, including 
27 patients, were eligible. Ninety-six percent of patients with oromandibular 
dystonia reported significant improvement. GPi-DBS significantly improved the 
UHDRS-motor score at < 6 months (p < 0.001) and ≥ 6 months (p < 0.001). The 
UHDRS-motor score improvement rate was over 25% in 75% (15/20 cases) of patients 
at long-term follow-up (≥ 6 months). The multiple linear regression analysis 
showed that sex, age at onset, course of disease, and preoperative movement 
score had no linear relationship with motor improvement at long-term follow-up 
(p > 0.05). GPi-DBS is an effective and safe treatment in most patients with 
ChAc, but no reliable predictor of efficacy has been found. Oromandibular 
dystonia-dominant patients might be the best candidates for GPi-DBS.

DOI: 10.14802/jmd.22003
PMCID: PMC9536914
PMID: 35880382

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest The authors have no 
financial conflicts of interest.