---
reference_id: "PMID:37107186"
title: "Oxidants and Cardiorenal Vascular Remodeling-Insights from Rare Genetic Tubulopathies: Bartter's and Gitelman's Syndromes."
authors:
- Sgarabotto L
- Ravarotto V
- Stefanelli LF
- Cacciapuoti M
- Davis PA
- Nalesso F
- Calò LA
journal: Antioxidants (Basel)
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/antiox12040811
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Oxidants and Cardiorenal Vascular Remodeling-Insights from Rare Genetic Tubulopathies: Bartter's and Gitelman's Syndromes.
**Authors:** Sgarabotto L, Ravarotto V, Stefanelli LF, Cacciapuoti M, Davis PA, Nalesso F, Calò LA
**Journal:** Antioxidants (Basel) (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/antiox12040811](https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox12040811)

## Content

1. Antioxidants (Basel). 2023 Mar 26;12(4):811. doi: 10.3390/antiox12040811.

Oxidants and Cardiorenal Vascular Remodeling-Insights from Rare Genetic 
Tubulopathies: Bartter's and Gitelman's Syndromes.

Sgarabotto L(1), Ravarotto V(1), Stefanelli LF(1), Cacciapuoti M(1), Davis 
PA(2), Nalesso F(1), Calò LA(1).

Author information:
(1)Nephrology, Dialysis and Transplantation Unit, Department of Medicine, 
University of Padova, 35128 Padova, Italy.
(2)Department of Nutrition, University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA.

Two human genetic tubulopathies, Bartter's (BS) and Gitelman's (GS) syndromes, 
have normo/hypotension and absent cardiac remodeling despite their apparent 
angiotensin system (RAS) activation. This seeming contradiction has led to an 
extensive investigation of BSGS patients, the result of which is that BSGS 
represents a mirror image of hypertension. BSGS's unique set of properties has 
then permitted their use as a human model to probe and characterize RAS system 
pathways and oxidative stress in cardiovascular and renal remodeling and 
pathophysiology. This review details the results using GSBS patients that 
provide a deeper understanding of Ang II signaling and its associated 
oxidants/oxidative stress in humans. By providing a more complete and complex 
picture of cardiovascular and renal remodeling pathways and processes, studies 
of GSBS can inform the identification and selection of new targets and therapies 
to treat these and other oxidant-related disorders.

DOI: 10.3390/antiox12040811
PMCID: PMC10135094
PMID: 37107186

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.