---
reference_id: "PMID:40473982"
title: "Comprehensive morphological, immunohistochemical, and molecular characterization of congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM)."
authors:
- Schweitzer S
- Stiller M
- Lacher M
- Aubert O
- Krämer S
- Hirsch FW
- Gräfe D
- Hauptmann K
- Arnold A
- Horst D
- Chirica M
- Klauschen F
- Obeck U
- Boeschen M
- Bläker H
- von Laffert M
journal: Virchows Arch
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s00428-025-04131-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Comprehensive morphological, immunohistochemical, and molecular characterization of congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM).
**Authors:** Schweitzer S, Stiller M, Lacher M, Aubert O, Krämer S, Hirsch FW, Gräfe D, Hauptmann K, Arnold A, Horst D, Chirica M, Klauschen F, Obeck U, Boeschen M, Bläker H, von Laffert M
**Journal:** Virchows Arch (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00428-025-04131-4](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00428-025-04131-4)

## Content

1. Virchows Arch. 2025 Jun 6. doi: 10.1007/s00428-025-04131-4. Online ahead of 
print.

Comprehensive morphological, immunohistochemical, and molecular characterization 
of congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM).

Schweitzer S(1), Stiller M(1), Lacher M(2), Aubert O(2), Krämer S(3), Hirsch 
FW(4), Gräfe D(4), Hauptmann K(5), Arnold A(5), Horst D(5), Chirica M(6), 
Klauschen F(6), Obeck U(1), Boeschen M(1), Bläker H(1), von Laffert M(7).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathology, Leipzig University, Liebigstraße 26, 04103, Leipzig, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Leipzig University, Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Department of Visceral, Transplantation, Thoracic, and Vascular Surgery, 
Leipzig University, Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Department of Pediatric Radiology, Leipzig University, Leipzig, Germany.
(5)Institute of Pathology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin,, Corporate Member 
Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(6)Institute of Pathology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, 
Germany.
(7)Institute of Pathology, Leipzig University, Liebigstraße 26, 04103, Leipzig, 
Germany. maximilian.von-laffert@medizin.uni-leipzig.de.

Congenital pulmonary airway malformation (CPAM) is among the most common 
congenital lung disorders. Possible findings are foci of mucinous cell clusters 
(MCCs), harboring KRAS mutations. Studies combining morphology, 
immunohistochemistry (IHC), and molecular data are scarce. A total of. 46 CPAM 
lesions were assessed by conventional histomorphology. IHC was performed to 
analyze lung-specific markers, transcription factors, and epithelial markers 
reflecting the structural composition of the bronchial tree and alveolar system. 
Next-generation sequencing (NGS) was conducted to identify mutations and 
fusions. CPAM type 1 was found in 50%, type 2 in 22%, and type 3 in 6%. A mixed 
pattern of types 1 and 2 was observed in 22%. The epithelial lining was strongly 
positive for CK7 and TTF-1 in all samples. Expression for Napsin A, Surfactant 
A, p40, CK5/6, and CK20 varied within and between subtypes. P40 and CK5/6 were 
more enriched in type 1 compared to type 2. MCCs occurred in 17%. Mutations were 
found in 24% (9 × KRAS; 2 × FGFR2). Besides classical KRAS mutations (G12D, 
G12V), two cases showed a double-mutation pattern (G12D/G12V; G12D/TP53). In all 
MCC cases, the same mutation with comparable allele frequencies was found in 
mucinous and non-mucinous areas. No fusions were detected. The presence of 
mixed-type patterns supports the hypothesis that CPAM represents a continuum of 
developmental disturbances occurring at various stages of lung branching 
morphogenesis. This is further corroborated by the divergent protein expression 
patterns. Our study confirms recent findings that the same KRAS mutations occur 
in mucinous and non-mucinous areas. The identification of additional mutations, 
including potential co-mutations, underscores the need for further investigation 
into molecularly defined CPAM subtypes.

© 2025. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00428-025-04131-4
PMID: 40473982

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Ethics approval and consent to 
participate: This study was conducted in accordance with the Ethics Committee of 
the Medical Faculty of Leipzig University (009/24-ek); all procedures complied 
with the Declaration of Helsinki. Conflict of interest: The authors declare no 
competing interests. 