---
reference_id: "PMID:7726222"
title: Genital abnormalities in females with Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
authors:
- Stoler JM
- Herrin JT
- Holmes LB
journal: Am J Med Genet
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320550306
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genital abnormalities in females with Bardet-Biedl syndrome.
**Authors:** Stoler JM, Herrin JT, Holmes LB
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.1320550306](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.1320550306)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet. 1995 Jan 30;55(3):276-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320550306.

Genital abnormalities in females with Bardet-Biedl syndrome.

Stoler JM(1), Herrin JT, Holmes LB.

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Teratology Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston 
02114-2696, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Med Genet. 1997 Mar 17;69(2):220.

The major manifestations of the Bardet-Biedl syndrome are digital anomalies, 
tapetoretinal degeneration, obesity, renal abnormalities, and hypogenitalism 
(described mainly in males). We report on 2 girls with Bardet-Biedl syndrome who 
also had vaginal atresia. A similar association in females with Bardet-Biedl 
syndrome was suggested in published reports of 11 affected individuals who had 
structural genital abnormalities, (some of which were missed in childhood), 
including persistent urogenital sinus, ectopic urethra, hypoplasia of the 
uterus, ovaries and fallopian tubes, uterus duplex, and septate vagina. The 
association of atresia of the vagina and other malformations of female genital 
structures in individuals with Bardet-Biedl syndrome has often been missed in 
childhood and should be looked for more systematically.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.1320550306
PMID: 7726222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]