---
reference_id: "PMID:17059358"
title: Genetic defects in ciliary structure and function.
authors:
- Zariwala MA
- Knowles MR
- Omran H
journal: Annu Rev Physiol
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1146/annurev.physiol.69.040705.141301
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic defects in ciliary structure and function.
**Authors:** Zariwala MA, Knowles MR, Omran H
**Journal:** Annu Rev Physiol (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1146/annurev.physiol.69.040705.141301](https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.physiol.69.040705.141301)

## Content

1. Annu Rev Physiol. 2007;69:423-50. doi:
10.1146/annurev.physiol.69.040705.141301.

Genetic defects in ciliary structure and function.

Zariwala MA(1), Knowles MR, Omran H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of 
North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA. zariwala@med.unc.edu

Cilia, hair-like structures extending from the cell membrane, perform diverse 
biological functions. Primary (genetic) defects in the structure and function of 
sensory and motile cilia result in multiple ciliopathies. The most prominent 
genetic abnormality involving motile cilia (and the respiratory tract) is 
primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD). PCD is a rare, usually autosomal recessive, 
genetically heterogeneous disorder characterized by sino-pulmonary disease, 
laterality defects, and male infertility. Ciliary ultrastructural defects are 
identified in approximately 90% of PCD patients and involve the outer dynein 
arms, inner dynein arms, or both. Diagnosing PCD is challenging and requires a 
compatible clinical phenotype together with tests such as ciliary 
ultrastructural analysis, immunofluorescent staining, ciliary beat assessment, 
and/or nasal nitric oxide measurements. Recent mutational analysis demonstrated 
that 38% of PCD patients carry mutations of the dynein genes DNAI1 and DNAH5. 
Increased understanding of the pathogenesis will aid in better diagnosis and 
treatment of PCD.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.physiol.69.040705.141301
PMID: 17059358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]