---
reference_id: "PMID:33512037"
title: Successful treatment of chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatosis with lipodystrophy and elevated temperature (CANDLE) syndrome with tofacitinib.
authors:
- Patel PN
- Hunt R
- Pettigrew ZJ
- Shirley JB
- Vogel TP
- de Guzman MM
journal: Pediatr Dermatol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/pde.14517
keywords:
- Child
- Female
- Fever
- Humans
- Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes
- Lipodystrophy
- Piperidines
- Pyrimidines
- Skin Diseases
- Sweet Syndrome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Successful treatment of chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatosis with lipodystrophy and elevated temperature (CANDLE) syndrome with tofacitinib.
**Authors:** Patel PN, Hunt R, Pettigrew ZJ, Shirley JB, Vogel TP, de Guzman MM
**Journal:** Pediatr Dermatol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/pde.14517](https://doi.org/10.1111/pde.14517)

## Content

1. Pediatr Dermatol. 2021 Mar;38(2):528-529. doi: 10.1111/pde.14517. Epub 2021
Jan  29.

Successful treatment of chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatosis with
lipodystrophy and elevated temperature (CANDLE) syndrome with tofacitinib.

Patel PN(1)(2), Hunt R(1)(2), Pettigrew ZJ(3)(4), Shirley JB(5)(6), Vogel
TP(1)(2), de Guzman MM(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(2)Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(4)North Carolina Children's Hospital, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.
(5)University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA.
(6)Children's Hospital of Colorado, Aurora, CO, USA.

Chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatosis with lipodystrophy and elevated
temperature (CANDLE) syndrome is a rare autoinflammatory disorder. Cutaneous
manifestations of CANDLE syndrome include characteristic recurring violaceous
annular plaques comprised of an immature dermal mononuclear cell infiltrate. In
CANDLE syndrome, deleterious genetic mutations inhibit
proteasome-immunoproteasome function, resulting in cellular accumulation of
ubiquitinated waste proteins that activate type I interferon signaling to drive
inflammation. We describe a report of successful treatment of a 12-year-old girl
with CANDLE syndrome with tofacitinib.

© 2021 Wiley Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1111/pde.14517
PMID: 33512037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
