---
reference_id: "PMID:15286788"
title: Hartnup disorder is caused by mutations in the gene encoding the neutral amino acid transporter SLC6A19.
authors:
- Seow HF
- Bröer S
- Bröer A
- Bailey CG
- Potter SJ
- Cavanaugh JA
- Rasko JE
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1038/ng1406
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- "Amino Acid Transport Systems, Neutral/genetics"
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 5"
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- Gene Frequency
- Hartnup Disease/genetics
- Humans
- Kidney/metabolism
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hartnup disorder is caused by mutations in the gene encoding the neutral amino acid transporter SLC6A19.
**Authors:** Seow HF, Bröer S, Bröer A, Bailey CG, Potter SJ, Cavanaugh JA, Rasko JE
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1406](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1406)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2004 Sep;36(9):1003-7. doi: 10.1038/ng1406. Epub 2004 Aug 1.

Hartnup disorder is caused by mutations in the gene encoding the neutral amino
acid transporter SLC6A19.

Seow HF(1), Bröer S, Bröer A, Bailey CG, Potter SJ, Cavanaugh JA, Rasko JE.

Author information:
(1)Gene Therapy, Centenary Institute of Cancer Medicine & Cell Biology,
University of Sydney, NSW 2042, Australia.

Hartnup disorder (OMIM 234500) is an autosomal recessive abnormality of renal
and gastrointestinal neutral amino acid transport noted for its clinical
variability. We localized a gene causing Hartnup disorder to chromosome 5p15.33
and cloned a new gene, SLC6A19, in this region. SLC6A19 is a sodium-dependent
and chloride-independent neutral amino acid transporter, expressed predominately
in kidney and intestine, with properties of system B(0). We identified six
mutations in SLC6A19 that cosegregated with disease in the predicted recessive
manner, with most affected individuals being compound heterozygotes. The
disease-causing mutations that we tested reduced neutral amino acid transport
function in vitro. Population frequencies for the most common mutated SLC6A19
alleles are 0.007 for 517G --> A and 0.001 for 718C --> T. Our findings indicate
that SLC6A19 is the long-sought gene that is mutated in Hartnup disorder; its
identification provides the opportunity to examine the inconsistent
multisystemic features of this disorder.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1406
PMID: 15286788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
