---
reference_id: "PMID:1283669"
title: "Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome: education exposure, knowledge and attitude of Nigerian adolescents in Calabar."
authors:
- Asindi AA
- Ibia EO
- Young MU
journal: Ann Trop Paediatr
year: '1992'
doi: 10.1080/02724936.1992.11747605
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome: education exposure, knowledge and attitude of Nigerian adolescents in Calabar.
**Authors:** Asindi AA, Ibia EO, Young MU
**Journal:** Ann Trop Paediatr (1992)
**DOI:** [10.1080/02724936.1992.11747605](https://doi.org/10.1080/02724936.1992.11747605)

## Content

1. Ann Trop Paediatr. 1992;12(4):397-402. doi: 10.1080/02724936.1992.11747605.

Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome: education exposure, knowledge and attitude 
of Nigerian adolescents in Calabar.

Asindi AA(1), Ibia EO, Young MU.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University of Calabar Teaching Hospital, Nigeria.

The knowledge of and attitude to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) of 
738 secondary school youths in Calabar were studied by questionnaire in March 
1991. Most (92%) of the adolescents had heard about AIDS, largely through the 
mass media (79-85%), with parents and teachers contributing in less than 40%. 
About 30% did not know that AIDS exists in Nigeria. Most of them knew that 
promiscuity, blood transfusion and sharing injection needles and syringes are 
the major modes of transmission, but a number still incriminate toilet seats, 
eating utensils, hand-shaking and kissing. Only 31% were aware that condoms 
provide protection. For self-protection the youths prefer abstinence (45%) and 
confinement to one sex partner (19%). Only 3.6% would adopt the use of condoms. 
To prevent the spread of AIDS, the youths prescribe isolation (37%), treatment 
(34%), and killing (14%) of diagnosed cases. Most youths (77%) will stop seeing 
friends and 63% will reject relatives who develop AIDS. The study reveals that 
while general awareness of AIDS is fairly good, detailed knowledge is riddled 
with misconceptions and confusion. It is recommended that physicians in the 
community should assist in disseminating accurate information, with the support 
of parents, teachers and the youths themselves.

PIP: This paper reports findings from a study of the knowledge and attitude 
toward AIDS of 738 secondary school youths in Calabar. Queried in March 1991, 
10.3% of the respondents were under age 15, while 79.5% were aged 15-20. 92% had 
heard about AIDs, with 79-85% doing so through the mass media. The input of 
parents and teachers was noted in less than 40% of cases. 30% did not know AIDS 
existed in Nigeria. Most knew that promiscuity, blood transfusions, sharing 
injection needles and syringes are the major modes of transmission, yet some 
held that toilet seats, eating utensils, hand-shaking, and kissing are risk 
factors for contracting HIV. Only 31% were aware that condoms provide 
protection, so their use to that end was suggested by only 2.6%. Instead, 45% 
prefer to abstain and 19% choose to remain monogamous in order to protect 
themselves from HIV. To prevent the spread of AIDS, 37% recommended that cases 
be isolated, 34% recommended treatment, and 14% though cases should be executed. 
77% and 63% responded that they would stop seeing, respectively, friends and 
relatives who develop AIDS. 61% were unaware that no cure exists for AIDS. In 
light of these findings, it is recommended that doctors in the community help 
disseminate accurate information with the support of parents, teachers, and 
youths.

DOI: 10.1080/02724936.1992.11747605
PMID: 1283669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]