---
reference_id: "PMID:21245435"
title: "Pralatrexate in patients with relapsed or refractory peripheral T-cell lymphoma: results from the pivotal PROPEL study."
authors:
- "O'Connor OA"
- Pro B
- Pinter-Brown L
- Bartlett N
- Popplewell L
- Coiffier B
- Lechowicz MJ
- Savage KJ
- Shustov AR
- Gisselbrecht C
- Jacobsen E
- Zinzani PL
- Furman R
- Goy A
- Haioun C
- Crump M
- Zain JM
- Hsi E
- Boyd A
- Horwitz S
journal: J Clin Oncol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1200/JCO.2010.29.9024
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Aminopterin/analogs & derivatives, therapeutic use"
- "Drug Resistance, Neoplasm/drug effects"
- Female
- Folic Acid Antagonists/therapeutic use
- Humans
- International Agencies
- "Lymphoma, T-Cell, Peripheral/drug therapy, pathology"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/drug therapy, pathology"
- Prospective Studies
- Remission Induction
- Salvage Therapy
- Standard of Care
- Survival Rate
- Treatment Outcome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pralatrexate in patients with relapsed or refractory peripheral T-cell lymphoma: results from the pivotal PROPEL study.
**Authors:** O'Connor OA, Pro B, Pinter-Brown L, Bartlett N, Popplewell L, Coiffier B, Lechowicz MJ, Savage KJ, Shustov AR, Gisselbrecht C, Jacobsen E, Zinzani PL, Furman R, Goy A, Haioun C, Crump M, Zain JM, Hsi E, Boyd A, Horwitz S
**Journal:** J Clin Oncol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1200/JCO.2010.29.9024](https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.2010.29.9024)

## Content

1. J Clin Oncol. 2011 Mar 20;29(9):1182-9. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2010.29.9024. Epub
2011  Jan 18.

Pralatrexate in patients with relapsed or refractory peripheral T-cell lymphoma:
results from the pivotal PROPEL study.

O'Connor OA(1), Pro B, Pinter-Brown L, Bartlett N, Popplewell L, Coiffier B,
Lechowicz MJ, Savage KJ, Shustov AR, Gisselbrecht C, Jacobsen E, Zinzani PL,
Furman R, Goy A, Haioun C, Crump M, Zain JM, Hsi E, Boyd A, Horwitz S.

Author information:
(1)New York University (NYU) Cancer Institute, NYU Langone Medical Center, New
York, NY, USA. owen.o'connor@nyumc.org

PURPOSE: Peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL) is a poor prognosis subtype of
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma with no accepted standard of care. This study evaluated
the efficacy and tolerability of pralatrexate, a novel antifolate with promising
activity.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients with independently confirmed PTCL who progressed
following ≥ 1 line of prior therapy received pralatrexate intravenously at 30
mg/m(2)/wk for 6 weeks in 7-week cycles. Primary assessment of response was made
by independent central review using the International Workshop Criteria. The
primary end point was overall response rate. Secondary end points included
duration of response, progression-free survival (PFS), and overall survival
(OS).
RESULTS: Of 115 patients enrolled, 111 were treated with pralatrexate. The
median number of prior systemic therapies was three (range, 1 to 12). The
response rate in 109 evaluable patients was 29% (32 of 109), including 12
complete responses (11%) and 20 partial responses (18%), with a median DoR of
10.1 months. Median PFS and OS were 3.5 and 14.5 months, respectively. The most
common grade 3/4 adverse events were thrombocytopenia (32%), mucositis (22%),
neutropenia (22%), and anemia (18%).
CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, PROPEL (Pralatrexate in Patients with Relapsed or
Refractory Peripheral T-Cell Lymphoma) is the largest prospective study
conducted in patients with relapsed or refractory PTCL. Pralatrexate induced
durable responses in relapsed or refractory PTCL irrespective of age, histologic
subtypes, amount of prior therapy, prior methotrexate, and prior autologous
stem-cell transplant. These data formed the basis for the US Food and Drug
Administration approval of pralatrexate, the first drug approved for this
disease.

DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2010.29.9024
PMCID: PMC3083873
PMID: 21245435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Authors' disclosures of potential conflicts of
interest and author contributions are found at the end of this article.
