---
reference_id: "PMID:31114860"
title: Incidence and predictors of implantable cardioverter-defibrillator therapy and its complications in idiopathic ventricular fibrillation patients.
authors:
- Blom LJ
- Visser M
- Christiaans I
- Scholten MF
- Bootsma M
- van den Berg MP
- Yap SC
- van der Heijden JF
- Doevendans PA
- Loh P
- Postema PG
- Barge-Schaapsveld DQ
- Hofman N
- Volders PGA
- Wilde AA
- Hassink RJ
journal: Europace
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1093/europace/euz151
keywords:
- Adult
- "Death, Sudden, Cardiac/epidemiology, etiology, prevention & control"
- "Defibrillators, Implantable/adverse effects"
- Electrocardiography
- Female
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Netherlands/epidemiology
- "Tachycardia, Ventricular/mortality, physiopathology, therapy"
- Treatment Outcome
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Incidence and predictors of implantable cardioverter-defibrillator therapy and its complications in idiopathic ventricular fibrillation patients.
**Authors:** Blom LJ, Visser M, Christiaans I, Scholten MF, Bootsma M, van den Berg MP, Yap SC, van der Heijden JF, Doevendans PA, Loh P, Postema PG, Barge-Schaapsveld DQ, Hofman N, Volders PGA, Wilde AA, Hassink RJ
**Journal:** Europace (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1093/europace/euz151](https://doi.org/10.1093/europace/euz151)

## Content

1. Europace. 2019 Oct 1;21(10):1519-1526. doi: 10.1093/europace/euz151.

Incidence and predictors of implantable cardioverter-defibrillator therapy and 
its complications in idiopathic ventricular fibrillation patients.

Blom LJ(1), Visser M(1), Christiaans I(2), Scholten MF(3), Bootsma M(4), van den 
Berg MP(5), Yap SC(6), van der Heijden JF(1), Doevendans PA(1)(7)(8), Loh P(1), 
Postema PG(9), Barge-Schaapsveld DQ(10), Hofman N(2), Volders PGA(11), Wilde 
AA(9), Hassink RJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Cardiogenetics, AMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Thoraxcentrum Twente, Medisch Spectrum Twente, 
Enschede, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Cardiology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(5)Department of Cardiology, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the 
Netherlands.
(6)Department of Cardiology, University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(7)Central Military Hospital, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(8)Netherlands Heart Institute (ICIN), Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(9)Department of Clinical and Experimental Cardiology, Heart Centre, Amsterdam 
UMC, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(10)Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
The Netherlands.
(11)Department of Cardiology, Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht 
(CARIM), Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, The Netherlands.

AIMS: Idiopathic ventricular fibrillation (IVF) is a rare cause of sudden 
cardiac arrest. Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) implantation is 
currently the only treatment option. Limited data are available on the 
prevalence and complications of ICD therapy in these patients. We sought to 
investigate ICD therapy and its complications in patients with IVF.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Patients were selected from a national registry of IVF 
patients. Patients in whom no underlying diagnosis was found during follow-up 
were eligible for inclusion. Recurrence of ventricular arrhythmia (VA) was 
derived from medical and ICD records, electrogram records of ICD therapies were 
used to differentiate between appropriate or inappropriate interventions. 
Independent predictors for appropriate ICD shock were calculated using cox 
regression. In 217 IVF patients, recurrence of sustained VAs occurred in 66 
patients (30%) during a median follow-up period of 6.1 years. Ten patients died 
(4.6%). Thirty-eight patients (17.5%) experienced inappropriate ICD therapy, and 
32 patients (14.7%) had device-related complications. Symptoms before cardiac 
arrest [hazard ratio (HR): 2.51, 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.48-4.24], signs 
of conduction disease (HR: 2.27, 95% CI: 1.15-4.47), and carrier of the DPP6 
risk haplotype (HR: 3.24, 1.70-6.17) were identified as independent predictors 
of appropriate shock occurrence.
CONCLUSION: Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator therapy is an effective 
treatment in IVF, treating recurrences of potentially lethal VAs in 
approximately one-third of patients during long-term follow-up. However, 
device-related complications and inappropriate shocks were also frequent. We 
found significant predictors for appropriate ICD therapy. This may imply that 
these patients require additional management to prevent recurrent events.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. 
© The Author(s) 2019. For permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/europace/euz151
PMID: 31114860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]