---
reference_id: "PMID:38370838"
title: "Metagenomic, metabolomic, and lipidomic shifts associated with fecal microbiota transplantation for recurrent Clostridioides difficile infection."
authors:
- McMillan AS
- Zhang G
- Dougherty MK
- McGill SK
- Gulati AS
- Baker ES
- Theriot CM
journal: bioRxiv
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1101/2024.02.07.579219
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Metagenomic, metabolomic, and lipidomic shifts associated with fecal microbiota transplantation for recurrent Clostridioides difficile infection.
**Authors:** McMillan AS, Zhang G, Dougherty MK, McGill SK, Gulati AS, Baker ES, Theriot CM
**Journal:** bioRxiv (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1101/2024.02.07.579219](https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.07.579219)

## Content

1. bioRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Feb 9:2024.02.07.579219. doi: 
10.1101/2024.02.07.579219.

Metagenomic, metabolomic, and lipidomic shifts associated with fecal microbiota 
transplantation for recurrent Clostridioides difficile infection.

McMillan AS, Zhang G, Dougherty MK, McGill SK, Gulati AS, Baker ES, Theriot CM.

Update in
    mSphere. 2024 Oct 29;9(10):e0070624. doi: 10.1128/msphere.00706-24.

Recurrent C. difficile infection (rCDI) is an urgent public health threat for 
which the last resort and lifesaving treatment is a fecal microbiota transplant 
(FMT). However, the exact mechanisms which mediate a successful FMT are not well 
understood. Here we use longitudinal stool samples collected from patients 
undergoing FMT to evaluate changes in the microbiome, metabolome, and lipidome 
after successful FMTs. We show changes in the abundance of many lipids, 
specifically acylcarnitines and bile acids, in response to FMT. These changes 
correlate with Enterobacteriaceae, which encode carnitine metabolism genes, and 
Lachnospiraceae, which encode bile salt hydrolases and baiA genes. LC-IMS-MS 
revealed a shift from microbial conjugation of primary bile acids pre-FMT to 
secondary bile acids post-FMT. Here we define the structural and functional 
changes in successful FMTs. This information will help guide targeted Live 
Biotherapeutic Product development for the treatment of rCDI and other 
intestinal diseases.

DOI: 10.1101/2024.02.07.579219
PMCID: PMC10871284
PMID: 38370838