---
reference_id: "PMID:32464195"
title: Blood plasma proteomic modulation induced by olanzapine and risperidone in schizophrenia patients.
authors:
- Garcia-Rosa S
- Carvalho BS
- Guest PC
- Steiner J
- Martins-de-Souza D
journal: J Proteomics
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2020.103813
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Blood plasma proteomic modulation induced by olanzapine and risperidone in schizophrenia patients.
**Authors:** Garcia-Rosa S, Carvalho BS, Guest PC, Steiner J, Martins-de-Souza D
**Journal:** J Proteomics (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jprot.2020.103813](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jprot.2020.103813)

## Content

1. J Proteomics. 2020 Jul 30;224:103813. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2020.103813. Epub 
2020 May 26.

Blood plasma proteomic modulation induced by olanzapine and risperidone in 
schizophrenia patients.

Garcia-Rosa S(1), Carvalho BS(2), Guest PC(1), Steiner J(3), Martins-de-Souza 
D(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neuroproteomics, Department of Biochemistry and Tissue Biology, 
Institute of Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil.
(2)Department of Statistics, Institute of Mathematics, Statistics and Scientific 
Computation, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Magdeburg, 
Magdeburg, Germany; The Center for Behavioral Brain Sciences, Magdeburg, 
Germany.
(4)Laboratory of Neuroproteomics, Department of Biochemistry and Tissue Biology, 
Institute of Biology, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil; 
Experimental Medicine Research Cluster (EMRC), University of Campinas, Campinas, 
SP 13083-862, Brazil; Instituto Nacional de Biomarcadores em Neuropsiquiatria 
(INBION) Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico, Sao 
Paulo, Brazil; D'Or Institute for Research and Education (IDOR), São Paulo, 
Brazil. Electronic address: dmsouza@unicamp.br.

Antipsychotics are the main line of treatment for schizophrenia. Even though 
there are significant rates of medication drop out due to side effects and 
limited response of approximately 50% of patients. This is likely due to 
incomplete knowledge in how these drugs act at the molecular level. To improve 
treatment efficacy during the critical early stages of schizophrenia, we aimed 
to identify molecular signatures at baseline (T0) for prediction of a positive 
response to the atypical antipsychotics olanzapine and risperidone after 6 weeks 
(T6) treatment. Blood plasma samples were processed and analyzed by label-free 
quantitative shotgun proteomics using two-dimensional nano-liquid 
chromatography, coupled online to a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer. Data were 
obtained in MSE mode (data-independent acquisition) in combination with 
ion-mobility (HDMSE). We were able to identify a potential panel of proteins 
that might predict a positive outcome to olanzapine and risperidone treatment. 
The proteins found to be differentially abundant between T0 and T6 in good 
responders compared to poor responders were analyzed in silico for enrichment 
pathways and found to be mostly involved with immune system functions. This data 
can contribute to better understand the biochemical signaling mechanisms 
peripherally triggered by antipsychotic medication and eventually used to 
develop surrogate biomarker tests to help improve treatment outcomes and guide 
development of new treatment approaches. SIGNIFICANCE: The application of 
proteomics to the study of the atypical antipsychotic effects on the blood 
plasma proteome from schizophrenia patients could help in the search for new 
targets to improve the current therapies, as well as in the development of new 
therapeutic strategies. In this original article, we provided clues that 
atypical antipsychotics might be associated with good response by modulating 
proteins that play a role in inflammation and/or immune system pathways. In 
addition, the proteins with differential abundance found in the comparison 
between good and poor responders at the baseline might compose a signature for 
prediction of response effectiveness.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2020.103813
PMID: 32464195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
declare no competing financial interests.