---
reference_id: "PMID:30468130"
title: The Causative Organisms of Bacterial Meningitis and their Antimicrobial Resistance Profiles in Iranian Children in 2011-2016.
authors:
- Valian SK
- Mahmoudi S
- Pourakbari B
- Banar M
- Ashtiani MTH
- Mamishi S
journal: Infect Disord Drug Targets
year: '2020'
doi: 10.2174/1871526519666181123130101
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Causative Organisms of Bacterial Meningitis and their Antimicrobial Resistance Profiles in Iranian Children in 2011-2016.
**Authors:** Valian SK, Mahmoudi S, Pourakbari B, Banar M, Ashtiani MTH, Mamishi S
**Journal:** Infect Disord Drug Targets (2020)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1871526519666181123130101](https://doi.org/10.2174/1871526519666181123130101)

## Content

1. Infect Disord Drug Targets. 2020;20(2):229-236. doi: 
10.2174/1871526519666181123130101.

The Causative Organisms of Bacterial Meningitis and their Antimicrobial 
Resistance Profiles in Iranian Children in 2011-2016.

Valian SK(1), Mahmoudi S(2), Pourakbari B(2), Banar M(2), Ashtiani MTH(3), 
Mamishi S(2)(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Pediatric Infectious Disease Research Center, Tehran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Pathology, Pediatrics Center of Excellence, Children's Medical 
Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Pediatrics Center of Excellence, 
Children's Medical Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

OBJECTIVES: The study aimed to describe the identity and antimicrobial 
resistance patterns of the causative agents of bacterial meningitis in children 
referred to Children's Medical Center (CMC) Hospital, Tehran, Iran.
METHODS: This retrospective study was performed at CMC Hospital during a 
six-year period from 2011 to 2016. The microbiological information of the 
patients with a diagnosis of bacterial meningitis was collected and the 
following data were obtained: patients' age, sex, hospital ward, the results of 
CSF and blood cultures, and antibiotic susceptibility profiles of isolated 
organisms.
RESULTS: A total of 118 patients with bacterial meningitis were admitted to CMC 
hospital. Sixty-two percent (n=73) of the patients were male. The median age of 
the patients was ten months (interquartile range [IQR]: 2 months-2 years) and 
the majority of them (n=92, 80%) were younger than two years of age. The highest 
number of patients (n=47, 40%) were admitted to the surgery department. 
Streptococcus epidermidis was the most frequent isolated bacterium (n=27/127, 
21%), followed by Klebsiella pneumoniae (n=20/127, 16%), and Staphylococcus 
aureus (n=16/127, 12.5%). Blood culture was positive in 28% (n=33/118) of 
patients. Ampicillin-sulbactam and imipenem were the most effective antibiotics 
against Gram-negative bacteria isolated from CSF cultures. In the case of 
Gram-positive organisms, ampicillinsulbactam, vancomycin, and linezolid were the 
best choices. Imipenem was the most active drug against Gram-negative blood 
pathogens. Also, ampicillin and vancomycin had the best effect on Gram-positive 
bacteria isolated from blood cultures.
CONCLUSION: Results of this study provide valuable information about the 
antibiotic resistance profiles of the etiologic agents of childhood meningitis, 
which can be used for prescription of more effective empirical therapies.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.net.

DOI: 10.2174/1871526519666181123130101
PMID: 30468130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]