---
reference_id: "PMID:19015167"
title: Arsenic and cardiovascular disease.
authors:
- States JC
- Srivastava S
- Chen Y
- Barchowsky A
journal: Toxicol Sci
year: '2009'
doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfn236
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arsenic and cardiovascular disease.
**Authors:** States JC, Srivastava S, Chen Y, Barchowsky A
**Journal:** Toxicol Sci (2009)
**DOI:** [10.1093/toxsci/kfn236](https://doi.org/10.1093/toxsci/kfn236)

## Content

1. Toxicol Sci. 2009 Feb;107(2):312-23. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfn236. Epub 2008 Nov
 17.

Arsenic and cardiovascular disease.

States JC(1), Srivastava S, Chen Y, Barchowsky A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Louisville, 
Louisville, Kentucky 40292, USA. jcstates@louisville.edu

Chronic arsenic exposure is a worldwide health problem. Although arsenic-induced 
cancer has been widely studied, comparatively little attention has been paid to 
arsenic-induced vascular disease. Epidemiological studies have shown that 
chronic arsenic exposure is associated with increased morbidity and mortality 
from cardiovascular disease. In addition, studies suggest that susceptibility to 
arsenic-induced vascular disease may be modified by nutritional factors in 
addition to genetic factors. Recently, animal models for arsenic-induced 
atherosclerosis and liver sinusoidal endothelial cell dysfunction have been 
developed. Initial studies in these models show that arsenic exposure 
accelerates and exacerbates atherosclerosis in apolipoprotein E-knockout mice. 
Microarray studies of liver mRNA and micro-RNA abundance in mice exposed in 
utero suggest that a permanent state of stress is induced by the arsenic 
exposure. Furthermore, the livers of the arsenic-exposed mice have activated 
pathways involved in immune responses suggesting a pro-hyperinflammatory state. 
Arsenic exposure of mice after weaning shows a clear dose-response in the extent 
of disease exacerbation. In addition, increased inflammation in arterial wall is 
evident. In response to arsenic-stimulated oxidative signaling, liver sinusoidal 
endothelium differentiates into a continuous endothelium that limits nutrient 
exchange and waste elimination. Data suggest that nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide phosphate oxidase-derived superoxide or its derivatives are 
essential second messengers in the signaling pathway for arsenic-stimulated 
vessel remodeling. The recent findings provide future directions for research 
into the cardiovascular effects of arsenic exposure.

DOI: 10.1093/toxsci/kfn236
PMCID: PMC2639760
PMID: 19015167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]