---
reference_id: "PMID:40795877"
title: "The role of radiotherapy in MPNST and the impact of NF1 status on outcomes: Insights from a multicenter cohort study."
authors:
- Jansma CYMN
- Grünhagen DJ
- Flucke UE
- Slooff WM
- van Dalen T
- Been LB
- Bonenkamp HJ
- Anten MHME
- Broen MPG
- Bemelmans MHA
- Bramer JAM
- Schaap GR
- Kievit AJ
- van Houdt WJ
- van der Hage J
- van de Sande MAJ
- Pendleton C
- Spinner RJ
- Coert JH
- Verhoef C
- Taal W
- Martin E
journal: Neuro Oncol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noaf186
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Male
- "Neurofibromatosis 1/pathology, radiotherapy, complications, mortality"
- Middle Aged
- Adult
- Aged
- Young Adult
- "Neoplasm Recurrence, Local/pathology, radiotherapy"
- Follow-Up Studies
- Adolescent
- Survival Rate
- Prognosis
- Retrospective Studies
- Cohort Studies
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of radiotherapy in MPNST and the impact of NF1 status on outcomes: Insights from a multicenter cohort study.
**Authors:** Jansma CYMN, Grünhagen DJ, Flucke UE, Slooff WM, van Dalen T, Been LB, Bonenkamp HJ, Anten MHME, Broen MPG, Bemelmans MHA, Bramer JAM, Schaap GR, Kievit AJ, van Houdt WJ, van der Hage J, van de Sande MAJ, Pendleton C, Spinner RJ, Coert JH, Verhoef C, Taal W, Martin E
**Journal:** Neuro Oncol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1093/neuonc/noaf186](https://doi.org/10.1093/neuonc/noaf186)

## Content

1. Neuro Oncol. 2025 Dec 1;27(12):3214-3223. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noaf186.

The role of radiotherapy in MPNST and the impact of NF1 status on outcomes:
Insights from a multicenter cohort study.

Jansma CYMN(1)(2), Grünhagen DJ(2), Flucke UE(3), Slooff WM(4), van Dalen T(2),
Been LB(5), Bonenkamp HJ(6), Anten MHME(7), Broen MPG(7), Bemelmans MHA(8),
Bramer JAM(9), Schaap GR(9), Kievit AJ(9), van Houdt WJ(10), van der Hage J(11),
van de Sande MAJ(12), Pendleton C(13), Spinner RJ(13), Coert JH(1), Verhoef
C(2), Taal W(14), Martin E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, University Medical Center
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Surgical Oncology and Gastrointestinal Surgery, Erasmus MC
Cancer Institute, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pathology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.
(5)Department of Surgical Oncology, University Medical Center Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Surgical Oncology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen,
The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Neurology, Maastricht University Medical Center+, Maastricht,
The Netherlands.
(8)Department of Surgical Oncology, Maastricht University Medical Center+,
Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(9)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Amsterdam University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(10)Department of Surgical Oncology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(11)Department of Surgical Oncology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
The Netherlands.
(12)Department of Orthopedic Oncology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
The Netherlands.
(13)Department of Neurosurgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(14)Department of Neurology, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNSTs) are rare,
aggressive sarcomas, with 40% associated with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1).
Surgical excision is the main treatment for localized disease; however, local
recurrence (LR) remains high. Radiotherapy (RTx) is increasingly used to enhance
local control in STS, but its use remains controversial due to the potential for
increased major wound complications and an increased risk of secondary
malignancies in NF1 patients. This study investigated the use and impact of RTx
on local control in MPNSTs, particularly in the NF1 setting.
METHODS: Surgically treated primary MPNSTs from 1988 to 2019 in the MONACO
multicenter cohort were included. Differences in demographics, treatment, and
RTx use between NF1 and non-NF1 cases were examined. Factors influencing RTx
administration and LR were assessed via multivariable analyses.
RESULTS: Among 499 patients (33.1% NF1), 143 (28.7%) experienced LRs.
Radiotherapy was administered to 56.3% of patients (57.0% in the NF1 group),
with 27.3% receiving neoadjuvant and 72.7% adjuvant RTx. RTx was administered
significantly more often to high-grade and extremity tumors. While RTx did not
affect overall survival, it reduced LR risk in sporadic cases (hazard ratio [HR]
0.530; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.354-0.793) but not in the NF1 subgroup
(HR 1.00; 95% CI, 0.545-1.85). In NF1 patients, a microscopically positive
margin (R1) was the only risk factor for LR development (HR 2.1; 95% CI,
1.19-3.79).
CONCLUSIONS: RTx is frequently used in the treatment of MPNSTs, regardless of
NF1 status. While it may affect the LR rate in sporadic cases, its impact on NF1
patients is less clear.

© The Author(s) 2025. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Neuro-Oncology.

DOI: 10.1093/neuonc/noaf186
PMCID: PMC12916730
PMID: 40795877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
