---
reference_id: PMID:16122419
title: Nutritional regulation of hepatic heme biosynthesis and porphyria through PGC-1alpha.
authors:
- Handschin C
- Lin J
- Rhee J
- Peyer AK
- Chin S
- Wu PH
- Meyer UA
- Spiegelman BM
journal: Cell
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.06.040
keywords:
- 5-Aminolevulinate Synthetase/metabolism
- Animals
- Fasting/metabolism
- Forkhead Box Protein O1
- Forkhead Transcription Factors
- Genetic Vectors
- Glucagon/metabolism
- Glucose/metabolism
- Heme/biosynthesis
- Insulin/metabolism
- "Liver/enzymology, physiopathology"
- Male
- Mice
- "Mice, Knockout"
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Peroxisome Proliferator-Activated Receptor Gamma Coactivator 1-alpha
- "Porphyrias/enzymology, genetics, physiopathology"
- Rats
- "Rats, Wistar"
- Trans-Activators/genetics
- Transcription Factors/metabolism
- Transfection
- "Tumor Cells, Cultured"
- Up-Regulation/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nutritional regulation of hepatic heme biosynthesis and porphyria through PGC-1alpha.
**Authors:** Handschin C, Lin J, Rhee J, Peyer AK, Chin S, Wu PH, Meyer UA, Spiegelman BM
**Journal:** Cell (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2005.06.040](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2005.06.040)

## Content

1. Cell. 2005 Aug 26;122(4):505-15. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.06.040.

Nutritional regulation of hepatic heme biosynthesis and porphyria through
PGC-1alpha.

Handschin C(1), Lin J, Rhee J, Peyer AK, Chin S, Wu PH, Meyer UA, Spiegelman BM.

Author information:
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2005 Aug 26;122(4):487-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.08.010.

Inducible hepatic porphyrias are inherited genetic disorders of enzymes of heme
biosynthesis. The main clinical manifestations are acute attacks of
neuropsychiatric symptoms frequently precipitated by drugs, hormones, or
fasting, associated with increased urinary excretion of delta-aminolevulinic
acid (ALA). Acute attacks are treated by heme infusion and glucose
administration, but the mechanisms underlying the precipitating effects of
fasting and the beneficial effects of glucose are unknown. We show that the
rate-limiting enzyme in hepatic heme biosynthesis, 5-aminolevulinate synthase
(ALAS-1), is regulated by the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
coactivator 1alpha (PGC-1alpha). Elevation of PGC-1alpha in mice via adenoviral
vectors increases the levels of heme precursors in vivo as observed in acute
attacks. The induction of ALAS-1 by fasting is lost in liver-specific PGC-1alpha
knockout animals, as is the ability of porphyrogenic drugs to dysregulate heme
biosynthesis. These data show that PGC-1alpha links nutritional status to heme
biosynthesis and acute hepatic porphyria.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2005.06.040
PMID: 16122419 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
