---
reference_id: "PMID:17250957"
title: The Biology of Ewing sarcoma.
authors:
- Riggi N
- Stamenkovic I
journal: Cancer Lett
year: '2007'
doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2006.12.009
keywords:
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Neoplastic"
- Humans
- "Oncogene Proteins, Fusion/genetics"
- Proto-Oncogene Protein c-fli-1/genetics
- RNA Interference
- RNA-Binding Protein EWS
- "Sarcoma, Ewing/genetics, pathology, therapy"
- "Translocation, Genetic"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The Biology of Ewing sarcoma.
**Authors:** Riggi N, Stamenkovic I
**Journal:** Cancer Lett (2007)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.canlet.2006.12.009](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.canlet.2006.12.009)

## Content

1. Cancer Lett. 2007 Aug 28;254(1):1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2006.12.009. Epub
2007 Jan 23.

The Biology of Ewing sarcoma.

Riggi N(1), Stamenkovic I.

Author information:
(1)Division of Experimental Pathology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Lausanne, Switzerland.

Sarcomas account for less than 10% of all human malignancies that are believed
to originate from as yet poorly defined mesenchymal progenitor cells. They
constitute some of the most aggressive adult and childhood cancers in that they
have a high metastatic proclivity and are typically refractory to conventional
chemo- and radiation therapy. Ewing's sarcoma is a member of Ewing's family
tumors (ESFT) and the second most common solid bone and soft tissue malignancy
of children and young adults. It is associated in 85% of cases with the
t(11;22)(q24:q12) chromosomal translocation that generates fusion of the 5'
segment of the EWS gene with the 3' segment of the ETS family gene FLI-1. The
resulting EWS-FLI-1 fusion protein is believed to behave as an aberrant
transcriptional activator that contributes to ESFT development by altering the
expression of its target genes in a permissive cellular environment. Although
ESFTs are among the best studied sarcomas, the mechanisms involved in
EWS-FLI-1-induced transformation require further elucidation and the primary
cells from which ESFTs originate need to be identified. This review will
highlight some of the most recent discoveries in the field of Ewing sarcoma
biology and origins.

DOI: 10.1016/j.canlet.2006.12.009
PMID: 17250957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
