---
reference_id: "PMID:38536645"
title: "Recent advances in understanding the biology of follicular lymphoma."
authors:
- Nishikori M
journal: Int J Hematol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1007/s12185-024-03764-6
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Recent advances in understanding the biology of follicular lymphoma.
**Authors:** Nishikori M
**Journal:** Int J Hematol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12185-024-03764-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12185-024-03764-6)

## Content

1. Int J Hematol. 2025 Mar;121(3):326-330. doi: 10.1007/s12185-024-03764-6. Epub
2024 Mar 27.

Recent advances in understanding the biology of follicular lymphoma.

Nishikori M(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan. nishikor@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
(2)Human Health Sciences, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, 53
Shogoin Kawahara-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8507, Japan.
nishikor@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

Follicular lymphoma (FL), the most common indolent B-cell lymphoma, develops
over decades before manifesting as overt disease. BCL2 overexpression by
t(14;18) confers a survival advantage to B cells during the germinal center
reaction, and abnormalities in epigenetic modifier genes lead to
desynchronization of gene expression changes in germinal center B cells. Studies
in mouse models have shown that BCL2 overexpression and epigenetic deregulation
in B cells cooperatively promote lymphomagenesis. The immune microenvironment
also plays an essential role in the biology of FL, and many molecular prognostic
indicators based on the immune microenvironment have been proposed. However,
high-risk gene signatures do not appear to be consistent between patients
receiving different chemotherapies. FL cells frequently carry N-linked
glycosylation motifs within the immunoglobulin gene, leading to chronic
activation of the B-cell receptor (BCR). Recent evidence suggests that this
chronic BCR signaling drives FL polarization toward a dark-zone phenotype and
promotes clonal evolution. Since both epigenetic and post-transcriptional
modifications of B cells have been implicated in the early stage of FL
development, it may be possible to use novel non-chemotherapeutic approaches
that interfere with the immunobiology in treatment or early prevention of FL.

DOI: 10.1007/s12185-024-03764-6
PMID: 38536645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations. Conflict of interest: The author
has received research funding from SymBio Pharmaceuticals Ltd.
