---
reference_id: "PMID:36835358"
title: In Silico Analysis of the Structural Dynamics and Substrate Recognition Determinants of the Human Mitochondrial Carnitine/Acylcarnitine SLC25A20 Transporter.
authors:
- Pasquadibisceglie A
- Quadrotta V
- Polticelli F
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/ijms24043946
content_type: abstract_only
---

# In Silico Analysis of the Structural Dynamics and Substrate Recognition Determinants of the Human Mitochondrial Carnitine/Acylcarnitine SLC25A20 Transporter.
**Authors:** Pasquadibisceglie A, Quadrotta V, Polticelli F
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms24043946](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms24043946)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2023 Feb 15;24(4):3946. doi: 10.3390/ijms24043946.

In Silico Analysis of the Structural Dynamics and Substrate Recognition 
Determinants of the Human Mitochondrial Carnitine/Acylcarnitine SLC25A20 
Transporter.

Pasquadibisceglie A(1), Quadrotta V(1), Polticelli F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Sciences, University of Roma Tre, 00146 Rome, Italy.
(2)National Institute of Nuclear Physics, Roma Tre Section, 00146 Rome, Italy.

The Carnitine-Acylcarnitine Carrier is a member of the mitochondrial Solute 
Carrier Family 25 (SLC25), known as SLC25A20, involved in the electroneutral 
exchange of acylcarnitine and carnitine across the inner mitochondrial membrane. 
It acts as a master regulator of fatty acids β-oxidation and is known to be 
involved in neonatal pathologies and cancer. The transport mechanism, also known 
as "alternating access", involves a conformational transition in which the 
binding site is accessible from one side of the membrane or the other. In this 
study, through a combination of state-of-the-art modelling techniques, molecular 
dynamics, and molecular docking, the structural dynamics of SLC25A20 and the 
early substrates recognition step have been analyzed. The results obtained 
demonstrated a significant asymmetry in the conformational changes leading to 
the transition from the c- to the m-state, confirming previous observations on 
other homologous transporters. Moreover, analysis of the MD simulations' 
trajectories of the apo-protein in the two conformational states allowed for a 
better understanding of the role of SLC25A20 Asp231His and Ala281Val pathogenic 
mutations, which are at the basis of Carnitine-Acylcarnitine Translocase 
Deficiency. Finally, molecular docking coupled to molecular dynamics simulations 
lend support to the multi-step substrates recognition and translocation 
mechanism already hypothesized for the ADP/ATP carrier.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms24043946
PMCID: PMC9961348
PMID: 36835358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.