---
reference_id: "PMID:7531539"
title: The gene for diffuse palmoplantar keratoderma of the type found in northern Sweden is localized to chromosome 12q11-q13.
authors:
- Lind L
- Lundström A
- Hofer PA
- Holmgren G
journal: Hum Mol Genet
year: '1994'
doi: 10.1093/hmg/3.10.1789
keywords:
- Chromosome Mapping
- "Chromosomes, Human, Pair 12"
- DNA/blood
- Family
- Female
- "Genes, Dominant"
- Genetic Linkage
- Genetic Markers
- Humans
- Keratins/genetics
- "Keratoderma, Palmoplantar, Diffuse/genetics"
- Male
- Multigene Family
- Pedigree
- "Receptors, Retinoic Acid/genetics"
- Sweden
- Retinoic Acid Receptor gamma
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The gene for diffuse palmoplantar keratoderma of the type found in northern Sweden is localized to chromosome 12q11-q13.
**Authors:** Lind L, Lundström A, Hofer PA, Holmgren G
**Journal:** Hum Mol Genet (1994)
**DOI:** [10.1093/hmg/3.10.1789](https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/3.10.1789)

## Content

1. Hum Mol Genet. 1994 Oct;3(10):1789-93. doi: 10.1093/hmg/3.10.1789.

The gene for diffuse palmoplantar keratoderma of the type found in northern
Sweden is localized to chromosome 12q11-q13.

Lind L(1), Lundström A, Hofer PA, Holmgren G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics/Applied Cell and Molecular Biology,
University Hospital, Umeå, Sweden.

Hereditary palmoplantar keratoderma is characterized by hyperkeratosis of the
skin of palms and soles. An autosomal dominant form of diffuse non-epidermolytic
palmoplantar keratoderma, frequently complicated by fungal infections, is
encountered in northern Sweden with a prevalence of 0.3-0.55%. We have examined
two families with this type of palmoplantar keratoderma and localized the
causative genetic defect to a 14 cM interval on chromosome 12q11-q13, a region
known to contain the keratin type II gene cluster as well as the retinoic acid
receptor gamma gene. The palmoplantar keratoderma variant investigated in this
study is thus genetically different from epidermolytic palmoplantar keratoderma,
which recently has been shown to result from mutations in the gene for the type
I keratin 9.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/3.10.1789
PMID: 7531539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
