---
reference_id: "PMID:40235137"
title: "Clinical and Genetic Characterization of Woodhouse-Sakati Syndrome in Iranian Patients: A Case Series."
authors:
- Khosravi S
- Moosavian T
- Salehpour S
- Habibi SAH
- Alavi A
- Rohani M
journal: J Mov Disord
year: '2025'
doi: 10.14802/jmd.25043
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical and Genetic Characterization of Woodhouse-Sakati Syndrome in Iranian Patients: A Case Series.
**Authors:** Khosravi S, Moosavian T, Salehpour S, Habibi SAH, Alavi A, Rohani M
**Journal:** J Mov Disord (2025)
**DOI:** [10.14802/jmd.25043](https://doi.org/10.14802/jmd.25043)

## Content

1. J Mov Disord. 2025 Jul;18(3):257-261. doi: 10.14802/jmd.25043. Epub 2025 Apr
16.

Clinical and Genetic Characterization of Woodhouse-Sakati Syndrome in Iranian 
Patients: A Case Series.

Khosravi S(1), Moosavian T(2), Salehpour S(3), Habibi SAH(4), Alavi A(5), Rohani 
M(4)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Firoozgar Hospital, Iran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Pediatric Neurology Department, Loghman Hakim Hospital, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shahid Beheshti 
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Department of Neurology, Hazrat Rasool Hospital, Iran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Skull Base Research Center, Five Senses Health Institute, School of Medicine, 
Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

OBJECTIVE: Woodhouse-Sakati syndrome (WSS) is a rare autosomal recessive 
neuroendocrine disorder characterized by a variety of endocrine and neurological 
manifestations, including extrapyramidal symptoms and intellectual disability.
METHODS: This report presents the genetic characterization of five Iranian 
patients with WSS, including the first Iranian patient to undergo deep brain 
stimulation (DBS).
RESULTS: We highlight five Iranian patients with mutations in the DCAF17 gene 
presenting with variable features of WSS, with symptom onset in early 
adolescence. Whole exome sequencing identified four homozygous variants 
(c.436delC, c.982-2A>G, c.580C>T, and c.838+1G>A) within the DCAF17 gene in the 
probands. Patients had variable responses to common therapies, and one patient 
achieved significant improvement following DBS.
CONCLUSION: We expand the clinical and genetic heterogeneity among Iranian 
patients and suggest the c.436delC variant as a founder mutation in the region. 
We highlight the importance of considering WSS in patients with both 
neurological and endocrine symptoms and suggest DBS as a potential treatment 
option.

DOI: 10.14802/jmd.25043
PMCID: PMC12301929
PMID: 40235137

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest The authors have no 
financial conflicts of interest.