---
reference_id: "PMID:35023662"
title: Mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiency as a polyneuropathy etiology in childhood.
authors:
- Uzun ÖÜ
- Çavdarlı B
- Karalök S
journal: Turk J Pediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.24953/turkjped.2021.06.020
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiency as a polyneuropathy etiology in childhood.
**Authors:** Uzun ÖÜ, Çavdarlı B, Karalök S
**Journal:** Turk J Pediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.24953/turkjped.2021.06.020](https://doi.org/10.24953/turkjped.2021.06.020)

## Content

1. Turk J Pediatr. 2021;63(6):1097-1102. doi: 10.24953/turkjped.2021.06.020.

Mitochondrial trifunctional protein deficiency as a polyneuropathy etiology in 
childhood.

Uzun ÖÜ(1), Çavdarlı B(2), Karalök S(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Metabolic, Kocaeli University Faculty of Medicine, 
Kocaeli.
(2)Medical Genetics, Ankara City Hospital, Ankara.
(3)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Akdeniz University Faculty of Medicine, 
Antalya, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: The mitochondrial trifunctional protein (MTP) is a multienzyme 
complex of the fatty acid betaoxidation cycle. Mitochondrial trifunctional 
protein deficiency (MTPD), a rare condition that leads to failure of converting 
certain fats to energy is characterized by decreased activity of three enzymes 
in the enzyme complex. Signs and symptoms of MTPD may present during infancy or 
later in life; those that begin after infancy include hypotonia, muscle pain, 
rhabdomyolysis, and peripheral neuropathy. We report a Turkish boy diagnosed 
with MTPD after being investigated for polyneuropathy of unknown origin since 
infancy.
CASE: A 5.5-year-old male patient was admitted to our clinic with complaints of 
weakness in the arms and legs, physical inactivity compared to his peers, 
fatigue, weakness and, difficulty in climbing stairs since infancy. 
Electroneuromyography (ENMG) analysis showed moderate symmetric distal 
sensorimotor and axonal neuropathy. On the background of chronic polyneuropathy, 
the patient had acute relapsing episodes with progressively worsening severity 
in the follow-up period until 12.5 years of age. Whole exome sequencing (WES) 
was performed in the patient and, revealed that the patient had a homozygous 
c.1390G > A (p.Gly464Ser) pathogenic variant of the HADHB gene. Although 
rhabdomyolysis is a well defined accompanying clinical feature of MTPD, it was 
not present in our patient who only had worsening muscle weakness during 
attacks.
CONCLUSION: On the background of chronic polyneuropathy and acute relapsing 
episodes triggered by fasting or illnesses and rhabdomyolysis physicians should 
suspect disorders of the fatty acid beta-oxidation cycle.

DOI: 10.24953/turkjped.2021.06.020
PMID: 35023662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]