---
reference_id: "PMID:37469536"
title: "Ivabradine effects on COVID-19-associated postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome: a single center prospective study."
authors:
- Abdelnabi M
- Saleh Y
- Ahmed A
- Benjanuwattra J
- Leelaviwat N
- Almaghraby A
journal: Am J Cardiovasc Dis
year: '2023'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ivabradine effects on COVID-19-associated postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome: a single center prospective study.
**Authors:** Abdelnabi M, Saleh Y, Ahmed A, Benjanuwattra J, Leelaviwat N, Almaghraby A
**Journal:** Am J Cardiovasc Dis (2023)

## Content

1. Am J Cardiovasc Dis. 2023 Jun 25;13(3):162-167. eCollection 2023.

Ivabradine effects on COVID-19-associated postural orthostatic tachycardia 
syndrome: a single center prospective study.

Abdelnabi M(1), Saleh Y(2), Ahmed A(3), Benjanuwattra J(1), Leelaviwat N(1), 
Almaghraby A(3).

Author information:
(1)Internal Medicine Department, Texas Tech University Health Science Center 
Lubbock, Texas, USA.
(2)Cardiology Department, Houston Methodist DeBakey Heart & Vascular Center 
Houston, Texas, USA.
(3)Cardiology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Alexandria University Alexandria, 
Egypt.

BACKGROUND: A wide range of cardiac arrhythmias were reported in the setting of 
active infection or as a complication of COVID-19. The main pathophysiology can 
be attributed to dysautonomia or autonomic nervous system dysfunction. Postural 
orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (POTS) is a complex, multisystemic disorder 
affecting usually younger age with tachycardia at rest or with minimal effort 
being the main symptom. Data regarding the safety and efficacy of ivabradine in 
POTS treatment is limited to small studies and case reports.
METHODS: This prospective observational study included a total of 55 
COVID-19-associated POTS patients after the exclusion of other causes of 
tachycardia. Ivabradine 5 mg twice daily was initiated. Re-assessment of 
patients' symptoms, heart rate, and heart rate variability (HRV) parameters' 
changes after 3 days of ivabradine therapy was done.
RESULTS: The mean age of the included patients was 30.5±6.9 years with 32 
patients being males (58.2%). 43 of 55 (78%) of the included patients reported 
significant improvement of the symptoms within 7 days of ivabradine therapy. 
24-hour heart rate (minimum, average, and maximum) was significantly lower 
(p-value < 0.0001*, = 0.001*, < 0.0001* consecutively) with a significant 
difference in HRV time-domain parameters (SDNN, rMSSD) (p-value < 0.0001*) after 
ivabradine therapy.
CONCLUSION: In a prospective study that evaluated the effects of ivabradine in 
post-COVID-19 POTS, patients treated with ivabradine reported improvement of 
their symptoms within 7 days of ivabradine treatment with a significant 
reduction of 24-hour average, minimum, and maximum heart rate, and improvement 
of HRV time domains parameters. Ivabradine might be a useful option to relieve 
symptoms of tachycardia in COVID-19 POTS. Further research is required to 
confirm the safety and efficacy of ivabradine in POTS treatment.

AJCD Copyright © 2023.

PMCID: PMC10352820
PMID: 37469536

Conflict of interest statement: None.