---
reference_id: "PMID:8447316"
title: Mutations in the paired domain of the human PAX3 gene cause Klein-Waardenburg syndrome (WS-III) as well as Waardenburg syndrome type I (WS-I).
authors:
- Hoth CF
- Milunsky A
- Lipsky N
- Sheffer R
- Clarren SK
- Baldwin CT
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1993'
keywords:
- Amino Acid Sequence
- Animals
- Base Sequence
- "Cloning, Molecular"
- Cosmids
- "DNA-Binding Proteins/chemistry, genetics"
- Exons
- Female
- Gene Library
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Molecular Sequence Data
- Mutation
- Oligodeoxyribonucleotides
- PAX3 Transcription Factor
- Paired Box Transcription Factors
- Pedigree
- Polymerase Chain Reaction/methods
- "Protein Structure, Secondary"
- "Sequence Homology, Amino Acid"
- Transcription Factors
- Waardenburg Syndrome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the paired domain of the human PAX3 gene cause Klein-Waardenburg syndrome (WS-III) as well as Waardenburg syndrome type I (WS-I).
**Authors:** Hoth CF, Milunsky A, Lipsky N, Sheffer R, Clarren SK, Baldwin CT
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1993)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1993 Mar;52(3):455-62.

Mutations in the paired domain of the human PAX3 gene cause Klein-Waardenburg
syndrome (WS-III) as well as Waardenburg syndrome type I (WS-I).

Hoth CF(1), Milunsky A, Lipsky N, Sheffer R, Clarren SK, Baldwin CT.

Author information:
(1)Center for Human Genetics, Boston University School of Medicine, MA 02118.

Waardenburg syndrome type I (WS-I) is an autosomal dominant disorder
characterized by sensorineural hearing loss, dystopia canthorum, pigmentary
disturbances, and other developmental defects. Klein-Waardenburg syndrome
(WS-III) is a disorder with many of the same characteristics as WS-I and
includes musculoskeletal abnormalities. We have recently reported the
identification and characterization of one of the first gene defects, in the
human PAX3 gene, which causes WS-I. PAX3 is a DNA-binding protein that contains
a structural motif known as the paired domain and is believed to regulate the
expression of other genes. In this report we describe two new mutations, in the
human PAX3 gene, that are associated with WS. One mutation was found in a family
with WS-I, while the other mutation was found in a family with WS-III. Both
mutations were in the highly conserved paired domain of the human PAX3 gene and
are similar to other mutations that cause WS. The results indicate that
mutations in the PAX3 gene can cause both WS-I and WS-III.

PMCID: PMC1682157
PMID: 8447316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
