---
reference_id: "PMID:27390838"
title: "Characterization of a novel zebrafish (Danio rerio) gene, wdr81, associated with cerebellar ataxia, mental retardation and dysequilibrium syndrome (CAMRQ)."
authors:
- Doldur-Balli F
- Ozel MN
- Gulsuner S
- Tekinay AB
- Ozcelik T
- Konu O
- Adams MM
journal: BMC Neurosci
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1186/s12868-015-0229-4
keywords:
- Animals
- "Brain/growth & development, metabolism"
- Cerebellar Ataxia/genetics
- Computational Biology
- "Eye/growth & development, metabolism"
- Gene Expression
- "Gene Expression Regulation, Developmental"
- In Situ Hybridization
- Intellectual Disability/genetics
- Polyadenylation
- Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction
- "Zebrafish/genetics, growth & development, metabolism"
- "Zebrafish Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Characterization of a novel zebrafish (Danio rerio) gene, wdr81, associated with cerebellar ataxia, mental retardation and dysequilibrium syndrome (CAMRQ).
**Authors:** Doldur-Balli F, Ozel MN, Gulsuner S, Tekinay AB, Ozcelik T, Konu O, Adams MM
**Journal:** BMC Neurosci (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12868-015-0229-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12868-015-0229-4)

## Content

1. BMC Neurosci. 2015 Dec 23;16(1):96. doi: 10.1186/s12868-015-0229-4.

Characterization of a novel zebrafish (Danio rerio) gene, wdr81, associated with 
cerebellar ataxia, mental retardation and dysequilibrium syndrome (CAMRQ).

Doldur-Balli F(1), Ozel MN(1), Gulsuner S(1), Tekinay AB(2)(3), Ozcelik 
T(1)(2)(3), Konu O(1)(3)(4), Adams MM(5)(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Bilkent University, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(2)UNAM-Institute of Materials Science and Nanotechnology, Bilkent University, 
Ankara, Turkey.
(3)Interdisciplinary Program in Neuroscience, Bilkent University, Ankara, 
Turkey.
(4)Molecular Biology and Genetics Department Zebrafish Facility, Bilkent 
University, Ankara, Turkey.
(5)UNAM-Institute of Materials Science and Nanotechnology, Bilkent University, 
Ankara, Turkey. michelle@bilkent.edu.tr.
(6)Interdisciplinary Program in Neuroscience, Bilkent University, Ankara, 
Turkey. michelle@bilkent.edu.tr.
(7)Molecular Biology and Genetics Department Zebrafish Facility, Bilkent 
University, Ankara, Turkey. michelle@bilkent.edu.tr.
(8)Psychology Department, Bilkent University, Ankara, Turkey. 
michelle@bilkent.edu.tr.

BACKGROUND: WDR81 (WD repeat-containing protein 81) is associated with 
cerebellar ataxia, mental retardation and disequilibrium syndrome (CAMRQ2, [MIM 
610185]). Human and mouse studies suggest that it might be a gene of importance 
during neurodevelopment. This study aimed at fully characterizing the structure 
of the wdr81 transcript, detecting the possible transcript variants and 
revealing its expression profile in zebrafish, a powerful model organism for 
studying development and disease.
RESULTS: As expected in human and mouse orthologous proteins, zebrafish wdr81 is 
predicted to possess a BEACH (Beige and Chediak-Higashi) domain, a major 
facilitator superfamily domain and WD40-repeats, which indicates a conserved 
function in these species. We observed that zebrafish wdr81 encodes one open 
reading frame while the transcript has one 5' untranslated region (UTR) and the 
prediction of the 3' UTR was mainly confirmed along with a detected insertion 
site in the embryo and adult brain. This insertion site was also found in 
testis, heart, liver, eye, tail and muscle, however, there was no amplicon in 
kidney, intestine and gills, which might be the result of possible alternative 
polyadenylation processes among tissues. The 5 and 18 hpf were critical 
timepoints of development regarding wdr81 expression. Furthermore, the signal of 
the RNA probe was stronger in the eye and brain at 18 and 48 hpf, then decreased 
at 72 hpf. Finally, expression of wdr81 was detected in the adult brain and eye 
tissues, including but not restricted to photoreceptors of the retina, 
presumptive Purkinje cells and some neurogenic brains regions.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together these data emphasize the importance of this gene 
during neurodevelopment and a possible role for neuronal proliferation. Our data 
provide a basis for further studies to fully understand the function of wdr81.

DOI: 10.1186/s12868-015-0229-4
PMCID: PMC4690267
PMID: 27390838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]