---
reference_id: "PMID:12473763"
title: Biochemical markers predicting survival in peroxisome biogenesis disorders.
authors:
- Gootjes J
- Mooijer PA
- Dekker C
- Barth PG
- Poll-The BT
- Waterham HR
- Wanders RJ
journal: Neurology
year: '2002'
doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000036609.14203.70
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biochemical markers predicting survival in peroxisome biogenesis disorders.
**Authors:** Gootjes J, Mooijer PA, Dekker C, Barth PG, Poll-The BT, Waterham HR, Wanders RJ
**Journal:** Neurology (2002)
**DOI:** [10.1212/01.wnl.0000036609.14203.70](https://doi.org/10.1212/01.wnl.0000036609.14203.70)

## Content

1. Neurology. 2002 Dec 10;59(11):1746-9. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000036609.14203.70.

Biochemical markers predicting survival in peroxisome biogenesis disorders.

Gootjes J(1), Mooijer PA, Dekker C, Barth PG, Poll-The BT, Waterham HR, Wanders 
RJ.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Academic Medical Center, University of 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To identify prognostic markers reflecting the extent of peroxisome 
dysfunction in primary skin fibroblasts from patients with peroxisome biogenesis 
disorders (PBD).
BACKGROUND: PBD are a genetically heterogeneous group of disorders due to 
defects in at least 11 distinct genes. Zellweger syndrome is the prototype of 
this group of disorders, with neonatal adrenoleukodystrophy and infantile Refsum 
disease as milder variants. Common to these three disorders are liver disease, 
variable neurodevelopmental delay, retinopathy, and perceptive deafness. Because 
genotype-phenotype studies are complicated by the genetic heterogeneity among 
patients with PBD, the authors evaluated a series of biochemical markers as a 
measure of peroxisome dysfunction in skin fibroblasts.
METHODS: Multiple peroxisomal functions including de novo plasmalogen synthesis, 
dihydroxyacetonephosphate acyltransferase (DHAPAT) activity, C26:0/C22:0 ratio, 
C26:0 and pristanic acid beta-oxidation, and phytanic acid alpha-oxidation were 
analyzed in fibroblasts from a series of patients with defined clinical 
phenotypes.
RESULTS: A poor correlation with age at death was found for de novo plasmalogen 
synthesis, C26:0/C22:0 ratio, and phytanic acid alpha-oxidation. A fairly good 
correlation was found for pristanic acid beta-oxidation, but the best 
correlation was found for DHAPAT activity and C26:0 beta-oxidation. A mathematic 
combination of DHAPAT activity and C26:0 beta-oxidation showed an even better 
correlation.
CONCLUSIONS: DHAPAT activity and C26:0 beta-oxidation are the best markers in 
predicting life expectancy of patients with PBD. Combination of both markers 
gives an even better prediction. These results contribute to the management of 
patients with PBD.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000036609.14203.70
PMID: 12473763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]