---
reference_id: "PMID:23843109"
title: Genetic component of giant cell arteritis.
authors:
- Carmona FD
- González-Gay MA
- Martín J
journal: Rheumatology (Oxford)
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/ket231
keywords:
- Alleles
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Genotype
- "Giant Cell Arteritis/genetics, immunology"
- "HLA-DR Antigens/genetics, immunology"
- Humans
- "Immunity, Innate/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic component of giant cell arteritis.
**Authors:** Carmona FD, González-Gay MA, Martín J
**Journal:** Rheumatology (Oxford) (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/rheumatology/ket231](https://doi.org/10.1093/rheumatology/ket231)

## Content

1. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2014 Jan;53(1):6-18. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/ket231.
Epub 2013 Jul 10.

Genetic component of giant cell arteritis.

Carmona FD(1), González-Gay MA, Martín J.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina López-Neyra, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas, Parque Tecnológico Ciencias de la Salud, Avenida
del Conocimiento s/n, 18100-Armilla, Granada, Spain. martin@ipb.csic.es.

Important steps forwards have been taken during recent years towards the
understanding of the genetic basis of autoimmunity. The increasing number of
study cohorts is allowing better characterization of the genetic component of
most autoimmune diseases. However, the molecular mechanisms leading to some less
common diseases remain poorly understood. GCA, an antigen-driven systemic
vasculitis affecting medium and large blood vessels of elderly people,
represents one of these cases. However, although underpowered to detect low to
moderate effect sizes and without replication steps, many genetic studies on
this disease have been published in the past decade. These reports clearly point
to genes located in the MHC region, in particular HLA-DRB1*04 alleles, and other
key members of the immune and inflammatory response (including cytokines,
adhesion molecules and regulators of innate immunity), as crucial players in the
development and progression of GCA. Considering that no literature review has
been published so far about the genetic component of this vasculitis, we aimed
to summarize here the current knowledge on the genetics underlying GCA
predisposition and severity.

DOI: 10.1093/rheumatology/ket231
PMID: 23843109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
