---
reference_id: "PMID:33186059"
title: Radiologic Features of Type II and Type XI Collagenopathies.
authors:
- Handa A
- Grigelioniene G
- Nishimura G
journal: Radiographics
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1148/rg.2021200075
keywords:
- Achondroplasia
- Cartilage
- Collagen Diseases/diagnostic imaging
- Humans
- Hyaline Membrane Disease
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Osteochondrodysplasias/diagnostic imaging
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Radiologic Features of Type II and Type XI Collagenopathies.
**Authors:** Handa A, Grigelioniene G, Nishimura G
**Journal:** Radiographics (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1148/rg.2021200075](https://doi.org/10.1148/rg.2021200075)

## Content

1. Radiographics. 2021 Jan-Feb;41(1):192-209. doi: 10.1148/rg.2021200075. Epub
2020  Nov 13.

Radiologic Features of Type II and Type XI Collagenopathies.

Handa A(1), Grigelioniene G(1), Nishimura G(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Radiology, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, 
200 Hawkins Dr, Iowa City, IA 52242 (A.H.); Department of Molecular Medicine and 
Surgery, Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet and Department of 
Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden (G.G.); and 
Center for Intractable Diseases, Saitama Medical University Hospital, Saitama, 
Japan (G.N.).

Type II collagen is a major component of the cartilage matrix. Pathogenic 
variants (ie, disease-causing aberrations) in the type II collagen gene (COL2A1) 
lead to an abnormal structure of type II collagen, causing a large group of 
skeletal dysplasias termed type II collagenopathies. Because type II collagen is 
also located in the vitreous body of the eyes and inner ears, type II 
collagenopathies are commonly associated with vitreoretinal degeneration and 
hearing impairment. Type II collagenopathies can be radiologically divided into 
two major groups: the spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita (SEDC) group and 
the Kniest-Stickler group. The SEDC group is characterized by delayed 
ossification of the juxtatruncal bones, including pear-shaped vertebrae. These 
collagenopathies comprise achondrogenesis type 2, hypochondrogenesis, SEDC, and 
other uncommon subtypes. The Kniest-Stickler group is characterized by 
disordered tubular bone growth that leads to "dumbbell" deformities. It 
comprises Kniest dysplasia and Stickler dysplasia type 1, whose radiographic 
manifestations overlap with those of type XI collagenopathies (a group of 
disorders due to abnormal type XI collagen) such as Stickler dysplasia types 2 
and 3. This phenotypic overlap is caused by type II and type XI collagen 
molecules sharing part of the same connective tissues. The authors describe the 
diagnostic pathways to type II and type XI collagenopathies and the associated 
differential diagnoses. In addition, they review the clinical features and 
genetic bases of these conditions, which radiologists should know to participate 
in multidisciplinary care and translational research. Online supplemental 
material is available for this article. ©RSNA, 2020.

DOI: 10.1148/rg.2021200075
PMID: 33186059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]