---
reference_id: "PMID:33558080"
title: "Morquio B disease: From pathophysiology towards diagnosis."
authors:
- Caciotti A
- Cellai L
- Tonin R
- Mei D
- Procopio E
- Di Rocco M
- Andaloro A
- Antuzzi D
- Rampazzo A
- Rigoldi M
- Forni G
- la Marca G
- Guerrini R
- Morrone A
journal: Mol Genet Metab
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.01.008
keywords:
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- "Gangliosidosis, GM1/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- Gene Expression Regulation/genetics
- Genetic Association Studies
- Genetic Predisposition to Disease
- Glycosaminoglycans/genetics
- Humans
- Lysosomes/genetics
- Male
- "Mucopolysaccharidosis IV/diagnosis, genetics, physiopathology"
- "Mutation, Missense/genetics"
- "Receptors, Cell Surface/genetics"
- beta-Galactosidase/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Morquio B disease: From pathophysiology towards diagnosis.
**Authors:** Caciotti A, Cellai L, Tonin R, Mei D, Procopio E, Di Rocco M, Andaloro A, Antuzzi D, Rampazzo A, Rigoldi M, Forni G, la Marca G, Guerrini R, Morrone A
**Journal:** Mol Genet Metab (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.01.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.01.008)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Metab. 2021 Mar;132(3):180-188. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.01.008.
Epub  2021 Feb 1.

Morquio B disease: From pathophysiology towards diagnosis.

Caciotti A(1), Cellai L(1), Tonin R(1), Mei D(2), Procopio E(3), Di Rocco M(4), 
Andaloro A(4), Antuzzi D(5), Rampazzo A(6), Rigoldi M(7), Forni G(8), la Marca 
G(9), Guerrini R(10), Morrone A(11).

Author information:
(1)Molecular and Cell Biology Laboratory, Paediatric Neurology Unit and 
Laboratories, Neuroscience Department, A. Meyer Children's Hospital, Florence, 
Italy.
(2)Neurogenetics, Paediatric Neurology Unit and Laboratories, Neuroscience 
Department, A. Meyer Children's Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(3)Metabolic and Muscular Unit, A. Meyer Children's Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(4)Unit of Rare Diseases, Dept of Pediatrics, IRCCS G. Gaslini, Genoa, Italy.
(5)Pediatric Clinic, Catholic University of "Sacro Cuore", Policlinico 
"Gemelli", Rome, Italy.
(6)Dept of Pediatrics, University Children's Hospital, Padova, Italy.
(7)Mario Negri Institute for Pharmacological Research, IRCCS, Clinical Research 
Center for Rare Diseases "Aldo e Cele Daccò", Bergamo, Italy.
(8)Newborn Screening, Biochemistry and Pharmacology Laboratory, A. Meyer 
Children's Hospital, Florence, Italy.
(9)Newborn Screening, Biochemistry and Pharmacology Laboratory, A. Meyer 
Children's Hospital, Florence, Italy; Department of Experimental and Clinical 
Biomedical Sciences, University of Florence, Italy.
(10)Molecular and Cell Biology Laboratory, Paediatric Neurology Unit and 
Laboratories, Neuroscience Department, A. Meyer Children's Hospital, Florence, 
Italy; Department of Neurosciences, Psychology, Pharmacology and Child Health, 
University of Florence, Italy.
(11)Molecular and Cell Biology Laboratory, Paediatric Neurology Unit and 
Laboratories, Neuroscience Department, A. Meyer Children's Hospital, Florence, 
Italy; Department of Neurosciences, Psychology, Pharmacology and Child Health, 
University of Florence, Italy. Electronic address: a.morrone@meyer.it.

Morquio B disease is an attenuated phenotype within the spectrum of beta 
galactosidase (GLB1) deficiencies. It is characterised by dysostosis multiplex, 
ligament laxity, mildly coarse facies and heart valve defects due to keratan 
sulphate accumulation, predominantly in the cartilage. Morquio B patients have 
normal neurological development, setting them apart from those with the more 
severe GM1 gangliosidosis. Morquio B disease, with an incidence of 1:250.000 to 
1:1.000.000 live births, is very rare. Here we report the clinical-biochemical 
data of nine patients. High amounts of keratan sulfate were detected using 
LC-MS/MS in the patients' urinary samples, while electrophoresis, the standard 
procedure of qualitative glycosaminoglycans analysis, failed to identify this 
metabolite in any of the patients' samples. We performed molecular analyses at 
gene, gene expression and protein expression levels, for both isoforms of the 
GLB1 gene, lysosomal GLB1, and the cell-surface expressed Elastin Binding 
Protein. We characterised three novel GLB1 mutations [c.75 + 2 T > G, c.575A > G 
(p.Tyr192Cys) and c.2030 T > G (p.Val677Gly)] identified in three heterozygous 
patients. We also set up a copy number variation assay by quantitative PCR to 
evaluate the presence of deletions/ insertions in the GLB1 gene. We propose a 
diagnostic plan, setting out the specific clinical- biochemical and molecular 
features of Morquio B, in order to avoid misdiagnoses and improve patients' 
management.

Copyright © 2021. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2021.01.008
PMID: 33558080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest The authors 
declare no competing interests.