---
reference_id: "PMID:12707034"
title: Toxic epidermal necrolysis and Stevens-Johnson syndrome are induced by soluble Fas ligand.
authors:
- Abe R
- Shimizu T
- Shibaki A
- Nakamura H
- Watanabe H
- Shimizu H
journal: Am J Pathol
year: '2003'
doi: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)64284-8
keywords:
- Adult
- Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
- Fas Ligand Protein
- Female
- Humans
- Lymphocyte Activation
- Male
- Membrane Glycoproteins/physiology
- Reference Values
- Skin/immunology
- "Stevens-Johnson Syndrome/etiology, immunology, pathology"
- fas Receptor/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Toxic epidermal necrolysis and Stevens-Johnson syndrome are induced by soluble Fas ligand.
**Authors:** Abe R, Shimizu T, Shibaki A, Nakamura H, Watanabe H, Shimizu H
**Journal:** Am J Pathol (2003)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S0002-9440(10)64284-8](https://doi.org/10.1016/S0002-9440(10)64284-8)

## Content

1. Am J Pathol. 2003 May;162(5):1515-20. doi: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)64284-8.

Toxic epidermal necrolysis and Stevens-Johnson syndrome are induced by soluble 
Fas ligand.

Abe R(1), Shimizu T, Shibaki A, Nakamura H, Watanabe H, Shimizu H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Sapporo, Japan. aberi@med.hokudai.ac.jp

The pathogeneses of toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) and Stevens-Johnson 
syndrome (SJS), both severe blistering diseases usually associated with drug 
intake, are not fully elucidated. Histologically, both TEN and SJS are 
characterized by extensive keratinocyte apoptosis. Previous studies have shown 
that keratinocyte apoptosis in TEN and SJS was induced by a suicidal interaction 
between Fas and Fas ligand (FasL), which are both expressed by keratinocytes. 
However, our preliminary examinations demonstrated that FasL is hardly detected 
on keratinocytes. We hypothesized that soluble FasL (sFasL) is secreted by 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs), and this interacts with the Fas 
expressed on keratinocytes in TEN and SJS. To justify this hypothesis, we 
investigated whether sFasL secreted by PBMCs could induce the keratinocyte 
apoptosis in TEN and SJS. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay analysis 
demonstrated that there was no significant sFasL increase in any samples of 
healthy controls (<40 pg/ml, n = 14) and patients with an ordinary erythema 
multiforme-type drug eruption (41.5 +/- 3.1 pg/ml, n = 14), whereas high 
concentrations are detected in all samples of TEN and SJS patients (TEN: 131.5 
+/- 57.4 pg/ml, n = 8; SJS: 119.1 +/- 41.0 pg/ml, n = 14) (P < 0.0001). In vitro 
analysis using cultured keratinocytes revealed that the sera of TEN and SJS 
patients induced abundant keratinocyte apoptosis compared to erythema 
multiforme-type drug eruption sera. Furthermore, on stimulation with the causal 
drug, PBMCs obtained from TEN and SJS patients secreted high levels of sFasL. 
Taken together, these results indicate that sFasL secreted by PBMCs, not 
keratinocytes, plays a crucial role in the apoptosis and pathomechanism of TEN 
and SJS, and that the serum sFasL level may be a good indicator for the early 
diagnosis of TEN and SJS.

DOI: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)64284-8
PMCID: PMC1851208
PMID: 12707034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]