---
reference_id: "PMID:36401318"
title: "Associations between bone mineral density, body composition and amenorrhoea in females with eating disorders: a systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Lopes MP
- Robinson L
- Stubbs B
- Dos Santos Alvarenga M
- Araújo Martini L
- Campbell IC
- Schmidt U
journal: J Eat Disord
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1186/s40337-022-00694-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Associations between bone mineral density, body composition and amenorrhoea in females with eating disorders: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Lopes MP, Robinson L, Stubbs B, Dos Santos Alvarenga M, Araújo Martini L, Campbell IC, Schmidt U
**Journal:** J Eat Disord (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40337-022-00694-8](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40337-022-00694-8)

## Content

1. J Eat Disord. 2022 Nov 18;10(1):173. doi: 10.1186/s40337-022-00694-8.

Associations between bone mineral density, body composition and amenorrhoea in
females with eating disorders: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Lopes MP(1)(2), Robinson L(3), Stubbs B(3)(4), Dos Santos Alvarenga M(5), Araújo
Martini L(5), Campbell IC(3), Schmidt U(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Nutrition Department, School of Public Health University of São Paulo, Av.
Dr. Arnaldo, 715 - Cerqueira César, São Paulo, São Paulo, 01246-904, Brazil.
marianapadualopes@gmail.com.
(2)Section of Eating Disorders, Department of Psychological Medicine, Institute
of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, 6 De
Crespigny Park, London, SE5 8AF, UK. marianapadualopes@gmail.com.
(3)Section of Eating Disorders, Department of Psychological Medicine, Institute
of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London, 6 De
Crespigny Park, London, SE5 8AF, UK.
(4)Maudsley Hospital, South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust, Denmark
Hill, London, SE5 8AZ, UK.
(5)Nutrition Department, School of Public Health University of São Paulo, Av.
Dr. Arnaldo, 715 - Cerqueira César, São Paulo, São Paulo, 01246-904, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Lower bone mineral density (BMD) increases the risk of osteoporosis
in individuals with eating disorders (EDs), particularly women with anorexia
nervosa (AN), making them susceptible to pain and fractures throughout
adulthood. In AN, low weight, hypothalamic amenorrhoea, and longer illness
duration are established risk factors for low BMD, and in people with other EDs
a history of AN seems to be an important risk factor for low BMD.
PURPOSE: To conduct a systematic review and meta-analysis of BMD in individuals
with EDs, including AN, bulimia nervosa (BN), binge-eating disorder (BED) and
other specified feeding or eating disorders (OSFED) compared to healthy controls
(HC).
METHODS: Following PRISMA guidelines, electronic databases were reviewed and
supplemented with a literature search until 2/2022 of publications measuring BMD
(dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry or dual photon absorptiometry) in females with
any current ED diagnosis and a HC group. Primary outcomes were spine, hip, femur
and total body BMD. Explanatory variables were fat mass, lean mass and ED
clinical characteristics (age, illness duration, body mass index (BMI),
amenorrhoea occurrence and duration, and oral contraceptives use).
RESULTS: Forty-three studies were identified (N = 4163 women, mean age
23.4 years, min: 14.0, max: 37.4). No study with individuals with BED met the
inclusion criteria. BMD in individuals with AN (total body, spine, hip, and
femur), with BN (total body and spine) and with OSFED (spine) was lower than in
HC. Meta-regression analyses of women with any ED (AN, BN or OSFED) (N = 2058)
showed low BMI, low fat mass, low lean mass and being amenorrhoeic significantly
associated with lower total body and spine BMD. In AN, only low fat mass was
significantly associated with low total body BMD.
CONCLUSION: Predictors of low BMD were low BMI, low fat mass, low lean mass and
amenorrhoea, but not age or illness duration. In people with EDs, body
composition measurement and menstrual status, in addition to BMI, are likely to
provide a more accurate assessment of individual risk to low BMD and
osteoporosis.

Plain Language Summary: Individuals with eating disorders (EDs) have an
increased risk for developing osteoporosis and suffering fractures. To better
understand this problem, we conducted a systematic review and meta-analysis
comparing bone mineral density (BMD) of females with EDs with that of healthy
people without an ED. We also tried to identify key factors linked with reduced
bone mass in EDs. We included studies reporting BMD of individuals with anorexia
nervosa (AN), bulimia nervosa (BN), binge-eating (BED) or other non-specified ED
(OSFED), and of healthy controls. We found that people with AN had overall lower
BMD than controls and also in the spine, hip, and femur. In people with BN,
there was lower BMD overall and in the spine, but that must be only in those who
previously had AN. In people with OSFED, BMD was lower in the spine. Having a
low BMI, low fat mass, low lean mass and not having menstrual periods seem to
negatively affect BMD. Therefore, this systematic review supports the idea that
people with current or past AN, irrespective of their current ED diagnosis,
should have their bone health assessed. For early identification of those most
at risk, body composition measurements, current menstrual status, duration of
amenorrhoea and presence or absence of a history of AN should be considered in
clinical practice.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s40337-022-00694-8
PMCID: PMC9675098
PMID: 36401318

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest.
