---
reference_id: "PMID:23284007"
title: "Full penetrance of Morgagni-Stewart-Morel syndrome in a 75-year-old woman: case report and review of the literature."
authors:
- Attanasio F
- Granziera S
- Giantin V
- Manzato E
journal: J Clin Endocrinol Metab
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-3242
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Full penetrance of Morgagni-Stewart-Morel syndrome in a 75-year-old woman: case report and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Attanasio F, Granziera S, Giantin V, Manzato E
**Journal:** J Clin Endocrinol Metab (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1210/jc.2012-3242](https://doi.org/10.1210/jc.2012-3242)

## Content

1. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Feb;98(2):453-7. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-3242. Epub
 2013 Jan 2.

Full penetrance of Morgagni-Stewart-Morel syndrome in a 75-year-old woman: case 
report and review of the literature.

Attanasio F(1), Granziera S, Giantin V, Manzato E.

Author information:
(1)Clinica Geriatrica, Ospedale Giustinianeo, via Giustiniani 2, 35100 Padova, 
Italy. attanasio.doc@libero.it

CONTEXT: Morgagni-Stewart-Morel syndrome is defined as the presence of 
hyperostosis frontalis interna, variably associated with metabolic, endocrine, 
and neuropsychiatric disorders. The possible cause-effect relationship of these 
associations remains uncertain.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 75-year-old woman presented with severe frontal headache 
and a history of psychotic disorders. On instrumental examination she was found 
to have extensive frontal hyperostosis and cortical atrophy. These findings, 
associated to the metabolic and neuropsychiatric pattern of the patient, are 
consistent with a high penetrance of Morgagni-Stewart-Morel syndrome.
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION AND SYNTHESIS: In this clinical case seminar, we summarize 
the current understanding of the association between hyperostosis frontalis 
interna and Morgagni-Stewart-Morel, based on a MEDLINE search (case reports, 
original articles, and reviews published between 1928 and 2011) on this topic. 
Possible pathophysiological mechanisms underlying both the headache and the 
hyperostosis frontalis interna are discussed.
CONCLUSION: A case of full penetrance of Morgagni-Stewart-Morel syndrome is 
reported, presenting many of the clinical features described in the literature. 
Metabolic and endocrine dysfunctions should be interpreted not only as isolated 
components of the syndrome, but also as the reason behind its pathogenesis. 
Endocrine or nutritional disorders may have led to an altered bone metabolism 
with frontal bone apposition. On the other hand, the severity of our patient's 
neurological and psychiatric symptoms correlates well with the severity of her 
hyperostosis frontalis interna and the cortical atrophy.

DOI: 10.1210/jc.2012-3242
PMID: 23284007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]