---
reference_id: "PMID:19802578"
title: Systemic vascular leakage associated with dengue infections - the clinical perspective.
authors:
- Trung DT
- Wills B
journal: Curr Top Microbiol Immunol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-02215-9_5
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Systemic vascular leakage associated with dengue infections - the clinical perspective.
**Authors:** Trung DT, Wills B
**Journal:** Curr Top Microbiol Immunol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1007/978-3-642-02215-9_5](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-02215-9_5)

## Content

1. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2010;338:57-66. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-02215-9_5.

Systemic vascular leakage associated with dengue infections - the clinical 
perspective.

Trung DT(1), Wills B.

Author information:
(1)Oxford University Clinical Research Unit, Hospital for Tropical Diseases, 190 
Ben Ham Tu, Quan 5, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.

Vascular leakage is the most serious complication of dengue infection. However, 
despite considerable progress in understanding the immunological derangements 
associated with dengue, the pathogenic mechanisms underlying the change in 
vascular permeability remain unclear. Lack of suitable model systems that 
manifest permeability characteristics similar to human vascular endothelium has 
seriously impeded research in this area. Similarly, limited knowledge of the 
factors regulating intrinsic microvascular permeability in health, together with 
limited understanding of the alterations seen in disease states in general, has 
also hampered progress. Fortunately considerable advances have been made in the 
field of endothelial biology in recent years, especially following appreciation 
of the crucial role played by the endothelial surface glycocalyx, acting in 
concert with underlying cellular structures, in regulating fluid flow across the 
microvasculature. We review what is known about vascular leakage during dengue 
infections, particularly in relation to current knowledge of vascular 
physiology, and discuss potential areas of research that may help to elucidate 
the complex nature of this singular phenomenon in the future.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-02215-9_5
PMID: 19802578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]