---
reference_id: "PMID:32170149"
title: Lumbar spinal stenosis and disc alterations affect the upper lumbar spine in adults with achondroplasia.
authors:
- Huet T
- Cohen-Solal M
- Laredo JD
- Collet C
- Baujat G
- Cormier-Daire V
- Yelnik A
- Orcel P
- Beaudreuil J
journal: Sci Rep
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-61704-w
keywords:
- "Achondroplasia/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Adult
- Female
- Humans
- "Intervertebral Disc Degeneration/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- "Lumbar Vertebrae/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
- Magnetic Resonance Imaging
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Radiography
- "Spinal Stenosis/diagnostic imaging, pathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lumbar spinal stenosis and disc alterations affect the upper lumbar spine in adults with achondroplasia.
**Authors:** Huet T, Cohen-Solal M, Laredo JD, Collet C, Baujat G, Cormier-Daire V, Yelnik A, Orcel P, Beaudreuil J
**Journal:** Sci Rep (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41598-020-61704-w](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-61704-w)

## Content

1. Sci Rep. 2020 Mar 13;10(1):4699. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-61704-w.

Lumbar spinal stenosis and disc alterations affect the upper lumbar spine in 
adults with achondroplasia.

Huet T(1), Cohen-Solal M(1), Laredo JD(2), Collet C(3), Baujat G(4), 
Cormier-Daire V(4), Yelnik A(5), Orcel P(1), Beaudreuil J(6)(7).

Author information:
(1)Université de Paris, BIOSCAR Inserm U1132 and Department of Rheumatology and 
Reference Center for Constitutional Bone Diseases, AP-HP Hospital Lariboisière, 
F-75010, Paris, France.
(2)Université de Paris, Department of Bone and Joint Imaging, AP-HP Hospital 
Lariboisière, F-75010, Paris, France.
(3)Université de Paris, Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, AP-HP Hospital 
Lariboisière, F-75010, Paris, France.
(4)Université de Paris, Department of Genetics, Reference Center for 
Constitutional Bone Diseases, AP-HP Hospital Necker, Paris, France.
(5)Université de Paris, Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 
AP-HP Hospital Fernand Widal, Paris, France.
(6)Université de Paris, BIOSCAR Inserm U1132 and Department of Rheumatology and 
Reference Center for Constitutional Bone Diseases, AP-HP Hospital Lariboisière, 
F-75010, Paris, France. johann.beaudreuil@aphp.fr.
(7)Université de Paris, Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 
AP-HP Hospital Fernand Widal, Paris, France. johann.beaudreuil@aphp.fr.

In achondroplasia, lumbar spinal stenosis arises from congenital dysplasia and 
acquired degenerative changes. We here aimed to describe the changes of the 
lumbar spinal canal and intervertebral disc in adults. We included 18 adults 
(age ≥ 18 years) with achondroplasia and lumbar spinal stenosis. Radiographs 
were used to analyze spinal-pelvic angles. Antero-posterior diameter of the 
spinal canal and the grade of disc degeneration were measured by MRI. 
Antero-posterior diameters of the spinal canal differed by spinal level 
(P < 0.05), with lower values observed at T12-L1, L1-2 and L2-3. Degrees of disc 
degeneration differed by intervertebral level, with higher degrees observed at 
L1-2, L2-3 and L3-4. A significant correlation was found between disc 
degeneration and thoraco-lumbar kyphosis at L2-3, between antero-posterior 
diameter of the spinal canal and lumbar lordosis at T12-L1 and L2-3, and between 
antero-posterior diameter of the spinal canal and thoraco-lumbar kyphosis at 
L1-2. Unlike the general population, spinal stenosis and disc degeneration 
involve the upper part of the lumbar spine in adults with achondroplasia, 
associated with thoraco-lumbar kyphosis and loss of lumbar lordosis.

DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-61704-w
PMCID: PMC7070089
PMID: 32170149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.