---
reference_id: "PMID:38331979"
title: "Major depressive disorder: hypothesis, mechanism, prevention and treatment."
authors:
- Cui L
- Li S
- Wang S
- Wu X
- Liu Y
- Yu W
- Wang Y
- Tang Y
- Xia M
- Li B
journal: Signal Transduct Target Ther
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41392-024-01738-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Major depressive disorder: hypothesis, mechanism, prevention and treatment.
**Authors:** Cui L, Li S, Wang S, Wu X, Liu Y, Yu W, Wang Y, Tang Y, Xia M, Li B
**Journal:** Signal Transduct Target Ther (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41392-024-01738-y](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41392-024-01738-y)

## Content

1. Signal Transduct Target Ther. 2024 Feb 9;9(1):30. doi: 
10.1038/s41392-024-01738-y.

Major depressive disorder: hypothesis, mechanism, prevention and treatment.

Cui L(1)(2)(3), Li S(1)(2)(3), Wang S(1)(2)(3), Wu X(1)(2)(3), Liu Y(1)(2)(3), 
Yu W(1)(2)(3), Wang Y(1)(2)(3), Tang Y(4), Xia M(5), Li B(6)(7)(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Forensic Analytical Toxicology, School of Forensic Medicine, 
China Medical University, Shenyang, China.
(2)Liaoning Province Key Laboratory of Forensic Bio-evidence Sciences, Shenyang, 
China.
(3)China Medical University Centre of Forensic Investigation, Shenyang, China.
(4)International Joint Research Centre on Purinergic Signalling/Key Laboratory 
of Acupuncture for Senile Disease (Chengdu University of TCM), Ministry of 
Education/School of Health and Rehabilitation, Chengdu University of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine/Acupuncture and Chronobiology Key Laboratory of Sichuan 
Province, Chengdu, China.
(5)Department of Orthopaedics, The First Hospital, China Medical University, 
Shenyang, China. xiamaosheng1981@163.com.
(6)Department of Forensic Analytical Toxicology, School of Forensic Medicine, 
China Medical University, Shenyang, China. bmli@cmu.edu.cn.
(7)Liaoning Province Key Laboratory of Forensic Bio-evidence Sciences, Shenyang, 
China. bmli@cmu.edu.cn.
(8)China Medical University Centre of Forensic Investigation, Shenyang, China. 
bmli@cmu.edu.cn.

Worldwide, the incidence of major depressive disorder (MDD) is increasing 
annually, resulting in greater economic and social burdens. Moreover, the 
pathological mechanisms of MDD and the mechanisms underlying the effects of 
pharmacological treatments for MDD are complex and unclear, and additional 
diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for MDD still are needed. The currently 
widely accepted theories of MDD pathogenesis include the neurotransmitter and 
receptor hypothesis, hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis hypothesis, 
cytokine hypothesis, neuroplasticity hypothesis and systemic influence 
hypothesis, but these hypothesis cannot completely explain the pathological 
mechanism of MDD. Even it is still hard to adopt only one hypothesis to 
completely reveal the pathogenesis of MDD, thus in recent years, great progress 
has been made in elucidating the roles of multiple organ interactions in the 
pathogenesis MDD and identifying novel therapeutic approaches and multitarget 
modulatory strategies, further revealing the disease features of MDD. 
Furthermore, some newly discovered potential pharmacological targets and newly 
studied antidepressants have attracted widespread attention, some reagents have 
even been approved for clinical treatment and some novel therapeutic methods 
such as phototherapy and acupuncture have been discovered to have effective 
improvement for the depressive symptoms. In this work, we comprehensively 
summarize the latest research on the pathogenesis and diagnosis of MDD, 
preventive approaches and therapeutic medicines, as well as the related clinical 
trials.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41392-024-01738-y
PMCID: PMC10853571
PMID: 38331979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.