---
reference_id: "PMID:15208645"
title: A novel FISH assay for SS18-SSX fusion type in synovial sarcoma.
authors:
- Surace C
- Panagopoulos I
- Pålsson E
- Rocchi M
- Mandahl N
- Mertens F
journal: Lab Invest
year: '2004'
doi: 10.1038/labinvest.3700142
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel FISH assay for SS18-SSX fusion type in synovial sarcoma.
**Authors:** Surace C, Panagopoulos I, Pålsson E, Rocchi M, Mandahl N, Mertens F
**Journal:** Lab Invest (2004)
**DOI:** [10.1038/labinvest.3700142](https://doi.org/10.1038/labinvest.3700142)

## Content

1. Lab Invest. 2004 Sep;84(9):1185-92. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.3700142.

A novel FISH assay for SS18-SSX fusion type in synovial sarcoma.

Surace C(1), Panagopoulos I, Pålsson E, Rocchi M, Mandahl N, Mertens F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.

Synovial sarcoma is a morphologically, clinically and genetically distinct 
entity that accounts for 5-10% of all soft tissue sarcomas. The 
t(X;18)(p11.2;q11.2) is the cytogenetic hallmark of synovial sarcoma and is 
present in more than 90% of the cases. It produces three types of fusion gene 
formed in part by SS18 from chromosome 18 and by SSX1, SSX2 or, rarely, SSX4 
from the X chromosome. The SS18-SSX fusions do not seem to occur in other tumor 
types, and it has been shown that in synovial sarcoma a clear correlation exists 
between the type of fusion gene and histologic subtype and, more importantly, 
clinical outcome. Previous analyses regarding the type of fusion genes have been 
based on PCR amplification of the fusion transcript, requiring access to 
good-quality RNA. In order to obtain an alternative tool to diagnose and follow 
this malignancy, we developed a fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) assay 
that could distinguish between the two most common fusion genes, that is, 
SS18-SSX1 and SS18-SSX2. The specificity of the selected bacterial artificial 
chromosome clones used in the detection of these fusion genes, as well as the 
sensitivity of the analysis in metaphase and interphase cells, was examined in a 
series of 28 synovial sarcoma samples with known fusion gene status. In all 
samples, the type of fusion was correctly identified by FISH. Thus, the assay 
described here should be useful for clarifying unresolved chromosome markers and 
for identifying fusion gene status in samples from which RNA of sufficient 
quality for PCR could not be extracted.

DOI: 10.1038/labinvest.3700142
PMID: 15208645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]