---
reference_id: "PMID:23901108"
title: Acute myeloid leukemia does not deplete normal hematopoietic stem cells but induces cytopenias by impeding their differentiation.
authors:
- Miraki-Moud F
- Anjos-Afonso F
- Hodby KA
- Griessinger E
- Rosignoli G
- Lillington D
- Jia L
- Davies JK
- Cavenagh J
- Smith M
- Oakervee H
- Agrawal S
- Gribben JG
- Bonnet D
- Taussig DC
journal: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1301891110
keywords:
- ADP-ribosyl Cyclase 1/metabolism
- Animals
- "Antigens, CD34/metabolism"
- Bone Marrow Cells/pathology
- Cell Differentiation/physiology
- Cell Proliferation
- Flow Cytometry
- Fluorescent Antibody Technique
- Hematopoietic Stem Cells/physiology
- Humans
- "Leukemia, Myeloid, Acute/physiopathology"
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred NOD"
- "Mice, SCID"
- "Microscopy, Confocal"
- "Statistics, Nonparametric"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Acute myeloid leukemia does not deplete normal hematopoietic stem cells but induces cytopenias by impeding their differentiation.
**Authors:** Miraki-Moud F, Anjos-Afonso F, Hodby KA, Griessinger E, Rosignoli G, Lillington D, Jia L, Davies JK, Cavenagh J, Smith M, Oakervee H, Agrawal S, Gribben JG, Bonnet D, Taussig DC
**Journal:** Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1073/pnas.1301891110](https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1301891110)

## Content

1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Aug 13;110(33):13576-81. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1301891110. Epub 2013 Jul 30.

Acute myeloid leukemia does not deplete normal hematopoietic stem cells but
induces cytopenias by impeding their differentiation.

Miraki-Moud F(1), Anjos-Afonso F, Hodby KA, Griessinger E, Rosignoli G,
Lillington D, Jia L, Davies JK, Cavenagh J, Smith M, Oakervee H, Agrawal S,
Gribben JG, Bonnet D, Taussig DC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Haemato-Oncology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University
of London, London EC1M 6BQ, United Kingdom.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) induces bone marrow (BM) failure in patients,
predisposing them to life-threatening infections and bleeding. The mechanism by
which AML mediates this complication is unknown but one widely accepted
explanation is that AML depletes the BM of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs)
through displacement. We sought to investigate how AML affects hematopoiesis by
quantifying residual normal hematopoietic subpopulations in the BM of
immunodeficient mice transplanted with human AML cells with a range of genetic
lesions. The numbers of normal mouse HSCs were preserved whereas normal
progenitors and other downstream hematopoietic cells were reduced following
transplantation of primary AMLs, findings consistent with a differentiation
block at the HSC-progenitor transition, rather than displacement. Once removed
from the leukemic environment, residual normal hematopoietic cells
differentiated normally and outcompeted steady-state hematopoietic cells,
indicating that this effect is reversible. We confirmed the clinical
significance of this by ex vivo analysis of normal hematopoietic subpopulations
from BM of 16 patients with AML. This analysis demonstrated that the numbers of
normal CD34(+)CD38(-) stem-progenitor cells were similar in the BM of AML
patients and controls, whereas normal CD34(+)CD38(+) progenitors were reduced.
Residual normal CD34(+) cells from patients with AML were enriched in long-term
culture, initiating cells and repopulating cells compared with controls. In
conclusion the data do not support the idea that BM failure in AML is due to HSC
depletion. Rather, AML inhibits production of downstream hematopoietic cells by
impeding differentiation at the HSC-progenitor transition.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1301891110
PMCID: PMC3746910
PMID: 23901108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
