---
reference_id: "PMID:37888546"
title: "Impacts of Solid-State Fermented Barley with Fibrolytic Exogenous Enzymes on Feed Utilization, and Antioxidant Status of Broiler Chickens."
authors:
- Ibrahim D
- El-Sayed HI
- Mahmoud ER
- El-Rahman GIA
- Bazeed SM
- Abdelwarith AA
- Elgamal A
- Khalil SS
- Younis EM
- Kishawy ATY
- Davies SJ
- Metwally AE
journal: Vet Sci
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/vetsci10100594
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impacts of Solid-State Fermented Barley with Fibrolytic Exogenous Enzymes on Feed Utilization, and Antioxidant Status of Broiler Chickens.
**Authors:** Ibrahim D, El-Sayed HI, Mahmoud ER, El-Rahman GIA, Bazeed SM, Abdelwarith AA, Elgamal A, Khalil SS, Younis EM, Kishawy ATY, Davies SJ, Metwally AE
**Journal:** Vet Sci (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/vetsci10100594](https://doi.org/10.3390/vetsci10100594)

## Content

1. Vet Sci. 2023 Sep 27;10(10):594. doi: 10.3390/vetsci10100594.

Impacts of Solid-State Fermented Barley with Fibrolytic Exogenous Enzymes on 
Feed Utilization, and Antioxidant Status of Broiler Chickens.

Ibrahim D(1), El-Sayed HI(1), Mahmoud ER(1), El-Rahman GIA(2), Bazeed SM(3), 
Abdelwarith AA(4), Elgamal A(5), Khalil SS(6), Younis EM(4), Kishawy ATY(1), 
Davies SJ(7), Metwally AE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutrition and Clinical Nutrition, Faculty of Veterinary 
Medicine, Zagazig University, Zagazig 44519, Egypt.
(2)Department of Clinical Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Zagazig 
University, Zagazig 44519, Egypt.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Chemistry of Nutrition, Faculty of Veterinary 
Medicine, Badr University in Cairo (BUC), Cairo P.O. Box 4942301, Egypt.
(4)Department of Zoology, College of Science, King Saud University, P.O. Box 
2455, Riyadh 11451, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Department of Animal Histology and Anatomy, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, 
Badr University in Cairo (BUC), Cairo P.O. Box 4942301, Egypt.
(6)Department of biochemistry, drug information center, Zagazig University 
Hospitals, Zagazig University, Zagazig P.O. Box 44511, Egypt.
(7)Aquaculture Nutrition Research Unit ANRU, Carna Research Station, Ryan 
Institute, College of Science and Engineering, University of Galway, H91 V8Y1 
Galway, Ireland.

The present and future high demand of common cereals as corn and wheat encourage 
the development of feed processing technology that allows for the dietary 
inclusion of other cereals of low nutritional value in poultry feeding. Barley 
grains contain anti-nutritional factors that limit their dietary inclusion in 
the poultry industry. The treatment of barley with solid-state fermentation and 
exogenous enzymes (FBEs) provides a good alternative to common cereals. In this 
study, barley grains were subjected to solid-state microbial fermentation using 
Lactobacillus plantarum, Bacillus subtilis and exogenous fibrolytic enzymes. 
This study aimed to assess the impact of FBEs on growth, feed utilization 
efficiency, immune modulation, antioxidant status and the expression of 
intestinal barrier and nutrient transporter-related genes. One-day-old broiler 
chicks (Ross 308, n = 400) comprised four representative groups with ten 
replicates (10 chicks/replicate) and were fed corn-soybean meal basal diets with 
inclusions of FBEs at 0, 5, 10 and 15% for 38 days. Solid-state fermentation of 
barley grains with fibrolytic enzymes increased protein content, lowered crude 
fiber and reduced sugars compared to non-fermented barley gains. In consequence, 
the group fed FBEs10% had the superior feed utilization efficiency and body 
weight gain (increased by 4.7%) with higher levels of nutrient metabolizability, 
pancreatic digestive enzyme activities and low digesta viscosity. Notably, the 
group fed FBEs10% showed an increased villi height and a decreased crypt depth 
with a remarkable hyperactivity of duodenal glands. In addition, higher 
inclusion levels of FBEs boosted serum immune-related parameters and intestinal 
and breast muscle antioxidants status. Intestinal nutrient transporters encoding 
genes (GLUT-1, CAAT-1, LAT1 and PepT-1) and intestinal barriers encoding genes 
(MUC-2, JAM-2, occludin, claudins-1 and β-defensin 1) were upregulated with 
higher dietary FBEs levels. In conclusion, feeding on FBEs10% positively 
enhanced broiler chickens' performance, feed efficiency and antioxidant status, 
and boosted intestinal barrier nutrient transporters encoding genes.

DOI: 10.3390/vetsci10100594
PMCID: PMC10611247
PMID: 37888546

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.