---
reference_id: "PMID:37339758"
title: "Eastern Equine Encephalitis Virus Diversity in Massachusetts Patients, 1938-2020."
authors:
- Langsjoen RM
- Key A
- Shariatzadeh N
- Jackson CR
- Mahmood F
- Arkun K
- Alexandrescu S
- Solomon IH
- Piantadosi A
journal: Am J Trop Med Hyg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.23-0047
keywords:
- Humans
- Animals
- Horses/genetics
- "Encephalitis Virus, Eastern Equine/genetics"
- Phylogeny
- "Encephalomyelitis, Equine/epidemiology"
- Massachusetts/epidemiology
- "RNA, Viral/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Eastern Equine Encephalitis Virus Diversity in Massachusetts Patients, 1938-2020.
**Authors:** Langsjoen RM, Key A, Shariatzadeh N, Jackson CR, Mahmood F, Arkun K, Alexandrescu S, Solomon IH, Piantadosi A
**Journal:** Am J Trop Med Hyg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.4269/ajtmh.23-0047](https://doi.org/10.4269/ajtmh.23-0047)

## Content

1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 2023 Jun 20;109(2):387-396. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.23-0047.
Print  2023 Aug 2.

Eastern Equine Encephalitis Virus Diversity in Massachusetts Patients, 
1938-2020.

Langsjoen RM(1), Key A(1), Shariatzadeh N(1), Jackson CR(2), Mahmood F(2), Arkun 
K(3), Alexandrescu S(4), Solomon IH(2), Piantadosi A(1)(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
Georgia.
(2)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Tufts Medical Center, 
Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Department of Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts.
(5)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Emory University 
School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia.

Eastern equine encephalitis virus (EEEV) is a relatively little-studied 
alphavirus that can cause devastating viral encephalitis, potentially leading to 
severe neurological sequelae or death. Although case numbers have historically 
been low, outbreaks have been increasing in frequency and scale since the 2000 
s. It is critical to investigate EEEV evolutionary patterns, especially within 
human hosts, to understand patterns of emergence, host adaptation, and 
within-host evolution. To this end, we obtained formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded 
tissue blocks from discrete brain regions from five contemporary (2004-2020) 
patients from Massachusetts, confirmed the presence of EEEV RNA by in situ 
hybridization (ISH) staining, and sequenced viral genomes. We additionally 
sequenced RNA from scrapings of historical slides made from brain sections of a 
patient in the first documented EEE outbreak in humans in 1938. ISH staining 
revealed the presence of RNA in all contemporary samples, and quantification 
loosely correlated with the proportion of EEEV reads in samples. Consensus EEEV 
sequences were generated for all six patients, including the sample from 1938; 
phylogenetic analysis using additional publicly available sequences revealed 
clustering of each study sample with like sequences from a similar region, 
whereas an intrahost comparison of consensus sequences between discrete brain 
regions revealed minimal changes. Intrahost single nucleotide variant (iSNV) 
analysis of four samples from two patients revealed the presence of tightly 
compartmentalized, mostly nonsynonymous iSNVs. This study contributes critical 
primary human EEEV sequences, including a historic sequence as well as novel 
intrahost evolution findings, contributing substantially to our understanding of 
the natural history of EEEV infection in humans.

DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.23-0047
PMCID: PMC10397450
PMID: 37339758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]