---
reference_id: "PMID:23827678"
title: Second cistron in CACNA1A gene encodes a transcription factor mediating cerebellar development and SCA6.
authors:
- Du X
- Wang J
- Zhu H
- Rinaldo L
- Lamar KM
- Palmenberg AC
- Hansel C
- Gomez CM
journal: Cell
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.05.059
keywords:
- Animals
- "Calcium Channels/genetics, metabolism"
- Cell Death
- "Cell Line, Tumor"
- "Cerebellum/embryology, physiopathology"
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Humans
- Mice
- Neurites/metabolism
- Peptides/genetics
- Purkinje Cells/metabolism
- Rats
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/genetics, metabolism, physiopathology"
- "Transcription Factors/genetics, metabolism"
- "Transcription, Genetic"
- "Calcium Channels, N-Type"
content_type: full_text_xml
---

# Second cistron in CACNA1A gene encodes a transcription factor mediating cerebellar development and SCA6.
**Authors:** Du X, Wang J, Zhu H, Rinaldo L, Lamar KM, Palmenberg AC, Hansel C, Gomez CM
**Journal:** Cell (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.cell.2013.05.059](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cell.2013.05.059)

## Content

1. Cell. 2013 Jul 3;154(1):118-33. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.05.059.

Second cistron in CACNA1A gene encodes a transcription factor mediating 
cerebellar development and SCA6.

Du X(1), Wang J, Zhu H, Rinaldo L, Lamar KM, Palmenberg AC, Hansel C, Gomez CM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2014;13(6):875-6. doi: 10.4161/cc.28199.

The CACNA1A gene, encoding the voltage-gated calcium channel subunit α1A, is 
involved in pre- and postsynaptic Ca(2+) signaling, gene expression, and several 
genetic neurological disorders. We found that CACNA1A coordinates gene 
expression using a bicistronic mRNA bearing a cryptic internal ribosomal entry 
site (IRES). The first cistron encodes the well-characterized α1A subunit. The 
second expresses a transcription factor, α1ACT, which coordinates expression of 
a program of genes involved in neural and Purkinje cell development. α1ACT also 
contains the polyglutamine (polyQ) tract that, when expanded, causes 
spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 (SCA6). When expressed as an independent 
polypeptide, α1ACT-bearing an expanded polyQ tract-lacks transcription factor 
function and neurite outgrowth properties, causes cell death in culture, and 
leads to ataxia and cerebellar atrophy in transgenic mice. Suppression of 
CACNA1A IRES function in SCA6 may be a potential therapeutic strategy.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.05.059
PMCID: PMC3939801
PMID: 23827678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Voltage-gated calcium channel genes encode a large family of channel proteins (α1 subunits) that play critical roles in neuronal excitability, transmitter release, muscle contractility and gene expression (Catterall, 2011). Genetic defects of these channels have been implicated in a variety of neurological, cardiac and skeletal muscle disorders (Cain and Snutch, 2011). Diverse mutations in the α1A subunit, CACNA1A gene, causing either loss or gain of P/Q-type channel function, have been associated with dominantly inherited conditions of migraine, epilepsy, and episodic and progressive ataxia (Rajakulendran et al., 2012). The recognition that spinocerebellar ataxia type 6 (SCA6) is due to expansion of a polyglutamine (polyQ) tract encoded by a newly identified 47th exon in CACNA1A, from a normal range of Q4-Q17 to pathological range of Q19-Q33, added further complexity to modeling both channel function and disease pathogenesis (Zhuchenko et al., 1997).

Attempts to attribute SCA6 to a disturbance in P/Q-type channel function associated with the expanded polyQ in the α1A subunit in heterologous expression systems have led to contradictory results, while two knockin studies showed no effect of expanded polyQ tracts on P/Q channel gating (Saegusa et al., 2007; Watase et al., 2008). Several laboratories have shown that the C terminus of the α1A subunit (α1ACT), which contains the polyQ tract, is present as a stable fragment in cultured cells or cerebellar tissues (Ishiguro et al., 2010; Kordasiewicz et al., 2006; Kubodera et al., 2003; Marqueze-Pouey et al., 2008; Scott et al., 1998) and enriched in cerebellar nuclei, based on nuclear localization signals in the α1ACT sequence (Kordasiewicz et al., 2006). This finding is similar to that of the C terminal fragment of the L-type subunit that is translocated to the nucleus and functions as a transcription factor (Gomez-Ospina et al., 2006). Finally, the α1ACT fragment bearing SCA6-expanded polyQs is toxic to cultured cells and primary neurons (Ishiguro et al., 2010; Kordasiewicz et al., 2006; Kubodera et al., 2003; Marqueze-Pouey et al., 2008).

Here, we explored the origin and function of the α1ACT polypeptide in physiology and disease. We demonstrate that α1ACT is generated from the full-length α1A transcript by means of a cellular internal ribosomal entry site (IRES) located within the α1A mRNA, i.e., that the CACNA1A gene is bicistronic. The α1ACT protein containing the normal polyQ tract is a transcription factor that binds and enhances expression of several Purkinje cell (PC)-expressed genes, promotes neurite outgrowth, and partially rescues the CACNA1A knockout phenotype. α1ACT with expanded polyQ has altered function, reduces viability of cells in vitro, and causes gait impairment and cerebellar cortical atrophy in vivo. This is the first report of a truly bicistronic, dual-function, cellular gene encoding two proteins with completely distinct functions, in this case an ion channel and a transcription factor. This gene expression strategy demonstrates a novel role for an IRES in coordinating gene expression, as well as a potential therapeutic target for disease modifying therapy.

To identify the N terminal sequence of the α1ACT fragment, we tagged the full-length human α1A subunit cDNA bearing normal polyQ (Q11), α1AWT, at its 3’ end with a 3xFLAG epitope and established HEK293 cell lines stably expressing this ~220kD α1A-FLAG fusion protein. The cell line grew normally and stably expressed the 75 kD α1ACT-FLAG fusion protein. We affinity purified α1ACT-FLAG from the whole-cell lysate in a two-step procedure. Peak elution fractions (Figure 1A) collected from anion exchange chromatography (HiTrap™ DEAE FF) were subjected to affinity purification using anti-FLAG M2 magnetic beads. The isolated α1ACT fragment protein was seen as a unique, 75kD band (arrowhead) above the heavy chain IgG band on a Coomassie stained SDS-PAGE gel (Figure 1B and 1C). LC-MS/MS analysis of in-gel digest protein (The Rockefeller University Protein Resource Center, NY) revealed that the amino acid sequence of N terminus of α1ACT fragment was Met Ile Met Glu Tyr (amino acids 1960-1964, nucleotides 6114-6128, Genbank access GI: 187828892, NM_001127222,) (Figure 1D and Figure S1). This sequence, which begins within the IQ-like domain of the full length α1A subunit and does not overlap with any known protease cleavage site, is a highly homologous sequence in all vertebrate species (Wilkins et al., 1999).

To investigate the origin of α1ACT protein fragment, we generated a series of constructs bearing different mutations of the α1A cDNA, as defined in Figure 1E, and transfected them into HEK293 cells. Deletion of 534 bps (α1Adel534bp) abolished the α1ACT fragment expression without affecting the expression of the full-length α1A subunit (Figure 1H), whereas other mutations of α1A failed to do so (Figure 1E-1H). This indicates that the 534 bps fragment upstream of the α1ACT start site in the α1A cDNA contains sequences essential for translation of α1ACT. These effects on expression were seen to an equivalent degree with both the α1AWT and the human α1A subunit cDNA bearing the pathological polyQ tract (Q33, α1ASCA6).

We hypothesized that expression of α1ACT fragment may be mediated by an IRES present within the CACNA1A coding sequence. 2-d structure analyses of the complete α1A mRNA sequence using an M-fold-based algorithm (Palmenberg and Sgro, 1997; Zuker, 2003) did not identify any canonical type I or type II IRES structures in this region (Baird et al., 2006). However, the region containing nucleotides 5096-6110 sequence was predicted to form a highly complex, stable conformation possessing several stem-loop structures that could represent an area of functional significance for ribosomal binding and interaction with trans-activating factors (Figure S2). This region is highly conserved, from 89.4% in Bos taurus to 76.7% in Danio rerio (data not shown).

To test for IRES activity within this region we inserted DNA segments of different lengths (Figure 2) from the region 5’ to the α1ACT start site into the bicistronic (Renilla luciferase, R-Luc, and firefly luciferase, F-Luc) reporter vector, pRF (Figure 2A) (Spriggs et al., 2009). Because the coding region for the R-Luc is followed by a stop codon, an increase in F-Luc activity indicates the presence of an upstream IRES that enables re-binding of the dual luciferase transcript to the ribosomal machinery. Expression of pRCT653TF or pRCT1014TF, but not pRCT189TF and pRCT293TF, in HEK293 cells enhanced the activity of the F-Luc approximately 9- and 26-fold (Figure 2A and 2B). Moreover, insertion of 1 or 2 nucleotides immediately 5’ to the ATG codon prior to the F-Luc coding region within the pRF vector eliminated the accumulation of F-Luc (Figure 2C and 2D). Therefore, the structure of the CACNA1A IRES is highly dependent on initiating translation of the second cistron at a specific codon, ATG 1960, as is typical of most IRES activation (Fitzgerald and Semler, 2009; Wilson et al., 2000). To help exclude the possibility that the increased F-Luc activity was due to a change at the RNA level, we inserted the same segments into the promoter-less reporter vector, pGL3Basic. Transfection into HEK293 cells yielded no significant increase of luciferase activity (Figure 2E-2G), arguing against the presence of a cryptic promoter in these segments. Subsequently, we performed a quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) on two amplicons within the Renilla ORF and one near the initiation codon of firefly ORF (Figure 2A). The observed ratio of 1:1 Renilla: Firefly mRNA (Figure 2H) favors the presence of an IRES, rather than increased transcription of the second reporter via a cryptic promoter, a splicing event or any other increase in mRNA stability. In addition, the qRT-PCR expression ratios for gene fragments (5’ to or 3’ to the α1ACT start site) within the α1A subunit were approximately 1 in untransfected HEK293 or PC12 cells. Lastly, we found equivalent signals from before and after the α1ACT start site using endogenous α1A mRNA isolated from human cerebellum (Figure 2I and 2J). These results suggest that expression of α1ACT is driven by the presence of a cellular IRES within the α1A coding region rather than by a cryptic promoter or splicing event.

Earlier studies indicated that the 75 kD α1ACT, bearing the normal polyQ tract, was enriched in the nucleus (Ishiguro et al., 2010; Kordasiewicz et al., 2006). To investigate whether α1ACTWT (Q11) plays a role in gene expression by binding to genomic DNA, we performed chromatin immunoprecipitation-based cloning (ChIP-based cloning) from PC12 cells transfected with α1ACT-FLAG fusion protein (Methods). Potential target genes identified via ChIP-based cloning and sequencing include GRN (granulin), BTG1 (B-cell translation gene 1), PMCA2 (Ca2+ ATPase, plasma membrane 2), ITGA8 (integrin alpha-8 precursor) and TAF1 (TATA box binding protein-associated factor of RNA pol II) (Table S2). Putative interaction between α1ACT-FLAG fusion protein and cloned DNA segments within the BTG1, PMCA2 and GRN genes was further confirmed by ChIP-qRT-PCR, (Figure 3A and 3B). Although these genes are not uniquely expressed in PCs, the abundant expression of α1ACT in PCs suggests that they are part of a PC-specific developmental program.

We tested whether α1ACT regulates gene expression through the target sequences identified in ChIP-based cloning. Within BTG1 3’ UTR, we identified an enhancer within the 113 bp sequence that obtained from α1ACT ChIP-based cloning, using reporter assays with segments spanning three lengths (beginning at nt 517) from the 3’ UTR inserted into the pGL3 promoter vector (Du et al., 2009), as shown in Figure 3C. Importantly, over-expression of α1ACTWT significantly increased luciferase activity in the BTG1-630 reporter construct, suggesting that BTG1 3’UTR contains an α1ACT-regulated enhancer element. However, α1ACTSCA6, bearing the pathological polyQ tract (Q33) failed to increase BTG1 3’UTR-enhanced luciferase expression (Figure 3C). We obtained similar results from two segments of 5’ flanking region in the progranulin gene using the pGL3-basic vector. The α1ACTWT fragment, but not the α1ACTSCA6 fragment, increased expression of the reporters bearing the 1662 bp fragment by 2-fold and the 638 bp fragment by 3.2-fold, respectively (Figure 3D). Thus, α1ACTWT has direct gene regulatory effects on at least two target genes, and these are lacking with α1ACTSCA6.

Alignments of ChIP-identified sequences predict two distinct motifs, 1) an AT-rich element, TTATAAAA, and 2) a CA-rich element, CCAA, as potential α1ACT binding sites (Figure 3E). The 113bp BTG1 3’UTR sequence (517-630bp BTG1 WT, Table S3) contains both consensus sequences. As shown in Figure 3F by electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) using the BTG1 WT as probe and nuclear extracts from untreated PC12 cells or from those transfected with α1ACTWT and α1ACTSCA6, we observed a component in PC12 cells, caused a significant gel shift (Complex I, II and III). This indicates that the BTG1 3’UTR contains cis-elements reacting with neuron-specific nuclear protein, present in both untransfected and α1ACT-transfected cells. The three protein complexes with the BTG1 WT probe could be abolished by excess unlabeled BTG1 WT probe, indicating that the binding was specific (Lanes 3 and 4, Figure 3F). Interestingly, nuclear extracts from α1ACTSCA6-transfected PC12 cells (Lane 8, Figure 3F) led to a different migration and pattern of DNA-protein complexes compared to α1ACTWT-expressing cells (Lane 5, Figure 3F), with a greater abundance of complex IV in complexes from the α1ACTSCA6-transfected PC12 cells. This suggests that α1ACTSCA6 has different protein binding pattern from α1ACTWT.

To further identify α1ACT consensus sequences, we used the AT-rich consensus element as a probe in EMSA (Table S3 and Figure 3G). The AT-rich consensus sequence greatly reduced the formation of the complexes (Lane 7, Figure 3G), while mutant AT-rich elements only partially reduced the complex formation (Lanes 5 and 6, Figure 3G). Anti-FLAG antibodies generated a super-shifted complex with nuclear extracts from α1ACTWT-FLAG expressing cells (Lanes 8 and 9, Figure 3G). These studies demonstrate that α1ACT binds to AT-rich element in the BTG1 3’UTR. Finally, we performed EMSA with a series of 3-bp mutations of the TTATAAGAT sequence (Table S3). As shown in Figure 3H, Mut1 abolished complex II and Mut2 abolished complex I. Mut4, combining Mut1 and Mut2, abolished both complex I and II (Figure S3). We also mutated the element, TTATAAGT, within the BTG1 630reporter construct (517-630bp). Constructs 630mut1 and 630mut2 contain 3bp mutation, while 630mut4 contains both Mut1 and Mut2 substitutions. All three constructs had significantly reduced luciferase activities, both basally and in response to over-expressing of α1ACTWT compared to BTG1 630 construct (Figure 3I). These results suggest that TTATAA is the core sequence of AT-rich element that is required to maintain the α1ACT-regulated BTG1 expression.

To test for an effect of α1ACT on endogenous expression of ChIP-identified genes we examined the mRNA and protein levels of TAF, BTG1, PMCA2 and GRN in both cell lines and human cerebellum. Over-expression of normal α1AWT or α1ACTWT, but not α1ACTSCA6, significantly increased the expression of these genes (1.6- to 2.7-fold) in PC12 cells, either compared to empty vector-transfected or α1ACTSCA6-transfected PC12 cells (Figure 4A). As shown in Figure 4B and 4C, BTG1 and PMCA2 protein expression levels were also increased in α1AWT- and α1ACTWT-transfected PC12 cells. Finally, using cerebellar tissues from two SCA6 patients (Q22) and normalizing transcript levels to a PC specific mRNA, Pcp2, we found that BTG1 gene mRNA expression was decreased compared to the normal control (Figure 4D).

Several of the genes regulated by α1ACT are known to play a role in differentiation of the neuronal phenotype (Baker et al., 2006). We established PC12 cell lines stably expressing 3xFLAG-tagged versions of either the full-length α1A or the α1ACT fragment. Upon induction with nerve growth factor (NGF) for 24 hrs, we observed that both α1AWT-FLAG and α1ACTWT-FLAG enhanced neurite outgrowth (fraction of cells with neurites) when compared with PC12 cells expressing empty vector (Figure 4E-4H and Figure S4A-S4D). Importantly, the P/Q channel blocker, ω-agatoxin, had no effect on α1ACTWT-induced neurite outgrowth (Figure S4E). Furthermore, blocking the expression of endogenous or transfected full-length α1A by siRNA, had no effect on α1ACTWT-enhanced neurite outgrowth in PC12 cells transfected with α1ACTWT-FLAG (Figure S4E-S4K). These findings suggest that enhanced neurite outgrowth does not depend on functioning channels or the presence of the full channel protein. There was a significant increase in the percentage of cells bearing neurites in cells transfected with α1AWT-FLAG and α1ACTWT-FLAG compared to controls after NGF stimulation for 24, 48 and 72 hrs (Figure 4E, 4F and 4H). Total neurite lengths were also increased 2 fold in α1ACTWT-expressing cells compared with controls at each time point (Figure 4G and Figure S4A-S4D). However, cells expressing α1ACTSCA6-FLAG had significantly lower percentage of cells with neurites and total neurite length/cell compared with cells expressing α1ACTWT-FLAG (Figure 4E-4H and Figure S4A-S4D). Thus, α1ACTSCA6 lacks the normal function of α1ACTWT in potentiating neurite outgrowth in neuronal cells.

BTG1 belongs to the BTG/TOB protein family of anti-proliferative genes. Both BTG1 and BTG2 proteins interact with the protein arginine N-methyltransferase (i.e. PRMT1) and positively modulate its activity. The PRMT1/BTG methylation pathway is involved in maintaining neuronal cells in a differentiated state (Berthet et al., 2002). We used BTG1 antibody to immunoprecipitate PRMT1 in PC12 cells stably transfected with α1ACTWT and α1ACTSCA6. In α1ACTWT-expressing cells the quantity of precipitated PRMT1 was increased, while in α1ACTSCA6-expressing cells precipitated PRMT1 was decreased, consistent with the expression of BTG1 in these two cell types (Figure 4I). Meanwhile, silencing of BTG1 by small interference RNA (siRNA) blocked the NGF-induced α1ACT-regulated neurite outgrowth (Figure 4J-4L and Figure S4L). These results demonstrate that α1ACT with normal range polyQ maintains the physiological expression of the BTG1 gene, leading to subsequent interaction of the PRMT1/BTG pathway to mediate neuronal differentiation. Together these observations suggest that the normal α1ACT acts as a transcription factor through target genes to enhance the neuronal phenotype, and that one effect of the SCA6 polyQ expansion in α1ACT is to disrupt the properties of the α1ACT transcription factor.

α1A−/− mice, with targeted disruption of mouse CACNA1A, develop a gross neurological phenotype of seizures, dystonia, and ataxia soon after birth, and die by P18-21 (Jun et al., 1999). To investigate the importance of expression of the α1ACT fragment in PCs we used the Pcp2 promoter and Tet-off system (Zu et al., 2004) to generate two double transgenic mouse lines, Pcp2-tTA/TRE-α1ACT (abbreviated, PC-α1ACT), expressing at comparable levels either α1ACTWT (WT=Q4, the smallest α1ACT polyQ seen in humans) or α1ACTSCA6 (SCA6=Q33, the largest α1ACT polyQ seen in SCA6) fragments tagged with an N-terminal myc epitope (see Methods). These mice appeared to grow and develop normally and live a full life span. α1ACTSCA6 mice, however, had mild progressive motor problems that were evident using the treadmill (see below).

To test the role of α1ACT in cerebellar PC development in the absence of α1A channels, we bred PC-α1ACT mice with α1A+/− heterozygous knockout mice and subsequently crossed these offspring to generate α1A−/− mice with PC-targeted α1ACT expression (α1A−/−/PC-α1ACT). Curiously we did not identify any mice with α1A−/−/PC-α1ACTSCA6 genotype, suggesting an impaired viability (Figure 5A). As expected, α1A−/− exhibited severe neurological impairment (Jun et al., 1999). Surprisingly, α1A−/− mice expressing α1ACTWT, i.e., α1A−/−/PC-α1ACTWT mice, had an improved behavioral phenotype relative to α1A−/− mice. Although still neurologically impaired, they gained more weight during the first two weeks of postnatal life compared to α1A−/− mice (Figure 5B and 5C), had improved in-cage mobility (Supplementary video 1), and survived approximately 1 week longer than α1A−/− mice (Figure 5D). We reasoned that the improved phenotype of α1A−/−/PC-α1ACTWT mouse might be mediated through improved dendritic and synaptic development. Immunofluorescent staining of cerebellar cortex of P16 mice from three groups, WT, α1A−/− and α1A−/−/PC-α1ACTWT mice showed that, as noted previously, PCs of α1A−/− mice had shortened primary dendrites with premature branching and an immature pattern of parallel fiber (PF) and climbing fiber (CF) synaptic contacts on PC soma and proximal dendrites (Hashimoto et al., 2011) (Figure 5E-5L). In contrast, PC morphology and afferent innervation of α1A−/−/PC-α1ACTWT cells resembled the pattern in WT mice (Figure 5E-5L). In α1A−/−/PC-α1ACTWT mice the thickness of molecular layer (ML), the relative height and density of the dendritic tree were significantly increased, compared to those of α1A−/− mice (p<0.05) (Figure 5F-5H). This finding is consistent with our in vitro studies showing that α1ACT enhances neurite outgrowth.

We also compared the height of CF innervation between the three mouse groups (Figure 5J-5L) (Hashimoto and Kano, 2005; Hashimoto et al., 2011). In α1A−/− mice, most PCs were multi-innervated, and the CF height only reached 65.2 ± 5.3% of the ML at P16. We found that the CF height was improved in α1A−/−/PC-α1ACTWT mice over that of α1A−/− mice, reaching to 80.7 ± 4.1% of the ML at P16 (p<0.05). However, α1A−/−/PC-α1ACTWT mice exhibited the same three patterns of CF contacts seen with α1A−/− mice, mono CF on PC dendrites, multiple CF contacts on proximal dendrites, and multiple CF contacts on PC soma (Figure 5). These results demonstrate that α1ACT, as a transcription factor, plays an important role in establishing normal dendritic tree morphology in PCs in vivo, but that synapse elimination or selection of dominant innervation requires either P/Q channel function or α1ACT under its endogenous expression pattern.

Finally, we examined mRNA levels of TAF, BTG1, PMCA2 and GRN in the three mouse groups. Figure S5 demonstrates that the expression of these genes was decreased in cerebellar tissue of α1A−/− mice when compared to normal mice, but was increased 1.5 to 3 fold in α1A−/−/PC-α1ACTWT transgenic mice when compared to α1A−/− mice (p<0.05), relative to either β-actin or Pcp2 gene expression (Figure S5A-S5D). These results indicate that expression of the α1ACT target genes is impaired in α1A−/− mice and is corrected by localized expression of α1ACTWT in PCs of transgenic mice.

To further assess the effect of α1ACT expression on Purkinje cell synaptic properties, we measured PF excitatory postsynaptic current (PF EPSC) amplitude as a function of stimulus intensity in WT, α1A−/−, and α1A−/−/PC-α1ACTWT mice (P16-18) in cerebellar slice preparations. While PF EPSCs from WT were significantly larger than those from both α1A−/− (p < 0.01, stimulus intensities 20-55 μA) and α1A−/−/PC-α1ACTWT mice (p<0.05), EPSCs from α1A−/−/PC-α1ACTWT mice were greater than those from α1A−/− mice (p<0.05), indicating that α1ACT expression improves PF synaptic connections (Figure 6A).

The inability of α1ACT to completely restore EPSC amplitudes to WT levels could be explained by the absence of P/Q-type Ca2+ channels in PF presynaptic terminals of α1A−/−/PC-α1ACTWT mice, as these channels play a critical role in neurotransmitter release at PF-Purkinje cell (PF-PC) synapses (Matsushita et al., 2002; Mintz et al., 1995). We therefore examined the presynaptic release properties of PF-PC synapses in α1A−/− and α1A−/−/PC-α1ACTWT mice by measuring the paired-pulse ratios (PPRs) of PF EPSCs. Large PPRs are indicative of low initial release probabilities, and are a sign of impaired presynaptic function (Zucker and Regehr, 2002). In accordance with observations from mouse models harboring loss-of-function mutations in the CACNA1A gene, α1A−/− mice exhibited PPRs significantly greater than WT at several stimulus intervals (WT to α1A−/− mice: p<0.01 for stimulus intervals of 20-100 ms, Figure 6B) (Liu and Friel, 2008; Matsushita et al., 2002). While α1ACT expression did lower PPRs closer to WT levels (α1A−/−/PC-α1ACTWT to α1A−/− mice: p<0.01 for stimulus intervals of 20 and 100 ms, p<0.05 for stimulus interval of 50 ms), the measured values were still elevated (WT to α1A−/−/PC-α1ACTWT: p<0.05 for stimulus intervals of 20 and 50 ms) (Figure 6B), suggesting a residual presynaptic deficit.

We also examined properties of the CF synapse onto Purkinje cells. We observed a reduction in CF EPSC amplitudes and a decrease in the degree of paired-pulse depression in both α1A−/− and α1A−/−/PC-α1ACTWT mice with respect to WT, both of which could also be due to the absence of P/Q-type channels presynaptically (Figure 6C). Additionally, we investigated whether α1ACT expression affects the process of CF maturation. During development, Purkinje cells undergo a competitive and activity-dependent elimination of superfluous CF inputs until only one remains. Impairments to this process results in the persistent innervation of Purkinje cells by multiple climbing fibers into adulthood. We found the proportion of Purkinje cells with multiple CF innervations to be increased in both α1A−/− and α1A−/−/PC-α1ACTWT mice compared to WT, a result indicating that actual P/Q-type Ca2+ channel function, and not just expression of the C terminus, may be essential for proper CF maturation (Watanabe and Kano, 2011) (Figure 6D). Our results provide evidence that α1ACT expression improves the synaptic connections of PFs, but not CFs, onto Purkinje cells.

Previous studies have shown that the α1A C terminus bearing an expanded polyQ tract is toxic relative to WT α1A C terminus when transiently over-expressed in cultured mammalian cells (Ishiguro et al., 2010; Kubodera et al., 2003). Our flow cytometry results showed that PC12 cells stably expressing α1ACTWT exhibited equivalent viability to vector control cells, while cells expressing α1ACTSCA6 had approximately a 2-fold increase in cell death (p<0.05, Figure 7A-7C) (Koopman et al., 1994). Also, LDH release was significantly higher in cells expressing the α1ACTSCA6 compared with that of PC12 cells expressing only pcDNA3 or α1ACTWT (Figure 7D). These findings indicate that over-expression of α1ACT bearing pathological size of polyQ reduces cell viability in cultured mammalian cells.

Finally, we tested whether over-expression of the SCA6-expanded α1ACTSCA6 fragment in mice would lead to clinical or pathological features resembling SCA6, compared with over-expression of the fragment with normal allele size, α1ACTWT. Both α1ACTWT and α1ACTSCA6 can be detected in the nucleus of PCs in the corresponding PC-α1ACT lines at comparable levels by western blot, RT-PCR and immunostaining (Figure 7E, Figure S6A and Figure S6B). There were no obvious clinical differences between these two lines in young adults, and lifespan was not affected. However, we found that PC-α1ACTSCA6 mice demonstrated significant abnormalities in several gait parameters compared with PC-α1ACTWT mice using a video-assisted computerized treadmill for gait analysis (DigiGait, Mouse Specifics, Inc) (p<0.05, after post hoc correction). Most importantly, they exhibited an age-dependent increase in shared stance (double support time) of hind limbs, between ages 3 and 9 months, indicating progressive instability during walking (p<0.05, Figure 7F and Supplementary video 2 and 3) (Matsukawa et al., 2003; Stolze et al., 2002). The gait disturbance never progressed to the level of severe ataxia, although natural changes in weight gain in older mice may have obscured an impact on normal cage activity. The lack of severe ataxia even in 2-year-old mice is not surprising for a model of SCA6, with an age of onset of 43-52 years. Although we found no obvious sign of cell loss in the cerebellum in α1ACTSCA6 mice at approximately 2 years of age, measurement of the ML thickness showed that α1ACTSCA6-expressing mice have significant thinning of the ML, compared with age-matched α1ACTWT and WT mice (Figure 7G and 7H). Lastly, using RT-PCR to examine the expression levels of ChIP-identified genes TAF, GRN, BTG1 and PMCA2 in cerebellar tissues of 2-year-old PC-α1ACTSCA6 mice compared with age-matched WT mice, we found that the transcript levels of each of the α1ACT-regulated genes were decreased by between 11% and 34% (Figure S6C-6F). These findings are the first to demonstrate clinical and pathological changes in an animal model of SCA6 expressing appropriate-sized pathological alleles within a CACNA1A protein.

Cellular IRESs play an increasingly recognized role in the control of eukaryote gene expression where in many 5’ UTRs they provide alternatives to cap-dependent translation initiation during times of cellular stress (Coldwell et al., 2001; Spriggs et al., 2008). IRES sequences have also been detected within the coding regions of some cellular mRNAs, leading to the expression of isoforms or distinct protein products (Cornelis et al., 2000; Ul-Hussain et al., 2008). Together with the present report, these observations suggest that expression of bi-functional genes, particularly those encoding separate transcription factor proteins in the second cistron, may be a newly-recognized strategy for coordinating gene expression programs tied to individual gene products. This could enable the timely expression of a set of genes coincident with the appearance of key proteins during differentiation.

As a transcription factor, the normal α1ACT enhances the expression of at least three genes, GRN, PMCA2 and BTG1, in PC12 cells and cerebellar tissue, potentiates NGF-mediated neurite outgrowth in PC12 cells, and partially rescues the CACNA1A knockout phenotype. GRN is involved in neurite outgrowth and is critical in maintaining neuronal survival, since loss-of-function mutations of the GRN gene lead to cell death in the frontal and temporal lobes (Baker et al., 2006; Cruts et al., 2006; Van Damme et al., 2008). PMCA2 is highly expressed in the cerebellum, particularly in PCs and throughout the ML and granule cell layer (Zacharias and Kappen, 1999). PMCA2 knock-out mice exhibit vestibular and gait abnormalities and reduced thickness of the cerebellar ML (Kozel et al., 1998). Lack of PMCA2 also dramatically alters PC morphology. PMCA2 is a component of mGluR1-IP3R1 signaling complex, which has been implicated in plasticity at the PF-PC synapse (Kurnellas et al., 2007).

The PRMT1/BTG methylation pathway is involved in neurogenesis or in maintaining neuronal cells in a differentiated state. The 3’ UTR of BTG1 is highly conserved throughout evolution and plays a key role in this pathway (Rouault et al., 1993), consistent with our finding that α1ACT activates a novel 3’ enhancer element of BTG1. Enhanced BTG1/PRMT1-driven arginine methylation partly accounts for the essential role of protein methylation during PC12 differentiation (Cimato et al., 1997), which is in line with findings here that BTG1 knockdown blocks neurite outgrowth. Together these findings suggest that α1ACTWT is essential for maintenance of neurite outgrowth through gene-specific signaling pathways. It will be of interest to extend our ChIP-based cloning approach using RNA-seq methodology to more completely characterize the normal repertoire of α1ACT-regulated genes, as well as those bound by α1ACTSCA6.

Except for the in vivo studies, the properties of α1ACT are similar to those demonstrated for the 70 kD fragment, termed CCAT, derived from the Cav1.2 channel, α1C subunit, which may arise from a similar translational mechanism (Gomez-Ospina et al., 2006). In that case, as well as in ours, the set of genes regulated by these novel transcription factors does not conform to an obvious functional class of proteins, but appears to be involved in elaborating key components of the neuronal phenotype, and in neurogenesis or neurodegeneration, timed with the appearance of Ca2+ channel activity.

The improved phenotype at behavioral, histological, and electrophysiological levels in α1A−/−/PC-α1ACTWT mice is remarkable, particularly because α1ACTWT expression, under the control of PC specific promoter, Pcp2, was only restored in PCs. Consistent with these findings and our in vitro results, ChIP-identified genes TAF, BTG1, PMCA2 and GRN were down-regulated in α1A−/− mice, but were increased 1.5 to 3 fold in α1A−/−/PC-α1ACTWT transgenic mice. These results suggest that α1ACT, as a second gene product from CACNA1A, plays an important role in establishing normal morphology and function of PCs.

PF EPSC amplitudes measured in α1A−/−/PC-α1ACTWT were significantly greater than those observed in α1A−/− mice, though they were not completely restored to WT levels, presumably due to the importance of P/Q-type Ca2+ channel function to neurotransmitter release at PF-PC synapses (Mintz et al., 1995). α1ACT expression also resulted in a partial reduction of PPRs at this synapse, which was surprising as PPRs generally reflect presynaptic release probabilities, and α1ACT is present only postsynaptically in α1A−/−/PC-α1ACTWT mice, indicating that factors either directly or indirectly related to the postsynaptic target cell can also influence this parameter. Regardless, the residual elevation of PPRs in α1A−/−/PC-α1ACTWT mice suggests that the incomplete restoration of PF EPSC amplitude is due to a presynaptic deficit in these mice.

The absence of any discernable effect of α1ACT expression on CF-EPSCs indicates that actual P/Q-type Ca2+ channel function is required for the process of CF maturation, as has been suggested previously (Watanabe and Kano, 2011). Thus, it appears that the phenotypic benefits of α1ACT expression are due predominantly to the improvement in PF synaptic transmission.

Compared the properties of the normal α1ACT protein, α1ACTWT, bearing 4 or 11 glutamines, the α1ACTSCA6 polypeptide had altered binding to the BTG1 enhancer, showing additional DNA-protein complexes, and lacked the capacity to mediate expression via BTG1 and GRN luciferase reporters and impaired expression of these genes in PC12 cells. α1ACTSCA6 also failed to mediate neurite outgrowth when stably expressed in PC12 cells and caused increased cell death. This may explain why we did not obtain any mice with α1A−/−/PC-α1ACTSCA6 genotype. Mice over-expressing α1ACTSCA6 on a normal background exhibited subtle, but clearly measurable defects in motor functioning. Computerized treadmill gait analysis demonstrated progressive gait impairment with an increase in double limb support, a compensatory reaction to instability during walking. With advanced age α1ACTSCA6 was associated with thinning of the cerebellar cortex. These mice have reduced levels of expression of TAF1, GRN, BTG1 and PMCA2, the targets of α1ACT, relative to endogenous PC transcripts. These studies suggest that, rather than arising from ion channel dysfunction, the pathogenesis of SCA6 more closely resembles the toxic gain-of-function mechanism of the polyQ disorders (La Spada et al., 1991; Palhan et al., 2005; Sopher et al., 2004). This is supported by the lack of disturbed Ca2+ channel function in two mouse knockin studies of the SCA6 mutation (Saegusa et al., 2007; Watase et al., 2008). If additional studies further support this Ca2+ channel-independent mechanism, the demonstration of selective translation based on an IRES may pave the way for therapies targeted at suppressing the IRES function.

We have shown that the CACNA1A gene is bicistronic, encoding a newly identified transcription factor, α1ACT, involved with neurite outgrowth and PC maturation, within the α1A mRNA. α1ACT also bears the expanded polyQ tract in SCA6, which interrupts transcription factor function, impairs viability of cultured cells and is pathogenic in transgenic mice. These findings are summarized in the diagram in Figure 7I.

Cells, animals/mouse strains, antibodies, plasmids, and other materials were described in the Extended Experimental Procedures. The detailed protocols used for ChIP, ChIP-based cloning, ChIP-qRT-PCR, EMSA, Luciferase Assays, immunoprecipitation, immunohistochemistry, immunoblotting, quantitative RT-PCR, electrophysiology and LDH assay are outlined in the Extended Experimental Procedures.

Protein extracts from HEK-293 cells stably transfected with α1A subunit bearing a Q11 allele were separated via anion exchange chromatography (His Trap FF column) and further purified by ANTI-FLAG M2 affinity purification. α1ACTWT fragment protein in SDS-PAGE gel was digested in-gel with trypsin and the resulting peptides were then analyzed via LC-MS/MS on an LTQ-Velos-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. See details in the Extended Experimental Procedures.

For detailed procedures of immunohistochemistry, antibodies and dilutions were described in the Extended Experimental Procedures. PC12 cells were imaged 0 hr, 24 hrs, 48 hrs and 72 hrs after NGF 24 hrs treatment. Neurites were defined as processes longer than the width of the cell body. For each experiment, cells were imaged. Dendrites were analyzed by employing ImageJ and NeuroJ programs.