---
reference_id: "PMID:34431609"
title: "Stargardt disease: monitoring incidence and diagnostic trends in the Netherlands using a nationwide disease registry."
authors:
- Runhart EH
- Dhooge P
- Meester-Smoor M
- Pas J
- Pott JWR
- van Leeuwen R
- Kroes HY
- Bergen AA
- de Jong-Hesse Y
- Thiadens AA
- van Schooneveld MJ
- van Genderen M
- Boon C
- Klaver C
- van den Born LI
- Cremers FPM
- Hoyng CB
journal: Acta Ophthalmol
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1111/aos.14996
keywords:
- ATP-Binding Cassette Transporters/genetics
- Delayed Diagnosis
- Female
- Humans
- Incidence
- Male
- Mutation
- Netherlands/epidemiology
- Registries
- Retrospective Studies
- Stargardt Disease
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Stargardt disease: monitoring incidence and diagnostic trends in the Netherlands using a nationwide disease registry.
**Authors:** Runhart EH, Dhooge P, Meester-Smoor M, Pas J, Pott JWR, van Leeuwen R, Kroes HY, Bergen AA, de Jong-Hesse Y, Thiadens AA, van Schooneveld MJ, van Genderen M, Boon C, Klaver C, van den Born LI, Cremers FPM, Hoyng CB
**Journal:** Acta Ophthalmol (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1111/aos.14996](https://doi.org/10.1111/aos.14996)

## Content

1. Acta Ophthalmol. 2022 Jun;100(4):395-402. doi: 10.1111/aos.14996. Epub 2021
Aug  25.

Stargardt disease: monitoring incidence and diagnostic trends in the Netherlands
using a nationwide disease registry.

Runhart EH(1)(2), Dhooge P(1)(2), Meester-Smoor M(3), Pas J(1), Pott JWR(4), van
Leeuwen R(5), Kroes HY(6), Bergen AA(7)(8), de Jong-Hesse Y(9), Thiadens AA(3),
van Schooneveld MJ(9)(10), van Genderen M(5)(10), Boon C(9)(11), Klaver
C(1)(3)(12), van den Born LI(13)(14), Cremers FPM(2)(15), Hoyng CB(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, the
Netherlands.
(2)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University
Medical Centre, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Erasmus University Medical Centre, Rotterdam,
the Netherlands.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, University Medical Centre Groningen, University
of Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Ophthalmology, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, the
Netherlands.
(6)Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, the
Netherlands.
(7)Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands.
(8)The Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience (NIN-KNAW), Amsterdam, the
Netherlands.
(9)Department of Ophthalmology, Amsterdam University Medical Centres, Amsterdam,
the Netherlands.
(10)Bartiméus Diagnostic Centre for Complex Visual Disorders, Zeist, the
Netherlands.
(11)Department of Ophthalmology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, the
Netherlands.
(12)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus University Medical Centre, Rotterdam,
the Netherlands.
(13)The Rotterdam Eye Hospital, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(14)Rotterdam Ophthalmic Institute, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
(15)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen,
the Netherlands.

PURPOSE: To assess the incidence of Stargardt disease (STGD1) and to evaluate
demographics of incident cases.
METHODS: For this retrospective cohort study, demographic, clinical and genetic
data of patients with a clinical diagnosis of STGD1 were registered between
September 2010 and January 2020 in a nationwide disease registry. Annual
incidence (2014-2018) and point prevalence (2018) were assessed on the basis of
this registry.
RESULTS: A total of 800 patients were registered, 56% were female and 83% were
of European ancestry. The incidence was 1.67-1.95:1,000,000 per year and the
point prevalence in 2018 was approximately 1:22,000-1:19,000 (with and without
10% of potentially unregistered cases). Age at onset was associated with sex
(p = 0.027, Fisher's exact); 1.9x more women than men were observed (140 versus
74) amongst patients with an age at onset between 10 and 19 years, while the sex
ratio in other age-at-onset categories approximated one. Late-onset STGD1
(≥45 years) constituted 33% of the diagnoses in 2014-2018 compared to 19% in
2004-2008. Diagnostic delay (≥2 years between the first documentation of macular
abnormalities and diagnosis) was associated with older age of onset (p = 0.001,
Mann-Whitney). Misdiagnosis for age-related macular degeneration (22%) and
incidental STGD1 findings (14%) was common in patients with late-onset STGD1.
CONCLUSION: The observed prevalence of STGD1 in real-world data was lower than
expected on the basis of population ABCA4 allele frequencies. Late-onset STGD1
was more frequently diagnosed in recent years, likely due to higher awareness of
its phenotype. In this pretherapeutic era, mis- and underdiagnosis of especially
late-onset STGD1 and the role of sex in STGD1 should receive special attention.

© 2021 The Authors. Acta Ophthalmologica published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd on
behalf of Acta Ophthalmologica Scandinavica Foundation.

DOI: 10.1111/aos.14996
PMCID: PMC9291619
PMID: 34431609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
