---
reference_id: "PMID:37692180"
title: "Arterial Tortuosity Syndrome: Unraveling a Rare Vascular Disorder."
authors:
- Ekhator C
- Devi M
- Barker C
- Safdar S
- Irfan R
- Malineni J
- Hussain I
- Bisharat P
- Ramadhan A
- Abdelaziz AM
- Bellegarde SB
- Saddique MN
journal: Cureus
year: '2023'
doi: 10.7759/cureus.44906
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Arterial Tortuosity Syndrome: Unraveling a Rare Vascular Disorder.
**Authors:** Ekhator C, Devi M, Barker C, Safdar S, Irfan R, Malineni J, Hussain I, Bisharat P, Ramadhan A, Abdelaziz AM, Bellegarde SB, Saddique MN
**Journal:** Cureus (2023)
**DOI:** [10.7759/cureus.44906](https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.44906)

## Content

1. Cureus. 2023 Sep 8;15(9):e44906. doi: 10.7759/cureus.44906. eCollection 2023
Sep.

Arterial Tortuosity Syndrome: Unraveling a Rare Vascular Disorder.

Ekhator C(1), Devi M(2), Barker C(3), Safdar S(4), Irfan R(4), Malineni J(5),
Hussain I(6), Bisharat P(7), Ramadhan A(8)(9), Abdelaziz AM(10), Bellegarde
SB(11), Saddique MN(12).

Author information:
(1)Neuro-Oncology, College of Osteopathic Medicine, New York Institute of
Technology, Old Westbury, USA.
(2)Medicine, Ziauddin University, Karachi, PAK.
(3)Public Health, University of South Florida, Tampa, USA.
(4)Internal Medicine, Mayo Hospital, Lahore, PAK.
(5)Medicine and Surgery, Maharajah's Institute of Medical Sciences,
Vizianagaram, IND.
(6)Medicine and Surgery, Khyber Medical University, Peshawar, PAK.
(7)Internal Medicine, Khyber Medical University, Peshawar, PAK.
(8)Medicine, Universal Scientific Education and Research Network (USERN),
Yogyakarta, IDN.
(9)Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Public Health, and Nursing, Gadjah Mada
University, Yogyakarta, IDN.
(10)Internal Medicine, Alexandria University Faculty of Medicine, Alexandria,
EGY.
(11)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, American University of Antigua, St.
John's, ATG.
(12)Medicine and Surgery, Mayo Hospital, Lahore, PAK.

Arterial tortuosity syndrome (ATS) is a rare genetic disorder characterized by
abnormal twists and turns of arteries, leading to cardiovascular complications.
This syndrome, first reported around 55 years ago, is inherited in an autosomal
recessive manner and affects both genders. ATS manifests primarily in childhood,
with arterial abnormalities disrupting blood circulation, increasing shear
stress, and causing complications, such as atherosclerosis and strokes. This
article reviews the genetics, etiology, pathophysiology, clinical presentation,
diagnosis, associated conditions, management, and challenges of ATS. The
syndrome's genetic cause is linked to mutations in the SLC2A10 gene, affecting
collagen and elastin synthesis. Arterial tortuosity, a complex phenomenon,
arises from factors such as vessel elongation, anatomic fixation, and vessel
diameter. ATS is one of many conditions associated with arterial tortuosity,
including Marfan syndrome and Loeys-Dietz syndrome. Recent studies highlight
arterial tortuosity's potential as a prognostic indicator for adverse
cardiovascular events. Management requires a multidisciplinary approach, and
surveillance and prevention play key roles. Despite challenges, advancements in
understanding ATS offer hope for targeted therapies and improved patient care.

Copyright © 2023, Ekhator et al.

DOI: 10.7759/cureus.44906
PMCID: PMC10491927
PMID: 37692180

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.
