---
reference_id: "PMID:35570616"
title: Long-Term Outcomes of Kidney Transplant Recipients With Juvenile Nephronophthisis.
authors:
- Avcı B
- Baskın E
- Gülleroğlu K
- Çaltık Yılmaz A
- Kantar A
- Akdur A
- Moray G
- Haberal M
journal: Exp Clin Transplant
year: '2022'
doi: 10.6002/ect.PediatricSymp2022.O39
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-Term Outcomes of Kidney Transplant Recipients With Juvenile Nephronophthisis.
**Authors:** Avcı B, Baskın E, Gülleroğlu K, Çaltık Yılmaz A, Kantar A, Akdur A, Moray G, Haberal M
**Journal:** Exp Clin Transplant (2022)
**DOI:** [10.6002/ect.PediatricSymp2022.O39](https://doi.org/10.6002/ect.PediatricSymp2022.O39)

## Content

1. Exp Clin Transplant. 2022 May;20(Suppl 3):122-125. doi: 
10.6002/ect.PediatricSymp2022.O39.

Long-Term Outcomes of Kidney Transplant Recipients With Juvenile 
Nephronophthisis.

Avcı B(1), Baskın E, Gülleroğlu K, Çaltık Yılmaz A, Kantar A, Akdur A, Moray G, 
Haberal M.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Baskent University Faculty of 
Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.

OBJECTIVES: Nephronophthisis is the most common genetic cause of kidney failure 
in childhood. Treatment for nephronophthisis is symptomatic, and kidney 
transplant is a good treatment option when kidney failure has developed. We 
reported the outcomes of kidney transplant recipients with primary diagnosis of 
juvenile nephronophthisis who were followed-up in our center.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We retrospectively examined medical records of 17 kidney 
transplant patients with a primary diagnosis of juvenile nephronophthisis. We 
compared this group of 17 patients with kidney transplant recipients who had 
other etiologies of kidney failure in terms of transplant age, donor type, 
immunosuppressive treatment, acute rejection, graft loss rates, and glomerular 
filtration rates at 1 and 5 years posttransplant (N = 180 total analyzed).
RESULTS: Among 180 kidney transplant recipients, the 17 patients (9.4%) with 
nephronophthisis had a mean age of 12.6 ± 4.3 years and mean follow-up time 
posttransplant of 79.5 ± 41.9 months. Five of 17 patients received a kidney 
transplant from a deceased donor (29.4%), and the remaining 12 patients (70.6%) 
received transplants from living related donors. Preemptive kidney transplant 
was performed in 4 patients (23.5%). There was a statistically significant 
difference (P < .05) in terms of acute rejection between patients with 
nephronophthisis (17.6%) versus patients with other primary diagnoses (34%). 
However, the patients with nephronophthisis versus those with other primary 
diagnoses were similar (P > .05) in terms of transplant age (12.6 ± 4.3 vs 13.8 
± 6.7 years, respectively) and follow-up time (79.5 ± 41.9 vs 59.1 ± 38.8 
months, respectively). Donor type, immunosuppressive treatment, and 1-year (96.7 
± 23.2 vs 97.6 ± 28.4 mL/min/1.73 m2) and 5-year (84.7 ± 31.1 vs 86.7 ± 21.7 
mL/min/1.73 m2) glomerular filtration rates were also similar (P > .05) between 
groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Posttransplant prognosis was good among kidney transplant 
recipients with juvenile nephronophthisis.

DOI: 10.6002/ect.PediatricSymp2022.O39
PMID: 35570616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]