---
reference_id: "PMID:30712769"
title: "Visceral Leishmaniasis: Recent Advances in Diagnostics and Treatment Regimens."
authors:
- van Griensven J
- Diro E
journal: Infect Dis Clin North Am
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.idc.2018.10.005
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Visceral Leishmaniasis: Recent Advances in Diagnostics and Treatment Regimens.
**Authors:** van Griensven J, Diro E
**Journal:** Infect Dis Clin North Am (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.idc.2018.10.005](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.idc.2018.10.005)

## Content

1. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2019 Mar;33(1):79-99. doi:
10.1016/j.idc.2018.10.005.

Visceral Leishmaniasis: Recent Advances in Diagnostics and Treatment Regimens.

van Griensven J(1), Diro E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Institute of Tropical Medicine, 
Nationalestraat 155, Antwerp 2000, Belgium. Electronic address: 
jvangriensven@itg.be.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Gondar, Post Office Box 196, 
Gondar, Ethiopia.

Diagnostic advances in visceral leishmaniasis include the development of the 
rK39 and rK28 rapid diagnostic test. The direct agglutination test is also 
increasingly used, as well as conventional and real-time polymerase chain 
reaction, which also performs well on peripheral blood. The choice of treatment 
for visceral leishmaniasis depends on the geographic region where the infection 
is acquired. Liposomal amphotericin B is generally found to be safe and 
effective in most endemic regions of the world; antimonials still remain to be 
the most effective in eastern Africa despite its high toxicity. Combination 
therapy is increasingly explored. Immunosuppressed patients require adapted 
diagnostic and therapeutic strategies.

Copyright © 2018 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.idc.2018.10.005
PMID: 30712769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]