---
reference_id: "PMID:9067788"
title: Obstetric factors and mother-to-infant transmission of HIV-1.
authors:
- Zorrilla CD
journal: Infect Dis Clin North Am
year: '1997'
doi: 10.1016/s0891-5520(05)70345-7
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Obstetric factors and mother-to-infant transmission of HIV-1.
**Authors:** Zorrilla CD
**Journal:** Infect Dis Clin North Am (1997)
**DOI:** [10.1016/s0891-5520(05)70345-7](https://doi.org/10.1016/s0891-5520(05)70345-7)

## Content

1. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 1997 Mar;11(1):109-18. doi: 
10.1016/s0891-5520(05)70345-7.

Obstetric factors and mother-to-infant transmission of HIV-1.

Zorrilla CD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Puerto Rico School of 
Medicine, San Juan, USA.

Mother-to-infant HIV transmission has been reported to occur during pregnancy 
(in utero), at delivery, or postpartum (breast feeding). There are a 
multiplicity of variables or cofactors that may influence such transmission. 
Among the obstetric factors reported to be more strikingly associated with 
mother-to-infant transmission are preterm delivery, low birth weight and birth 
order in twin pregnancies. Perhaps the most controversial issue in obstetric 
management is the association of mode of delivery and transmission. Some large 
studies and metaanalyses have found a protective effect of cesarean section 
varying from odds ratios of 0.8 to 0.56. Unfortunately, those large studies have 
not included the duration of rupture membranes in their analyses. When such a 
variable (duration of ruptured membranes) is taken into account, the protective 
effect of the cesarean section may disappear. The impact of such obstetric 
variables on transmission can be explained by the hypothesis that a significant 
proportion of the perinatal transmission occurs intrapartum and is related to 
the dose exposure (time and concentration) of the presenting part to the genital 
tract virus load and to the maternal blood virus load. Currently, routine 
cesarean section is not recommended as a strategy for the prevention of vertical 
transmission. Although prospective studies are underway to elucidate the effect 
of cesarean section on transmission, the results are academic if recent potent 
antiviral agents are demonstrated to reduce or minimize the viral load in blood 
and in cervicovaginal secretions. Meanwhile, the current management of the 
delivery process should have as a goal the reduction of the presenting part to 
the cervicovaginal secretions by preserving the intactness of the membranes and 
by the proper use of invasive procedures when clinically indicated.

DOI: 10.1016/s0891-5520(05)70345-7
PMID: 9067788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]