---
reference_id: "PMID:34768808"
title: Common Pathogenic Mechanisms in Centronuclear and Myotubular Myopathies and Latest Treatment Advances.
authors:
- Gómez-Oca R
- Cowling BS
- Laporte J
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2021'
doi: 10.3390/ijms222111377
keywords:
- Animals
- Autophagy
- Dynamins
- Humans
- "Myopathies, Structural, Congenital/metabolism, physiopathology, therapy"
- Nerve Tissue Proteins
- "Protein Tyrosine Phosphatases, Non-Receptor"
- Ryanodine Receptor Calcium Release Channel
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Common Pathogenic Mechanisms in Centronuclear and Myotubular Myopathies and Latest Treatment Advances.
**Authors:** Gómez-Oca R, Cowling BS, Laporte J
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2021)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms222111377](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms222111377)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2021 Oct 21;22(21):11377. doi: 10.3390/ijms222111377.

Common Pathogenic Mechanisms in Centronuclear and Myotubular Myopathies and 
Latest Treatment Advances.

Gómez-Oca R(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Cowling BS(5), Laporte J(1)(2)(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Medicine and Neurogenetics, Institut de Génétique 
et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), 67400 Illkirch, France.
(2)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM), U1258, 
67400 Illkirch, France.
(3)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), UMR7104, 67400 Illkirch, 
France.
(4)Strasbourg University, 67081 Strasbourg, France.
(5)Dynacure, 67400 Illkirch, France.

Centronuclear myopathies (CNM) are rare congenital disorders characterized by 
muscle weakness and structural defects including fiber hypotrophy and organelle 
mispositioning. The main CNM forms are caused by mutations in: the MTM1 gene 
encoding the phosphoinositide phosphatase myotubularin (myotubular myopathy), 
the DNM2 gene encoding the mechanoenzyme dynamin 2, the BIN1 gene encoding the 
membrane curvature sensing amphiphysin 2, and the RYR1 gene encoding the 
skeletal muscle calcium release channel/ryanodine receptor. MTM1, BIN1, and DNM2 
proteins are involved in membrane remodeling and trafficking, while RyR1 
directly regulates excitation-contraction coupling (ECC). Several CNM animal 
models have been generated or identified, which confirm shared pathological 
anomalies in T-tubule remodeling, ECC, organelle mispositioning, protein 
homeostasis, neuromuscular junction, and muscle regeneration. Dynamin 2 plays a 
crucial role in CNM physiopathology and has been validated as a common 
therapeutic target for three CNM forms. Indeed, the promising results in 
preclinical models set up the basis for ongoing clinical trials. Another two 
clinical trials to treat myotubular myopathy by MTM1 gene therapy or tamoxifen 
repurposing are also ongoing. Here, we review the contribution of the different 
CNM models to understanding physiopathology and therapy development with a focus 
on the commonly dysregulated pathways and current therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms222111377
PMCID: PMC8583656
PMID: 34768808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: B.S. Cowling and J. Laporte are co-founders of 
Dynacure. R. Gomez-Oca and B.S. Cowling are employees of Dynacure.