---
reference_id: "PMID:36704348"
title: A novel non-sense variant in the OFD1 gene caused Joubert syndrome.
authors:
- Li C
- Wang X
- Li F
- Ding H
- Liu L
- Xiong Y
- Yang C
- Zhang Y
- Wu J
- Yin A
journal: Front Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.1064762
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel non-sense variant in the OFD1 gene caused Joubert syndrome.
**Authors:** Li C, Wang X, Li F, Ding H, Liu L, Xiong Y, Yang C, Zhang Y, Wu J, Yin A
**Journal:** Front Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fgene.2022.1064762](https://doi.org/10.3389/fgene.2022.1064762)

## Content

1. Front Genet. 2023 Jan 10;13:1064762. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2022.1064762. 
eCollection 2022.

A novel non-sense variant in the OFD1 gene caused Joubert syndrome.

Li C(1), Wang X(1), Li F(1), Ding H(1), Liu L(1), Xiong Y(1), Yang C(2), Zhang 
Y(1), Wu J(1), Yin A(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetic Center, Guangdong Women and Children Hospital, Guangzhou, 
China.
(2)Medical Imaging Department, Guangdong Women and Children Hospital, Guangzhou, 
China.

Background: Joubert syndrome (JBS) is a rare neurodevelopmental disorder 
associated with progressive renal, liver, and retinal involvement that exhibits 
heterogeneity in both clinical manifestations and genetic etiology. Therefore, 
it is difficult to make a definite prenatal diagnosis. Methods: Whole-exome 
sequencing and Sanger sequencing were performed to screen the causative gene 
variants in a suspected JBS family. RNA-seq and protein model prediction were 
performed to clarify the potential pathogenic mechanism. A more comprehensive 
review of previously reported cases with OFD1 variants is presented and may help 
to establish a genotype-phenotype. Results: We identified a novel non-sense 
variant in the OFD1 gene, OFD1 (NM_003611.3): c.2848A>T (p.Lys950Ter). Sanger 
sequencing confirmed cosegregation among this family. RNA-seq confirmed that 
partial degradation of mutant transcripts, which was predicted to be caused by 
the non-sense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) mechanism, may explain the reduction in 
the proportion of mutant transcripts. Protein structure prediction of the 
non-sense variant transcript revealed that this variant may lead to a change in 
the OFD1 protein structure. Conclusion: The genetic variation spectrum of JBS10 
caused by OFD1 was broadened. The novel variants further deepened our insight 
into the molecular mechanism of the disease.

Copyright © 2023 Li, Wang, Li, Ding, Liu, Xiong, Yang, Zhang, Wu and Yin.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2022.1064762
PMCID: PMC9871390
PMID: 36704348

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.