---
reference_id: "PMID:39546052"
title: Dupilumab in a 9-week-old with Netherton Syndrome Leads to Deep Symptom Control.
authors:
- Vollmuth Y
- Alelq NA
- Sattler F
- Schmidt S
- Hauck F
journal: J Clin Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s10875-024-01837-z
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dupilumab in a 9-week-old with Netherton Syndrome Leads to Deep Symptom Control.
**Authors:** Vollmuth Y, Alelq NA, Sattler F, Schmidt S, Hauck F
**Journal:** J Clin Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10875-024-01837-z](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10875-024-01837-z)

## Content

1. J Clin Immunol. 2024 Nov 15;45(1):42. doi: 10.1007/s10875-024-01837-z.

Dupilumab in a 9-week-old with Netherton Syndrome Leads to Deep Symptom Control.

Vollmuth Y(1), Alelq NA(2)(3), Sattler F(1), Schmidt S(1), Hauck F(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Dr von Hauner Children's Hospital, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Lindwurmstraße 4 , Munich, European Union 
(EU), D-80337 , Germany.
(2)Department of Dermatology and Allergology, University Hospital, LMU Klinikum, 
European Union (EU), Munich, Germany.
(3)Ministry of Health, Dammam, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Dr von Hauner Children's Hospital, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Lindwurmstraße 4 , Munich, European Union 
(EU), D-80337 , Germany. fabian.hauck@med.uni-muenchen.de.

PURPOSE: Netherton syndrome (NS) is a rare inborn error of immunity (IEI) with 
an incidence of approximately 1:200,000 and the phenotypic triad of 
trichorrhexis invaginate (bamboo hair), congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma, 
and multiple atopic manifestations. Treatment options especially in infants are 
scarce and generally not licensed.
METHODS: Case report of a 9-week-old infant with NS treated with dupilumab 
off-label.
RESULTS: We report rapid and sustained resolution of allergic inflammation, deep 
symptom control including normalization of the skin microbiome, and catch-up 
somatic and psychomotor development without adverse drug reactions.
CONCLUSION: Due to the high complication rate of NS, especially in the first 
years of life, we recommend treatment with dupilumab off-label immediately after 
the diagnosis has been established.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s10875-024-01837-z
PMCID: PMC11568019
PMID: 39546052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declarations Competing Interests The authors 
have no conflicts of interest to disclose.