---
reference_id: "PMID:31562989"
title: "Seasonal Variation in Acute Cholecystitis: An Analysis of Cholecystectomies Spanning Three Decades."
authors:
- Khan MS
- Shahzad N
- Arshad S
- Shariff AH
journal: J Surg Res
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2019.08.025
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Seasonal Variation in Acute Cholecystitis: An Analysis of Cholecystectomies Spanning Three Decades.
**Authors:** Khan MS, Shahzad N, Arshad S, Shariff AH
**Journal:** J Surg Res (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jss.2019.08.025](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2019.08.025)

## Content

1. J Surg Res. 2020 Feb;246:78-82. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2019.08.025. Epub 2019 Sep 
25.

Seasonal Variation in Acute Cholecystitis: An Analysis of Cholecystectomies 
Spanning Three Decades.

Khan MS(1), Shahzad N(1), Arshad S(1), Shariff AH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Aga Khan University, Karachi, Pakistan.
(2)Department of Surgery, Aga Khan University, Karachi, Pakistan. Electronic 
address: amir.shariff@aku.edu.

BACKGROUND: Seasonal variation in the occurrence of medical illnesses reflects 
the effect of the environment, provides insight into pathogenesis, and can 
assist health care administrators in allocating resources accordingly. Seasonal 
variation has been reported in various infectious and surgical diseases, but has 
been rarely studied in acute cholecystitis. Our objective was to study seasonal 
variation in acute cholecystitis at our institution.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective analysis of patients who underwent 
cholecystectomy for acute cholecystitis from January 1988 to December 2018. 
Chi-square goodness-of-fit test was used to analyze seasonality of acute 
cholecystitis adjusting for variation in number of days between seasons. The 
number of days for seasons were taken as 92, 92, 91, and 90.25 for spring, 
summer, fall, and winter, respectively.
RESULTS: Overall, 3924 patients underwent cholecystectomy for acute 
cholecystitis during the study period. The frequency of cholecystectomies 
performed varied between months (minimum February n = 259, maximum July n = 372, 
P < 0.001) and seasons (minimum winter n = 789, maximum summer n = 1101 
P < 0.001). Age and gender distribution across months and seasons was similar 
(P > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings confirm seasonal variation in occurrence of acute 
cholecystitis with summer season witnessing the most and the winter season 
encountering the least patients with acute cholecystitis. Validation of our 
findings through prospectively collected data at national level is the way 
forward.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jss.2019.08.025
PMID: 31562989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]