---
reference_id: "PMID:30654394"
title: "Endoscopic treatment of chronic pancreatitis: European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) Guideline - Updated August 2018."
authors:
- Dumonceau JM
- Delhaye M
- Tringali A
- Arvanitakis M
- Sanchez-Yague A
- Vaysse T
- Aithal GP
- Anderloni A
- Bruno M
- Cantú P
- Devière J
- Domínguez-Muñoz JE
- Lekkerkerker S
- Poley JW
- Ramchandani M
- Reddy N
- van Hooft JE
journal: Endoscopy
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1055/a-0822-0832
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Endoscopic treatment of chronic pancreatitis: European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) Guideline - Updated August 2018.
**Authors:** Dumonceau JM, Delhaye M, Tringali A, Arvanitakis M, Sanchez-Yague A, Vaysse T, Aithal GP, Anderloni A, Bruno M, Cantú P, Devière J, Domínguez-Muñoz JE, Lekkerkerker S, Poley JW, Ramchandani M, Reddy N, van Hooft JE
**Journal:** Endoscopy (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1055/a-0822-0832](https://doi.org/10.1055/a-0822-0832)

## Content

1. Endoscopy. 2019 Feb;51(2):179-193. doi: 10.1055/a-0822-0832. Epub 2019 Jan 17.

Endoscopic treatment of chronic pancreatitis: European Society of 
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) Guideline - Updated August 2018.

Dumonceau JM(1), Delhaye M(2), Tringali A(3)(4), Arvanitakis M(2), Sanchez-Yague 
A(5), Vaysse T(6), Aithal GP(7), Anderloni A(8), Bruno M(9), Cantú P(10), 
Devière J(2), Domínguez-Muñoz JE(11), Lekkerkerker S(12), Poley JW(9), 
Ramchandani M(13), Reddy N(13), van Hooft JE(12).

Author information:
(1)Gedyt Endoscopy Center, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology Hepatopancreatology, and Digestive Oncology, 
Erasme University Hospital, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.
(3)Digestive Endoscopy Unit, Fondazione Policlinico Universitario Agostino 
Gemelli, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(4)Centre for Endoscopic Research, Therapeutics and Training (CERTT), Università 
Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy.
(5)Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Hospital Costa del Sol, Marbella, Spain.
(6)Service de Gastroentérologie, University Hospital of Bicêtre, Assistance 
Publique-Hopitaux de Paris, Université Paris Sud, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France.
(7)Nottingham Digestive Diseases Centre, NIHR Nottingham Biomedical Research 
Centre, Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust and University of Nottingham, 
UK.
(8)Endoscopy Unit, IRCCS Istituto Clinico Humanitas, Rozzano, Milan, Italy.
(9)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus University Medical 
Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(10)Gastroenterology and Endoscopy Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale 
Maggiore Policlinico, Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, 
Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy.
(11)Gastroenterology Department, University Hospital of Santiago de Compostela, 
Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(12)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Amsterdam UMC, University of 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(13)Asian Institute of Gastroenterology, Hyderabad, India.

ESGE suggests endoscopic therapy and/or extracorporeal shockwave lithotripsy 
(ESWL) as the first-line therapy for painful uncomplicated chronic pancreatitis 
(CP) with an obstructed main pancreatic duct (MPD) in the head/body of the 
pancreas. The clinical response should be evaluated at 6 - 8 weeks; if it 
appears unsatisfactory, the patient's case should be discussed again in a 
multidisciplinary team and surgical options should be considered.Weak 
recommendation, low quality evidence.ESGE suggests, for the selection of 
patients for initial or continued endoscopic therapy and/or ESWL, taking into 
consideration predictive factors associated with a good long-term outcome. These 
include, at initial work-up, absence of MPD stricture, a short disease duration, 
non-severe pain, absence or cessation of cigarette smoking and of alcohol 
intake, and, after initial treatment, complete removal of obstructive pancreatic 
stones and resolution of pancreatic duct stricture with stenting.Weak 
recommendation, low quality evidence.ESGE recommends ESWL for the clearance of 
radiopaque obstructive MPD stones larger than 5 mm located in the head/body of 
the pancreas and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) for MPD 
stones that are radiolucent or smaller than 5 mm. Strong recommendation, 
moderate quality evidence.ESGE suggests restricting the use of endoscopic 
therapy after ESWL to patients with no spontaneous clearance of pancreatic 
stones after adequate fragmentation by ESWL.Weak recommendation, moderate 
quality evidence.ESGE suggests treating painful dominant MPD strictures with a 
single 10-Fr plastic stent for one uninterrupted year if symptoms improve after 
initial successful MPD drainage. The stent should be exchanged if necessary, 
based on symptoms or signs of stent dysfunction at regular pancreas imaging at 
least every 6 months. ESGE suggests consideration of surgery or multiple 
side-by-side plastic stents for symptomatic MPD strictures persisting beyond 1 
year after the initial single plastic stenting, following multidisciplinary 
discussion. Weak recommendation, low quality evidence.ESGE recommends endoscopic 
drainage over percutaneous or surgical treatment for uncomplicated chronic 
pancreatitis (CP)-related pseudocysts that are within endoscopic reach.Strong 
recommendation, moderate quality evidence.ESGE recommends retrieval of 
transmural plastic stents at least 6 weeks after pancreatic pseudocyst 
regression if MPD disruption has been excluded, and long-term indwelling of 
transmural double-pigtail plastic stents in patients with disconnected 
pancreatic duct syndrome.Strong recommendation, low quality evidence.ESGE 
suggests the temporary insertion of multiple side-by-side plastic stents or of a 
fully covered self-expandable metal stent (FCSEMS) for treating CP-related 
benign biliary strictures.Weak recommendation, moderate quality evidence.ESGE 
recommends maintaining a registry of patients with biliary stents and recalling 
them for stent removal or exchange.Strong recommendation, low quality evidence.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/a-0822-0832
PMID: 30654394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: G. P. Aithal receives consultancy fees from 
Shire (September 2015 to present), Pfizer (July 2018 to present), and GSK and 
Agios (February 2018 to present). A. Anderloni has provided consultancy to 
Boston Scientific (2017 – 2018). M. J. Bruno has received lecturing and 
consultancy fees from Boston Scientific, Cook Medical, and Pentax Medical 
(ongoing) and consultancy fees from Mylan (ongoing); his department is involved 
in investigator- and industry-initiated studies with Boston Scientific, Cook 
Medical, and Pentax Medical (ongoing); he is a member (no financial benefit) of 
the Dutch Pancreatitis Study Group J. Devière receives research support from 
Olympus for institutional review board-approved studies (ongoing); his 
department receives research support from Boston Scientific for institutional 
review board-approved studies (ongoing). J. E. Domínguez-Muñoz has received 
speaker’s honoraria from Boston Scientific (2018); his department has received 
financial support for educational activities from Pentax and Boston Scientific 
(2017 – 2018) and Medtronic (2018). J.-W. Poley receives speaker’s fees and 
travel expenses from Pentax, Boston Scientific, and Cook Endoscopy (ongoing), 
and consultancy fees from Boston Scientific and Cook Endoscopy (ongoing). A. 
Sanchez-Yague has provided paid consultancy to Boston Scientific (2015 – 2018). 
J. E. van Hooft has received lecture fees from Medtronic (2014 – 2015) and 
consultancy fees from Boston Scientific (2014 – 2016); her department has 
received research grants from Cook Medical (2014 – 2018) and Abbott 
(2014 – 2017). M. Arvanitakis, P. Cantú, M. Delhaye, J.-M. Dumonceau, 
S. Lekkerkerker, M. Ramchandani, N. Reddy, A. Tringali, and T. Vaysse have no 
competing interests.