---
reference_id: "PMID:27882623"
title: "Concise Review: Stem Cell-Based Treatment of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease."
authors:
- Osorio MJ
- Rowitch DH
- Tesar P
- Wernig M
- Windrem MS
- Goldman SA
journal: Stem Cells
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1002/stem.2530
keywords:
- Animals
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Humans
- Mutation/genetics
- Myelin Sheath/metabolism
- "Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease/pathology, therapy"
- Stem Cell Transplantation
- Stem Cells/cytology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Concise Review: Stem Cell-Based Treatment of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease.
**Authors:** Osorio MJ, Rowitch DH, Tesar P, Wernig M, Windrem MS, Goldman SA
**Journal:** Stem Cells (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1002/stem.2530](https://doi.org/10.1002/stem.2530)

## Content

1. Stem Cells. 2017 Feb;35(2):311-315. doi: 10.1002/stem.2530. Epub 2016 Nov 23.

Concise Review: Stem Cell-Based Treatment of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease.

Osorio MJ(1), Rowitch DH(2), Tesar P(3), Wernig M(4)(5), Windrem MS(6), Goldman 
SA(1)(6).

Author information:
(1)Center for Basic and Translational Neuroscience, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Departments of Pediatrics and Neurosurgery, UCSF School of Medicine and Broad 
Center for Regenerative Medicine, San Francisco, California, USA.
(3)Department of Genetics and Genome Sciences, Case Western Reserve School of 
Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.
(4)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine.
(5)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, 
California, USA.
(6)Center for Translational Neuromedicine, University of Rochester Medical 
Center, Rochester, New York, USA.

Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD) is an X-linked disorder caused by mutation in 
the proteolipid protein-1 (PLP1) gene, which encodes the proteolipid protein of 
myelinating oligodendroglia. PMD exhibits phenotypic variability that reflects 
its considerable genotypic heterogeneity, but all forms of the disease result in 
central hypomyelination, associated in most cases with early neurological 
dysfunction, progressive deterioration, and ultimately death. PMD may present as 
a connatal, classic and transitional forms, or as the less severe spastic 
paraplegia type 2 and PLP-null phenotypes. These disorders are most often 
associated with duplications of the PLP1 gene, but can also be caused by coding 
and noncoding point mutations as well as full or partial deletion of the gene. A 
number of genetically-distinct but phenotypically-similar disorders of 
hypomyelination exist which, like PMD, lack any effective therapy. Yet as 
relatively pure CNS hypomyelinating disorders, with limited involvement of the 
PNS and relatively little attendant neuronal pathology, PMD and similar 
hypomyelinating disorders are attractive therapeutic targets for neural stem 
cell and glial progenitor cell transplantation, efforts at which are now 
underway in a number of research centers. Stem Cells 2017;35:311-315.

© 2016 AlphaMed Press.

DOI: 10.1002/stem.2530
PMCID: PMC5314962
PMID: 27882623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]