---
reference_id: "PMID:17705300"
title: Mutations of the CEP290 gene encoding a centrosomal protein cause Meckel-Gruber syndrome.
authors:
- Frank V
- den Hollander AI
- Brüchle NO
- Zonneveld MN
- Nürnberg G
- Becker C
- Du Bois G
- Kendziorra H
- Roosing S
- Senderek J
- Nürnberg P
- Cremers FP
- Zerres K
- Bergmann C
journal: Hum Mutat
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1002/humu.20614
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations of the CEP290 gene encoding a centrosomal protein cause Meckel-Gruber syndrome.
**Authors:** Frank V, den Hollander AI, Brüchle NO, Zonneveld MN, Nürnberg G, Becker C, Du Bois G, Kendziorra H, Roosing S, Senderek J, Nürnberg P, Cremers FP, Zerres K, Bergmann C
**Journal:** Hum Mutat (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1002/humu.20614](https://doi.org/10.1002/humu.20614)

## Content

1. Hum Mutat. 2008 Jan;29(1):45-52. doi: 10.1002/humu.20614.

Mutations of the CEP290 gene encoding a centrosomal protein cause Meckel-Gruber 
syndrome.

Frank V(1), den Hollander AI, Brüchle NO, Zonneveld MN, Nürnberg G, Becker C, Du 
Bois G, Kendziorra H, Roosing S, Senderek J, Nürnberg P, Cremers FP, Zerres K, 
Bergmann C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.

Meckel-Gruber syndrome (MKS) is an autosomal recessive, lethal multisystemic 
disorder characterized by meningooccipital encephalocele, cystic kidney 
dysplasia, hepatobiliary ductal plate malformation, and postaxial polydactyly. 
Recently, genes for MKS1 and MKS3 were identified, putting MKS on the list of 
ciliary disorders (ciliopathies). By positional cloning in a distantly related 
multiplex family, we mapped a novel locus for MKS to a 3-Mb interval on 12q21. 
Sequencing of the CEP290 gene located in the minimal critical region showed a 
homozygous 1-bp deletion supposed to lead to loss of function of the encoded 
centrosomal protein CEP290/nephrocystin-6. CEP290 is thought to be involved in 
chromosome segregation and localizes to cilia, centrosomes, and the nucleus. 
Subsequent analysis of another consanguineous multiplex family revealed 
homozygous haplotypes and the same frameshift mutation. Our findings add to the 
increasing body of evidence that ciliopathies can cause a broad spectrum of 
disease phenotypes, and pleiotropic effects of CEP290 mutations range from 
single organ involvement with isolated Leber congenital amaurosis to Joubert 
syndrome and lethal early embryonic multisystemic malformations in Meckel-Gruber 
syndrome. We compiled clinical and genetic data of all patients with CEP290 
mutations described so far. No clear-cut genotype-phenotype correlations were 
apparent as almost all mutations are nonsense, frameshift, or splice-site 
changes and scattered throughout the gene irrespective of the patients' 
phenotypes. Conclusively, other factors than the type and location of CEP290 
mutations may underlie phenotypic variability.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20614
PMID: 17705300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]