---
reference_id: PMID:26092122
title: Auditory hair cell defects as potential cause for sensorineural deafness in Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome.
authors:
- Ahmed M
- Ura K
- Streit A
journal: Dis Model Mech
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1242/dmm.019547
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cochlea/abnormalities, embryology, pathology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Gene Deletion
- "Hair Cells, Auditory/pathology"
- "Hearing Loss, Sensorineural/genetics"
- Heterozygote
- Histone-Lysine N-Methyltransferase/genetics
- Histones/metabolism
- Humans
- Incidence
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- "Receptor, Fibroblast Growth Factor, Type 3/genetics"
- Signal Transduction
- Wolf-Hirschhorn Syndrome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Auditory hair cell defects as potential cause for sensorineural deafness in Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome.
**Authors:** Ahmed M, Ura K, Streit A
**Journal:** Dis Model Mech (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1242/dmm.019547](https://doi.org/10.1242/dmm.019547)

## Content

1. Dis Model Mech. 2015 Sep;8(9):1027-35. doi: 10.1242/dmm.019547. Epub 2015 Jun 
18.

Auditory hair cell defects as potential cause for sensorineural deafness in 
Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome.

Ahmed M(1), Ura K(2), Streit A(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development and Stem Cell Biology, King's College 
London, London, SE1 9RT, UK.
(2)Laboratory of Chromatin Metabolism and Epigenetics, Graduate School of 
Science, Chiba University, 1-33, Yayoi-cho, Inage-ku, Chiba 263-8522, Japan 
PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, 
Japan.
(3)Department of Craniofacial Development and Stem Cell Biology, King's College 
London, London, SE1 9RT, UK andrea.streit@kcl.ac.uk.

WHSC1 is a histone methyltransferase (HMT) that catalyses the addition of methyl 
groups to lysine 36 on histone 3. In humans, WHSC1 haploinsufficiency is 
associated with all known cases of Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS). The cardinal 
feature of WHS is a craniofacial dysmorphism, which is accompanied by 
sensorineural hearing loss in 15% of individuals with WHS. Here, we show that 
WHSC1-deficient mice display craniofacial defects that overlap with WHS, 
including cochlea anomalies. Although auditory hair cells are specified 
normally, their stereocilia hair bundles required for sound perception fail to 
develop the appropriate morphology. Furthermore, the orientation and cellular 
organisation of cochlear hair cells and their innervation are defective. These 
findings identify, for the first time, the likely cause of sensorineural hearing 
loss in individuals with WHS.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.019547
PMCID: PMC4582100
PMID: 26092122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests The authors declare no 
competing or financial interests.