---
reference_id: "PMID:35240325"
title: TUBB4B gene mutation in Leber phenotype of congenital amaurosis syndrome associated with early-onset deafness.
authors:
- Maasz A
- Hadzsiev K
- Ripszam R
- Zsigmond A
- Maka E
- Knezy K
- Lesch B
- Nemeth A
- Bene J
- Galik B
- Gyenesei A
- Melegh B
journal: Eur J Med Genet
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104471
keywords:
- Blindness
- Deafness/genetics
- Female
- Humans
- Leber Congenital Amaurosis/genetics
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- Tubulin/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# TUBB4B gene mutation in Leber phenotype of congenital amaurosis syndrome associated with early-onset deafness.
**Authors:** Maasz A, Hadzsiev K, Ripszam R, Zsigmond A, Maka E, Knezy K, Lesch B, Nemeth A, Bene J, Galik B, Gyenesei A, Melegh B
**Journal:** Eur J Med Genet (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104471](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104471)

## Content

1. Eur J Med Genet. 2022 Apr;65(4):104471. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104471. Epub 
2022 Feb 28.

TUBB4B gene mutation in Leber phenotype of congenital amaurosis syndrome 
associated with early-onset deafness.

Maasz A(1), Hadzsiev K(2), Ripszam R(2), Zsigmond A(2), Maka E(3), Knezy K(3), 
Lesch B(3), Nemeth A(4), Bene J(2), Galik B(5), Gyenesei A(5), Melegh B(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Clinical Centre and Medical School, 
University of Pecs, Pecs, H-7624, Hungary; Szentagothai Research Centre, 
Clinical Genetics and Genomics Research Group, University of Pecs, Pecs, H-7624, 
Hungary. Electronic address: maasz.anita@pte.hu.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, Clinical Centre and Medical School, 
University of Pecs, Pecs, H-7624, Hungary; Szentagothai Research Centre, 
Clinical Genetics and Genomics Research Group, University of Pecs, Pecs, H-7624, 
Hungary.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, H-1085, 
Hungary.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Clinical Centre and Medical School, 
University of Pecs, Pecs, H-7624, Hungary.
(5)Bioinformatics Research Group, Genomics and Bioinformatics Core Facility, 
University of Pecs, Pecs, H-7624, Hungary.

Beta-tubulin 4B isotype is one of the subunits of microtubules encoded by TUBB4B 
gene on chromosome 9, which is responsible for the maintenance of microtubule 
stability. In humans, mutations in microtubule-encoding genes have been 
associated with several tubulinopathies with very heterogeneous symptoms. So 
far, only two missense mutations in TUBB4B gene have been found to have 
pathological implications in this disorder. Here we report a Hungarian family 
with three affected members, mother and her 12- and 14-year-old children, who 
suffer from ophthalmologic and hearing impairments probably due to c.1171C > T 
missense variant in the TUBB4B gene. The presented case is the second report, 
and unique in the literature because of three affected family members carrying 
the same mutation and the family provides evidence for a quite similar but not 
identical phenotype of LCAEOD in subjects carrying this mutation.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2022.104471
PMID: 35240325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]