---
reference_id: "PMID:26467909"
title: "Predictors of Relapse and Functioning in First-Episode Psychosis: A Two-Year Follow-Up Study."
authors:
- Bergé D
- Mané A
- Salgado P
- Cortizo R
- Garnier C
- Gomez L
- Diez-Aja C
- Bulbena A
- Pérez V
journal: Psychiatr Serv
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1176/appi.ps.201400316
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predictors of Relapse and Functioning in First-Episode Psychosis: A Two-Year Follow-Up Study.
**Authors:** Bergé D, Mané A, Salgado P, Cortizo R, Garnier C, Gomez L, Diez-Aja C, Bulbena A, Pérez V
**Journal:** Psychiatr Serv (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1176/appi.ps.201400316](https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ps.201400316)

## Content

1. Psychiatr Serv. 2016 Feb;67(2):227-33. doi: 10.1176/appi.ps.201400316. Epub
2015  Oct 15.

Predictors of Relapse and Functioning in First-Episode Psychosis: A Two-Year 
Follow-Up Study.

Bergé D(1), Mané A(1), Salgado P(1), Cortizo R(1), Garnier C(1), Gomez L(1), 
Diez-Aja C(1), Bulbena A(1), Pérez V(1).

Author information:
(1)The authors are with the Department of Neurosciences and Psychiatry, Hospital 
del Mar Medical Research Institute (IMIM), Barcelona, Spain (e-mail: 
dbergeba@gmail.com ). Dr. Bergé, Dr. Mané, and Dr. Pérez are also with Centro de 
Investigación Biomédica en Red en Salud Mental, Barcelona. Dr. Bulbena is also 
with the Department of Psychiatry, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Barcelona.

OBJECTIVE: First-episode psychosis has an annual incidence rate of 24.6 to 40.9 
per 100,000 population, and most individuals develop chronic disorders, such as 
schizophrenia or affective psychosis. The first two to five years are thought to 
be key determinants of long-term functional and clinical prognosis. This study 
aimed to determine the two-year course of illness in first-episode psychosis, 
including diagnosis, relapse, and functioning and factors related to these 
variables.
METHODS: A total of 140 patients who experienced a first episode of psychosis 
were recruited and evaluated between 2008 and 2012 in a first-episode psychosis 
program in Barcelona, Spain. Regression models were used to determine factors 
predicting relapse and functioning.
RESULTS: A general trend was noted toward improved functioning and less severe 
psychotic symptoms. However, after two years, one-third of the patients had a 
diagnosis of schizophrenia and more than 40% had a diagnosis of affective 
psychosis. Rates of relapse were 31% after one year and 43% at two years. 
Cannabis use after illness onset and poor insight were the best predictors of 
relapse. Being male and severity of negative symptoms at baseline predicted 
worse functioning at two years.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with first-episode psychosis were found to have high 
relapse rates during the first years after illness onset. Further studies 
evaluating treatment strategies focused on reducing cannabis use and improving 
insight in first-episode psychosis should be encouraged.

DOI: 10.1176/appi.ps.201400316
PMID: 26467909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]