---
reference_id: "PMID:33580673"
title: Genetic insight into sick sinus syndrome.
authors:
- Thorolfsdottir RB
- Sveinbjornsson G
- Aegisdottir HM
- Benonisdottir S
- Stefansdottir L
- Ivarsdottir EV
- Halldorsson GH
- Sigurdsson JK
- Torp-Pedersen C
- Weeke PE
- Brunak S
- Westergaard D
- Pedersen OB
- Sorensen E
- Nielsen KR
- Burgdorf KS
- Banasik K
- Brumpton B
- Zhou W
- Oddsson A
- Tragante V
- Hjorleifsson KE
- Davidsson OB
- Rajamani S
- Jonsson S
- Torfason B
- Valgardsson AS
- Thorgeirsson G
- Frigge ML
- Thorleifsson G
- Norddahl GL
- Helgadottir A
- Gretarsdottir S
- Sulem P
- Jonsdottir I
- Willer CJ
- Hveem K
- Bundgaard H
- Ullum H
- Arnar DO
- Thorsteinsdottir U
- Gudbjartsson DF
- Holm H
- Stefansson K
- DBDS Genomic Consortium
journal: Eur Heart J
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehaa1108
keywords:
- Atrial Fibrillation/genetics
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2"
- Genome-Wide Association Study
- Humans
- NAV1.8 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel
- "Pacemaker, Artificial"
- Sick Sinus Syndrome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic insight into sick sinus syndrome.
**Authors:** Thorolfsdottir RB, Sveinbjornsson G, Aegisdottir HM, Benonisdottir S, Stefansdottir L, Ivarsdottir EV, Halldorsson GH, Sigurdsson JK, Torp-Pedersen C, Weeke PE, Brunak S, Westergaard D, Pedersen OB, Sorensen E, Nielsen KR, Burgdorf KS, Banasik K, Brumpton B, Zhou W, Oddsson A, Tragante V, Hjorleifsson KE, Davidsson OB, Rajamani S, Jonsson S, Torfason B, Valgardsson AS, Thorgeirsson G, Frigge ML, Thorleifsson G, Norddahl GL, Helgadottir A, Gretarsdottir S, Sulem P, Jonsdottir I, Willer CJ, Hveem K, Bundgaard H, Ullum H, Arnar DO, Thorsteinsdottir U, Gudbjartsson DF, Holm H, Stefansson K, DBDS Genomic Consortium
**Journal:** Eur Heart J (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1093/eurheartj/ehaa1108](https://doi.org/10.1093/eurheartj/ehaa1108)

## Content

1. Eur Heart J. 2021 May 21;42(20):1959-1971. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehaa1108.

Genetic insight into sick sinus syndrome.

Thorolfsdottir RB(1), Sveinbjornsson G(1), Aegisdottir HM(1), Benonisdottir 
S(1), Stefansdottir L(1), Ivarsdottir EV(1), Halldorsson GH(1), Sigurdsson 
JK(1), Torp-Pedersen C(2), Weeke PE(3), Brunak S(4), Westergaard D(4), Pedersen 
OB(5), Sorensen E(6), Nielsen KR(7), Burgdorf KS(6), Banasik K(4), Brumpton 
B(8), Zhou W(9), Oddsson A(1), Tragante V(1), Hjorleifsson KE(1)(10), Davidsson 
OB(1), Rajamani S(1), Jonsson S(1), Torfason B(11)(12), Valgardsson AS(12), 
Thorgeirsson G(1)(11)(13), Frigge ML(1), Thorleifsson G(1), Norddahl GL(1), 
Helgadottir A(1), Gretarsdottir S(1), Sulem P(1), Jonsdottir I(1)(11)(14), 
Willer CJ(9)(15)(16), Hveem K(17)(18)(19), Bundgaard H(3), Ullum H(6)(20), Arnar 
DO(1)(11)(13), Thorsteinsdottir U(1)(11), Gudbjartsson DF(1)(21), Holm H(1), 
Stefansson K(1)(11); DBDS Genomic Consortium.

Collaborators: Andersen S, Erikstrup C, Hansen TF, Hjalgrim H, Jemec G, Jennum 
P, Nyegaard M, Bruun MT, Petersen M, Werge T, Johansson PI.

Author information:
(1)deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc., Sturlugata 8, Reykjavik 101, Iceland.
(2)Department of Clinical Research and Cardiology, Nordsjaelland Hospital, 
Dyrehavevej 29, Hillerød 3400, Denmark.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Copenhagen University Hospital, Blegdamsvej 9, 
Copenhagen 2100, Denmark.
(4)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and 
Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3A, Copenhagen 2200, 
Denmark.
(5)Department of Clinical Immunology, Naestved Hospital, Ringstedgade 77B, 
Naestved 4700, Denmark.
(6)Department of Clinical Immunology, Copenhagen University Hospital, 
Blegdamsvej 9, Copenhagen 2100, Denmark.
(7)Department of Clinical Immunology, Aalborg University Hospital North, 
Urbansgade 36, Aalborg 9000, Denmark.
(8)Department of Thoracic and Occupational Medicine, St. Olavs Hospital, 
Trondheim University Hospital, Prinsesse Kristinas gate 3, Trondheim 7030, 
Norway.
(9)Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, University of 
Michigan, 100 Washtenaw Avenue, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2218, USA.
(10)Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of 
Technology, 1200 E California Blvd. MC 305-16, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.
(11)Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Vatnsmyrarvegur 16, Reykjavik 
101, Iceland.
(12)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Landspitali-The National University 
Hospital of Iceland, Hringbraut, Reykjavik 101, Iceland.
(13)Department of Medicine, Landspitali-The National University Hospital of 
Iceland, Hringbraut, Reykjavik 101, Iceland.
(14)Department of Immunology, Landspitali-The National University Hospital of 
Iceland, Hringbraut, Reykjavik 101, Iceland.
(15)Department of Internal Medicine: Cardiology, University of Michigan, 1500 
East Medical Center Drive, Ann Arbor, MI 48109 -5368, USA.
(16)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, 4909 Buhl Building, 
1241 E. Catherine St., Ann Arbor, MI 48109 -5618, USA.
(17)K.G. Jebsen Center for Genetic Epidemiology, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Erling Skjalgssons gt. 
1, Trondheim 7491, Norway.
(18)Department of Public Health and Nursing, Faculty of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Postboks 8905, 
Trondheim 7491, Norway.
(19)HUNT Research Centre, Department of Public Health and General Practice, 
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Forskningsveien 2, Levanger 
7600, Norway.
(20)Statens Serum Institut, Artillerivej 5, Copenhagen 2300, Denmark.
(21)School of Engineering and Natural Sciences, University of Iceland, 
Hjardarhagi 4, Reykjavik 107, Iceland.

Comment in
    Eur Heart J. 2021 May 21;42(20):1972-1975. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehab209.

AIMS: The aim of this study was to use human genetics to investigate the 
pathogenesis of sick sinus syndrome (SSS) and the role of risk factors in its 
development.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We performed a genome-wide association study of 6469 SSS 
cases and 1 000 187 controls from deCODE genetics, the Copenhagen Hospital 
Biobank, UK Biobank, and the HUNT study. Variants at six loci associated with 
SSS, a reported missense variant in MYH6, known atrial fibrillation 
(AF)/electrocardiogram variants at PITX2, ZFHX3, TTN/CCDC141, and SCN10A and a 
low-frequency (MAF = 1.1-1.8%) missense variant, p.Gly62Cys in KRT8 encoding the 
intermediate filament protein keratin 8. A full genotypic model best described 
the p.Gly62Cys association (P = 1.6 × 10-20), with an odds ratio (OR) of 1.44 
for heterozygotes and a disproportionally large OR of 13.99 for homozygotes. All 
the SSS variants increased the risk of pacemaker implantation. Their association 
with AF varied and p.Gly62Cys was the only variant not associating with any 
other arrhythmia or cardiovascular disease. We tested 17 exposure phenotypes in 
polygenic score (PGS) and Mendelian randomization analyses. Only two associated 
with the risk of SSS in Mendelian randomization, AF, and lower heart rate, 
suggesting causality. Powerful PGS analyses provided convincing evidence against 
causal associations for body mass index, cholesterol, triglycerides, and type 2 
diabetes (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: We report the associations of variants at six loci with SSS, 
including a missense variant in KRT8 that confers high risk in homozygotes and 
points to a mechanism specific to SSS development. Mendelian randomization 
supports a causal role for AF in the development of SSS.

© The Author(s) 2021. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
European Society of Cardiology.

DOI: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehaa1108
PMCID: PMC8140484
PMID: 33580673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]