---
reference_id: "PMID:36880400"
title: "Competitive, multi-objective, and compartmented Flux Balance Analysis for addressing tissue-specific inborn errors of metabolism."
authors:
- Liu Y
- Westerhoff HV
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12603
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Competitive, multi-objective, and compartmented Flux Balance Analysis for addressing tissue-specific inborn errors of metabolism.
**Authors:** Liu Y, Westerhoff HV
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12603](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12603)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2023 Jul;46(4):573-585. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12603. Epub
2023  Apr 7.

Competitive, multi-objective, and compartmented Flux Balance Analysis for 
addressing tissue-specific inborn errors of metabolism.

Liu Y(1), Westerhoff HV(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands.
(2)Molecular Cell Biology, Amsterdam Institute for Molecules, Medicines and 
Systems, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, 
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

The inborn error of metabolism phenylketonuria (PKU, OMIM 261600) is most often 
due to inactivation of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH), which converts 
phenylalanine (Phe) into tyrosine (Tyr). The reduced PAH activity increases 
blood concentration of phenylalanine and urine levels of phenylpyruvate. Flux 
balance analysis (FBA) of a single-compartment model of PKU predicts that 
maximum growth rate should be reduced unless Tyr is supplemented. However, the 
PKU phenotype is lack of development of brain function specifically, and Phe 
reduction rather than Tyr supplementation cures the disease. Phe and Tyr cross 
the blood-brain barrier (BBB) through the aromatic amino acid transporter 
implying that the two transport reactions interact. However, FBA does not 
accommodate such competitive interactions. We here report on an extension to FBA 
that enables it to deal with such interactions. We built a three-compartment 
model, made the common transport across the BBB explicit, and included dopamine 
and serotonin synthesis as parts of the brain function to be delivered by FBA. 
With these ramifications, FBA of the genome-scale metabolic model extended to 
three compartments does explain that (i) the disease is brain specific, (ii) 
phenylpyruvate in urine is a biomarker, (iii) excess of blood-phenylalanine 
rather than shortage of blood-tyrosine causes brain pathology, and (iv) Phe 
deprivation is the better therapy. The new approach also suggests (v) 
explanations for differences in pathology between individuals with the same PAH 
inactivation, and (vi) interference of disease and therapy with the functioning 
of other neurotransmitters.

© 2023 The Authors. Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12603
PMID: 36880400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]