---
reference_id: "PMID:37455357"
title: "Succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency in mice and in humans: An untargeted metabolomics perspective."
authors:
- Peters TMA
- Engelke UFH
- de Boer S
- Reintjes JTG
- Roullet JB
- Broekman S
- de Vrieze E
- van Wijk E
- Wamelink MMC
- Artuch R
- Barić I
- Merx J
- Boltje TJ
- Martens J
- Willemsen MAAP
- Verbeek MM
- Wevers RA
- Gibson KM
- Coene KLM
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/jimd.12657
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Animals
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Female
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- Mice
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/metabolism"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Epilepsy/metabolism
- gamma-Aminobutyric Acid/metabolism
- Hydroxybutyrates
- Language Development Disorders
- Metabolomics/methods
- Succinate-Semialdehyde Dehydrogenase/deficiency
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency in mice and in humans: An untargeted metabolomics perspective.
**Authors:** Peters TMA, Engelke UFH, de Boer S, Reintjes JTG, Roullet JB, Broekman S, de Vrieze E, van Wijk E, Wamelink MMC, Artuch R, Barić I, Merx J, Boltje TJ, Martens J, Willemsen MAAP, Verbeek MM, Wevers RA, Gibson KM, Coene KLM
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jimd.12657](https://doi.org/10.1002/jimd.12657)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2024 May;47(3):417-430. doi: 10.1002/jimd.12657. Epub
2023  Jul 29.

Succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency in mice and in humans: An
untargeted metabolomics perspective.

Peters TMA(1)(2), Engelke UFH(2), de Boer S(2), Reintjes JTG(2), Roullet JB(3),
Broekman S(4), de Vrieze E(4), van Wijk E(4), Wamelink MMC(5), Artuch R(6),
Barić I(7), Merx J(8), Boltje TJ(8), Martens J(9), Willemsen MAAP(10), Verbeek
MM(1)(2), Wevers RA(2), Gibson KM(3), Coene KLM(2)(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior,
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Translational Metabolic Laboratory (TML),
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Pharmacotherapy, College of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Washington State University, Spokane, Washington, USA.
(4)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behavior, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Metabolic Unit, Amsterdam Gastroenterology
Endocrinology Metabolism, Amsterdam UMC Location Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.
(6)Clinical Biochemistry Department, Institut de Recerca Sant Joan de Déu,
CIBERER and MetabERN Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University Hospital Center
Zagreb and University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia.
(8)Institute for Molecules and Materials, Synthetic Organic Chemistry, Radboud
University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(9)Institute for Molecules and Materials, FELIX Laboratory, Radboud University,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(10)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition,
and Behavior, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(11)Laboratory of Clinical Chemistry and Haematology, Máxima Medical Center,
Veldhoven, The Netherlands.

Succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase deficiency (SSADHD) is a rare neurometabolic
disorder caused by disruption of the gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) pathway. A
more detailed understanding of its pathophysiology, beyond the accumulation of
GABA and gamma-hydroxybutyric acid (GHB), will increase our understanding of the
disease and may support novel therapy development. To this end, we compared
biochemical body fluid profiles from SSADHD patients with controls using
next-generation metabolic screening (NGMS). Targeted analysis of NGMS data from
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed a moderate increase of aspartic acid, glutaric
acid, glycolic acid, 4-guanidinobutanoic acid, and 2-hydroxyglutaric acid, and
prominent elevations of GHB and 4,5-dihydroxyhexanoic acid (4,5-DHHA) in SSADHD
samples. Remarkably, the intensities of 4,5-DHHA and GHB showed a significant
positive correlation in control CSF, but not in patient CSF. In an established
zebrafish epilepsy model, 4,5-DHHA showed increased mobility that may reflect
limited epileptogenesis. Using untargeted metabolomics, we identified 12
features in CSF with high biomarker potential. These had comparable increased
fold changes as GHB and 4,5-DHHA. For 10 of these features, a similar increase
was found in plasma, urine and/or mouse brain tissue for SSADHD compared to
controls. One of these was identified as the novel biomarker
4,5-dihydroxyheptanoic acid. The intensities of selected features in plasma and
urine of SSADHD patients positively correlated with the clinical severity score
of epilepsy and psychiatric symptoms of those patients, and also showed a high
mutual correlation. Our findings provide new insights into the (neuro)metabolic
disturbances in SSADHD and give leads for further research concerning SSADHD
pathophysiology.

© 2023 The Authors. Journal of Inherited Metabolic Disease published by John
Wiley & Sons Ltd on behalf of SSIEM.

DOI: 10.1002/jimd.12657
PMID: 37455357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
