---
reference_id: "PMID:9464990"
title: Internalization of D1 dopamine receptor in striatal neurons in vivo as evidence of activation by dopamine agonists.
authors:
- Dumartin B
- Caillé I
- Gonon F
- Bloch B
journal: J Neurosci
year: '1998'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.18-05-01650.1998
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Internalization of D1 dopamine receptor in striatal neurons in vivo as evidence of activation by dopamine agonists.
**Authors:** Dumartin B, Caillé I, Gonon F, Bloch B
**Journal:** J Neurosci (1998)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.18-05-01650.1998](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.18-05-01650.1998)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 1998 Mar 1;18(5):1650-61. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.18-05-01650.1998.

Internalization of D1 dopamine receptor in striatal neurons in vivo as evidence 
of activation by dopamine agonists.

Dumartin B(1), Caillé I, Gonon F, Bloch B.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire d'Histologie-Embryologie, Institut F-ed-eratif de Recherches en 
Neurosciences Cliniques et Expérimentales, Université Victor S-egalen-Bordeaux 
2, Bordeaux, France.

To investigate how dopamine influences the subcellular localization of the 
dopamine receptors in the striatal dopaminoceptive neurons, we have used 
immunohistochemistry to detect D1 dopamine receptors (D1R) after modifications 
of the dopamine environment. In normal rats, D1R are located mostly 
extrasynaptically at the plasma membrane of the cell bodies, dendrites, and 
spines. The intrastriatal injection of the full D1R agonist SKF-82958 and the 
intraperitoneal injection of the same molecule or of amphetamine (which induces 
a massive release of dopamine in the striatum) induce modifications of the 
pattern of D1R immunoreactivity in the dorsal and ventral striatum. Whereas 
normal rats display homogenous staining of the neuropile with staining of the 
plasma membrane of the cell bodies, either treatment provokes the appearance of 
an intense immunoreactivity in the cytoplasm and the proximal dendrites. The 
labeling pattern is heterogeneous and more intense in the striosomes than in the 
matrix. Analysis of semithin sections and electron microscopy studies 
demonstrates a translocation of the labeling from the plasma membrane to 
endocytic vesicles and endosomes bearing D1R immunoreactivity in the cytoplasm 
of cell bodies and dendrites. Injection of D1R antagonist (SCH-23390) alone or 
injection of D1R antagonist, together with amphetamine or SKF-82958, do not 
provoke modification of the immunoreactivity, as compared with normal rat. Our 
results demonstrate that, in vivo, the acute activation of dopamine receptors by 
direct agonists or endogenously released dopamine provokes dramatic 
modifications of their subcellular distribution in neurons, including 
internalization in the endosomal compartment in the cytoplasm. This suggests 
that modifications of the localization of neurotransmitter receptors, including 
extrasynaptic ones, may be a critical event that contributes to the postsynaptic 
response in vivo.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.18-05-01650.1998
PMCID: PMC6792610
PMID: 9464990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]