---
reference_id: "PMID:33968835"
title: "Peutz-Jeghers syndrome: an unusual autopsy finding in pregnancy."
authors:
- de Oliveira MFA
- Rodrigues MAM
journal: Autops Case Rep
year: '2021'
doi: 10.4322/acr.2021.279
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Peutz-Jeghers syndrome: an unusual autopsy finding in pregnancy.
**Authors:** de Oliveira MFA, Rodrigues MAM
**Journal:** Autops Case Rep (2021)
**DOI:** [10.4322/acr.2021.279](https://doi.org/10.4322/acr.2021.279)

## Content

1. Autops Case Rep. 2021 Apr 20;11:e2021279. doi: 10.4322/acr.2021.279.

Peutz-Jeghers syndrome: an unusual autopsy finding in pregnancy.

de Oliveira MFA(1), Rodrigues MAM(1).

Author information:
(1)Universidade Estadual Paulista (UNESP), Faculdade de Medicina de Botucatu, 
Departamento de Patologia, Botucatu, SP, Brasil.

Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS) is a rare autosomal dominant polyposis entity that 
often remains undiagnosed. The major problems associated with PJS are acute 
complications due to (i) polyp-related intestinal obstruction, (ii) 
intussusception, and (iii) the risk of cancer in the long-term. We report the 
case of a 32-year-old female who presented at the emergency room with signs of 
acute abdomen and died during the clinical workup. She had a one-month history 
of nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea and was pregnant at about 30 weeks. There was 
no contributing past history except for undergoing small bowel resection in 
infancy. The postmortem examination revealed multiple arborizing polyps 
throughout the gastrointestinal tract, chiefly in the small bowel. Intestinal 
obstruction was found at the proximal jejunum with necrosis, perforation, and 
peritonitis. Histologically, the polyps were composed of tree branch-like 
bundles of smooth muscle covered by normal-appearing glandular epithelium, 
confirming the diagnosis of hamartomatous polyps. No malignant or premalignant 
lesions were detected in the gastrointestinal tract or other organs. This case 
was an opportunity to analyze the natural history and the pathological features 
of the Peutz-Jeghers syndrome in an adult and to investigate the presence of 
neoplastic lesions associated with this condition.

Copyright: © 2021 The Authors.

DOI: 10.4322/acr.2021.279
PMCID: PMC8087392
PMID: 33968835

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None.