---
reference_id: "PMID:36581685"
title: A systematic review and meta-analysis on the prevalence of mental disorders among children and adolescents in Europe.
authors:
- Sacco R
- Camilleri N
- Eberhardt J
- Umla-Runge K
- Newbury-Birch D
journal: Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1007/s00787-022-02131-2
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Child
- Humans
- Europe/epidemiology
- Mental Disorders/epidemiology
- Prevalence
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A systematic review and meta-analysis on the prevalence of mental disorders among children and adolescents in Europe.
**Authors:** Sacco R, Camilleri N, Eberhardt J, Umla-Runge K, Newbury-Birch D
**Journal:** Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00787-022-02131-2](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00787-022-02131-2)

## Content

1. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2024 Sep;33(9):2877-2894. doi:
10.1007/s00787-022-02131-2. Epub 2022 Dec 30.

A systematic review and meta-analysis on the prevalence of mental disorders
among children and adolescents in Europe.

Sacco R(1)(2)(3)(4), Camilleri N(5)(6)(7), Eberhardt J(5), Umla-Runge K(8),
Newbury-Birch D(5).

Author information:
(1)School of Social Sciences, Humanities and Law, Teesside University,
Middlesbrough, UK. R.Sacco@tees.ac.uk.
(2)School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, Wales. R.Sacco@tees.ac.uk.
(3)School of Medicine and Surgery, University of Malta, Msida, Malta.
R.Sacco@tees.ac.uk.
(4)Mental Health Services, Attard, Malta. R.Sacco@tees.ac.uk.
(5)School of Social Sciences, Humanities and Law, Teesside University,
Middlesbrough, UK.
(6)School of Medicine and Surgery, University of Malta, Msida, Malta.
(7)Mental Health Services, Attard, Malta.
(8)School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, Wales.

Most mental disorders appear by age 14, but in most cases, they remain
undiagnosed and untreated well into adulthood. A scoping review showed an
absence of systematic reviews that address prevalence rates of mental disorders
among children and adolescents in Europe that are based on community studies
conducted between 2015 and 2020. To estimate the updated pooled prevalence of
Anxiety Disorder, Depressive Disorder, Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
(ADHD), Conduct Disorder (CD), Oppositional Defiant Disorder (ODD), Autism
Spectrum Disorder, Eating Disorders, Substance Use Disorders (SUD), among
children and adolescents living in Europe, a search strategy was conducted using
MEDLINE, Embase and Psych Info and studies were also identified from reference
lists and gray literature. Eligible studies were evaluated for reliability,
validity, and bias. Trends of prevalence rates for each mental disorder were
calculated. Almost one in five young people in Europe were found to suffer from
a mental disorder, with a pooled prevalence rate of 15.5%. Anxiety disorders had
the highest pooled prevalence rate (7.9% (95% CI 5.1-11.8%, I2: 98.0%)),
followed by ADHD (2.9% (95% CI 1.2-6.9%, I2 = 94.3%)), ODD (1.9% (95% CI
1.0-3.7%, I2 = 98.4%)), depressive disorder (1.7% (95% CI 1.0-2.9%,
I2 = 97.7%)), CD (1.5% (95% CI 0.6-3.8%, I2 = 98.8%)) and ASD (1.4% (95% CI
0.4-5.4%, I2 = 99.7%). No studies on SUD were identified. The mental health of
children and adolescents may be improved by introducing routine screening,
refining diagnostic sensitivity, raising awareness of mental disorders,
minimizing stigma and socioeconomic inequality, as well as developing early
intervention services. These facilitators of good mental health need to be
prioritized, especially at a time of unprecedented risk factors for poor mental
health.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1007/s00787-022-02131-2
PMCID: PMC9800241
PMID: 36581685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors report financial or
non-financial interests that are directly or indirectly related to the work
submitted for publication.
