---
reference_id: "PMID:29274272"
title: "The role of the Hedgehog signaling pathway in cancer: A comprehensive review."
authors:
- Skoda AM
- Simovic D
- Karin V
- Kardum V
- Vranic S
- Serman L
journal: Bosn J Basic Med Sci
year: '2018'
doi: 10.17305/bjbms.2018.2756
keywords:
- Animals
- Hedgehog Proteins/genetics
- Humans
- "Neoplasms/genetics, physiopathology"
- Signal Transduction/genetics
- Transcription Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of the Hedgehog signaling pathway in cancer: A comprehensive review.
**Authors:** Skoda AM, Simovic D, Karin V, Kardum V, Vranic S, Serman L
**Journal:** Bosn J Basic Med Sci (2018)
**DOI:** [10.17305/bjbms.2018.2756](https://doi.org/10.17305/bjbms.2018.2756)

## Content

1. Bosn J Basic Med Sci. 2018 Feb 20;18(1):8-20. doi: 10.17305/bjbms.2018.2756.

The role of the Hedgehog signaling pathway in cancer: A comprehensive review.

Skoda AM(1), Simovic D, Karin V, Kardum V, Vranic S, Serman L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb,
Croatia. amskoda1@gmail.com.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway was first identified in the common fruit
fly. It is a highly conserved evolutionary pathway of signal transmission from
the cell membrane to the nucleus. The Hh signaling pathway plays an important
role in the embryonic development. It exerts its biological effects through a
signaling cascade that culminates in a change of balance between activator and
repressor forms of glioma-associated oncogene (Gli) transcription factors. The
components of the Hh signaling pathway involved in the signaling transfer to the
Gli transcription factors include Hedgehog ligands (Sonic Hh [SHh], Indian Hh
[IHh], and Desert Hh [DHh]), Patched receptor (Ptch1, Ptch2), Smoothened
receptor (Smo), Suppressor of fused homolog (Sufu), kinesin protein Kif7,
protein kinase A (PKA), and cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). The activator
form of Gli travels to the nucleus and stimulates the transcription of the
target genes by binding to their promoters. The main target genes of the Hh
signaling pathway are PTCH1, PTCH2, and GLI1. Deregulation of the Hh signaling
pathway is associated with developmental anomalies and cancer, including Gorlin
syndrome, and sporadic cancers, such as basal cell carcinoma, medulloblastoma,
pancreatic, breast, colon, ovarian, and small-cell lung carcinomas. The aberrant
activation of the Hh signaling pathway is caused by mutations in the related
genes (ligand-independent signaling) or by the excessive expression of the Hh
signaling molecules (ligand-dependent signaling - autocrine or paracrine).
Several Hh signaling pathway inhibitors, such as vismodegib and sonidegib, have
been developed for cancer treatment. These drugs are regarded as promising
cancer therapies, especially for patients with refractory/advanced cancers.

DOI: 10.17305/bjbms.2018.2756
PMCID: PMC5826678
PMID: 29274272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
