---
reference_id: "PMID:36899861"
title: "Clinical Spectrum of LMNA-Associated Type 2 Familial Partial Lipodystrophy: A Systematic Review."
authors:
- Fernandez-Pombo A
- Diaz-Lopez EJ
- Castro AI
- Sanchez-Iglesias S
- Cobelo-Gomez S
- Prado-Moraña T
- Araujo-Vilar D
journal: Cells
year: '2023'
doi: 10.3390/cells12050725
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- "Lipodystrophy, Familial Partial"
- Adipose Tissue/metabolism
- Insulin Resistance/genetics
- Extremities/pathology
- "Diabetes Mellitus, Type 2/pathology"
- Lamin Type A
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical Spectrum of LMNA-Associated Type 2 Familial Partial Lipodystrophy: A Systematic Review.
**Authors:** Fernandez-Pombo A, Diaz-Lopez EJ, Castro AI, Sanchez-Iglesias S, Cobelo-Gomez S, Prado-Moraña T, Araujo-Vilar D
**Journal:** Cells (2023)
**DOI:** [10.3390/cells12050725](https://doi.org/10.3390/cells12050725)

## Content

1. Cells. 2023 Feb 24;12(5):725. doi: 10.3390/cells12050725.

Clinical Spectrum of LMNA-Associated Type 2 Familial Partial Lipodystrophy: A 
Systematic Review.

Fernandez-Pombo A(1)(2), Diaz-Lopez EJ(1)(2), Castro AI(2)(3), Sanchez-Iglesias 
S(1), Cobelo-Gomez S(1), Prado-Moraña T(1)(2), Araujo-Vilar D(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)UETeM-Molecular Pathology Group, Department of Psychiatry, Radiology, Public 
Health, Nursing and Medicine, IDIS-CIMUS, University of Santiago de Compostela, 
15706 Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(2)Division of Endocrinology and Nutrition, University Clinical Hospital of 
Santiago de Compostela, 15706 Santiago de Compostela, Spain.
(3)CIBER Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y la Nutrición (CIBERobn), 28029 Madrid, 
Spain.

Type 2 familial partial lipodystrophy (FPLD2) is a laminopathic lipodystrophy 
due to pathogenic variants in the LMNA gene. Its rarity implies that it is not 
well-known. The aim of this review was to explore the published data regarding 
the clinical characterisation of this syndrome in order to better describe 
FPLD2. For this purpose, a systematic review through a search on PubMed until 
December 2022 was conducted and the references of the retrieved articles were 
also screened. A total of 113 articles were included. FPLD2 is characterised by 
the loss of fat starting around puberty in women, affecting limbs and trunk, and 
its accumulation in the face, neck and abdominal viscera. This adipose tissue 
dysfunction conditions the development of metabolic complications associated 
with insulin resistance, such as diabetes, dyslipidaemia, fatty liver disease, 
cardiovascular disease, and reproductive disorders. However, a great degree of 
phenotypical variability has been described. Therapeutic approaches are directed 
towards the associated comorbidities, and recent treatment modalities have been 
explored. A comprehensive comparison between FPLD2 and other FPLD subtypes can 
also be found in the present review. This review aimed to contribute towards 
augmenting knowledge of the natural history of FPLD2 by bringing together the 
main clinical research in this field.

DOI: 10.3390/cells12050725
PMCID: PMC10000975
PMID: 36899861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: D.A.-V. has received honoraria as scientific 
advisor from Amryt Pharma. The rest of the authors declare no conflict of 
interest.