---
reference_id: "PMID:20572300"
title: Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth syndrome.
authors:
- Bures J
- Cyrany J
- Kohoutova D
- Förstl M
- Rejchrt S
- Kvetina J
- Vorisek V
- Kopacova M
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2010'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v16.i24.2978
keywords:
- "Blind Loop Syndrome/epidemiology, etiology, physiopathology, therapy"
- Breath Tests
- "Diagnosis, Differential"
- Humans
- "Intestine, Small/microbiology, pathology"
- Prognosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth syndrome.
**Authors:** Bures J, Cyrany J, Kohoutova D, Förstl M, Rejchrt S, Kvetina J, Vorisek V, Kopacova M
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2010)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.v16.i24.2978](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v16.i24.2978)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2010 Jun 28;16(24):2978-90. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v16.i24.2978.

Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth syndrome.

Bures J(1), Cyrany J, Kohoutova D, Förstl M, Rejchrt S, Kvetina J, Vorisek V,
Kopacova M.

Author information:
(1)2nd Department of Medicine, Charles University in Praha, Faculty of Medicine
at Hradec Kralove, University Teaching Hospital, Sokolska 581, 500 05 Hradec
Kralove, Czech Republic. bures@lfhk.cuni.cz

Human intestinal microbiota create a complex polymicrobial ecology. This is
characterised by its high population density, wide diversity and complexity of
interaction. Any dysbalance of this complex intestinal microbiome, both
qualitative and quantitative, might have serious health consequence for a
macro-organism, including small intestinal bacterial overgrowth syndrome (SIBO).
SIBO is defined as an increase in the number and/or alteration in the type of
bacteria in the upper gastrointestinal tract. There are several endogenous
defence mechanisms for preventing bacterial overgrowth: gastric acid secretion,
intestinal motility, intact ileo-caecal valve, immunoglobulins within intestinal
secretion and bacteriostatic properties of pancreatic and biliary secretion.
Aetiology of SIBO is usually complex, associated with disorders of protective
antibacterial mechanisms (e.g. achlorhydria, pancreatic exocrine insufficiency,
immunodeficiency syndromes), anatomical abnormalities (e.g. small intestinal
obstruction, diverticula, fistulae, surgical blind loop, previous ileo-caecal
resections) and/or motility disorders (e.g. scleroderma, autonomic neuropathy in
diabetes mellitus, post-radiation enteropathy, small intestinal
pseudo-obstruction). In some patients more than one factor may be involved.
Symptoms related to SIBO are bloating, diarrhoea, malabsorption, weight loss and
malnutrition. The gold standard for diagnosing SIBO is still microbial
investigation of jejunal aspirates. Non-invasive hydrogen and methane breath
tests are most commonly used for the diagnosis of SIBO using glucose or
lactulose. Therapy for SIBO must be complex, addressing all causes, symptoms and
complications, and fully individualised. It should include treatment of the
underlying disease, nutritional support and cyclical gastro-intestinal selective
antibiotics. Prognosis is usually serious, determined mostly by the underlying
disease that led to SIBO.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v16.i24.2978
PMCID: PMC2890937
PMID: 20572300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
