---
reference_id: "PMID:25830761"
title: High prevalence of and potential mechanisms for chronic kidney disease in patients with acute intermittent porphyria.
authors:
- Pallet N
- Mami I
- Schmitt C
- Karim Z
- François A
- Rabant M
- Nochy D
- Gouya L
- Deybach JC
- Xu-Dubois Y
- Thervet E
- Puy H
- Karras A
journal: Kidney Int
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1038/ki.2015.97
keywords:
- Aged
- Aminolevulinic Acid/pharmacology
- Apoptosis/drug effects
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress
- "Epithelial Cells/drug effects, ultrastructure"
- Epithelium/pathology
- Female
- Fibrosis
- France/epidemiology
- Glomerular Filtration Rate
- Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cells/drug effects
- Humans
- Hydroxymethylbilane Synthase
- Hypertension/epidemiology
- Kidney Tubules/pathology
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Nephritis, Interstitial/complications"
- Phenotype
- Porphobilinogen/pharmacology
- "Porphyria, Acute Intermittent/complications, epidemiology"
- Prevalence
- "Renal Insufficiency, Chronic/epidemiology, etiology, pathology"
- Tunica Intima/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# High prevalence of and potential mechanisms for chronic kidney disease in patients with acute intermittent porphyria.
**Authors:** Pallet N, Mami I, Schmitt C, Karim Z, François A, Rabant M, Nochy D, Gouya L, Deybach JC, Xu-Dubois Y, Thervet E, Puy H, Karras A
**Journal:** Kidney Int (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ki.2015.97](https://doi.org/10.1038/ki.2015.97)

## Content

1. Kidney Int. 2015 Aug;88(2):386-95. doi: 10.1038/ki.2015.97. Epub 2015 Apr 1.

High prevalence of and potential mechanisms for chronic kidney disease in 
patients with acute intermittent porphyria.

Pallet N(1), Mami I(2), Schmitt C(3), Karim Z(4), François A(5), Rabant M(6), 
Nochy D(7), Gouya L(3), Deybach JC(3), Xu-Dubois Y(8), Thervet E(9), Puy H(3), 
Karras A(9).

Author information:
(1)1] INSERM U1147, Centre Universitaire des Saints Pères, Paris, France [2] 
Service de Biochimie, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France [3] Service de Néphrologie, Hôpital 
Européen Georges Pompidou, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France 
[4] Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France.
(2)1] INSERM U1147, Centre Universitaire des Saints Pères, Paris, France [2] 
Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France.
(3)1] Centre Francais des Porphyries, Hôpital Louis Mourier, Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Colombes, France [2] INSERM U1149, Center for 
Research on Inflammation (CRI), Site Bichat, Paris, France [3] Université Paris 
Diderot, Paris, France.
(4)1] INSERM U1149, Center for Research on Inflammation (CRI), Site Bichat, 
Paris, France [2] Université Paris Diderot, Paris, France.
(5)Service d'Anatomopathologie, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire Charles Nicolle, 
Rouen, France.
(6)1] Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France [2] Service d'Anatomopathologie, 
Hôpital Necker, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(7)Service d'Anatomopathologie, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(8)1] INSERM U702, Paris, France [2] Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, 
France.
(9)1] Service de Néphrologie, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France [2] Université Paris Descartes, Paris, 
France.

Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) is a genetic disorder of the synthesis of 
heme caused by a deficiency in hydroxymethylbilane synthase (HMBS), leading to 
the overproduction of the porphyrin precursors δ-aminolevulinic acid and 
porphobilinogen. The aim of this study is to describe the clinical and 
biological characteristics, the renal pathology, and the cellular mechanisms of 
chronic kidney disease associated with AIP. A total of 415 patients with HMBS 
deficiency followed up in the French Porphyria Center were enrolled in 2003 in a 
population-based study. A follow-up study was conducted in 2013, assessing 
patients for clinical, biological, and histological parameters. In vitro models 
were used to determine whether porphyrin precursors promote tubular and 
endothelial cytotoxicity. Chronic kidney disease occurred in up to 59% of the 
symptomatic AIP patients, with a decline in the glomerular filtration rate of 
~1 ml/min per 1.73 m(2) annually. Proteinuria was absent in the vast majority of 
the cases. The renal pathology was a chronic tubulointerstitial nephropathy, 
associated with a fibrous intimal hyperplasia and focal cortical atrophy. Our 
experimental data provide evidence that porphyrin precursors promote endoplasmic 
reticulum stress, apoptosis, and epithelial phenotypic changes in proximal 
tubular cells. In conclusion, the diagnosis of chronic kidney disease associated 
with AIP should be considered in cases of chronic tubulointerstitial nephropathy 
and/or focal cortical atrophy with severe proliferative arteriosclerosis.

DOI: 10.1038/ki.2015.97
PMID: 25830761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]