---
reference_id: "PMID:38798120"
title: "Critical appraisal of the SIBO hypothesis and breath testing: A clinical practice update endorsed by the European society of neurogastroenterology and motility (ESNM) and the American neurogastroenterology and motility society (ANMS)."
authors:
- Kashyap P
- Moayyedi P
- Quigley EMM
- Simren M
- Vanner S
journal: Neurogastroenterol Motil
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1111/nmo.14817
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Critical appraisal of the SIBO hypothesis and breath testing: A clinical practice update endorsed by the European society of neurogastroenterology and motility (ESNM) and the American neurogastroenterology and motility society (ANMS).
**Authors:** Kashyap P, Moayyedi P, Quigley EMM, Simren M, Vanner S
**Journal:** Neurogastroenterol Motil (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1111/nmo.14817](https://doi.org/10.1111/nmo.14817)

## Content

1. Neurogastroenterol Motil. 2024 Jun;36(6):e14817. doi: 10.1111/nmo.14817. Epub 
2024 May 26.

Critical appraisal of the SIBO hypothesis and breath testing: A clinical 
practice update endorsed by the European society of neurogastroenterology and 
motility (ESNM) and the American neurogastroenterology and motility society 
(ANMS).

Kashyap P(1), Moayyedi P(2), Quigley EMM(3), Simren M(4), Vanner S(5).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(2)Farncombe Institute, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Lynda K and David M Underwood Center for Digestive Disorders, Houston 
Methodist Hospital and Weill Cornell Medical College, Houston, Texas, USA.
(4)University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(5)GI Diseases Research Unit, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: There is compelling evidence that microbe-host interactions in the 
intestinal tract underlie many human disorders, including disorders of gut-brain 
interactions (previously termed functional bowel disorders), such as irritable 
bowel syndrome (IBS). Small intestinal bacterial overgrowth (SIBO) has been 
recognized for over a century in patients with predisposing conditions causing 
intestinal stasis, such as surgical alteration of the small bowel or chronic 
diseases, including scleroderma and is associated with diarrhea and signs of 
malabsorption. Over 20 years ago, it was hypothesized that increased numbers of 
small intestine bacteria might also account for symptoms in the absence of 
malabsorption in IBS and related disorders. This SIBO-IBS hypothesis stimulated 
significant research and helped focus the profession's attention on the 
importance of microbe-host interactions as a potential pathophysiological 
mechanism in IBS.
PURPOSE: However, after two decades, this hypothesis remains unproven. Moreover, 
it has led to serious unintended consequences, namely the widespread use of 
unreliable and unvalidated breath tests as a diagnostic test for SIBO and a 
resultant injudicious use of antibiotics. In this review, we examine why the 
SIBO hypothesis remains unproven and, given the unintended consequences, discuss 
why it is time to reject this hypothesis and its reliance on breath testing. We 
also examine recent IBS studies of bacterial communities in the GI tract, their 
composition and functions, and their interactions with the host. While these 
studies provide important insights to guide future research, they highlight the 
need for further mechanistic studies of microbe-host interactions in IBS 
patients before we can understand their possible role in diagnosis and treatment 
of patient with IBS and related disorders.

© 2024 The Author(s). Neurogastroenterology & Motility published by John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/nmo.14817
PMCID: PMC11268457
PMID: 38798120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]