---
reference_id: "PMID:15630389"
title: Osteoprotegerin in the inner ear may inhibit bone remodeling in the otic capsule.
authors:
- Zehnder AF
- Kristiansen AG
- Adams JC
- Merchant SN
- McKenna MJ
journal: Laryngoscope
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1097/01.mlg.0000150702.28451.35
keywords:
- Animals
- Bone Remodeling/physiology
- Carrier Proteins/analysis
- Cochlea/chemistry
- "Ear, Inner/chemistry"
- Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay
- "Glycoproteins/analysis, blood, cerebrospinal fluid, physiology"
- Ligands
- Membrane Glycoproteins/analysis
- Mice
- "Mice, Inbred Strains"
- Osteoprotegerin
- Perilymph/chemistry
- RANK Ligand
- Receptor Activator of Nuclear Factor-kappa B
- "Receptors, Cytoplasmic and Nuclear/analysis, blood, physiology"
- "Receptors, Tumor Necrosis Factor"
- Temporal Bone/chemistry
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Osteoprotegerin in the inner ear may inhibit bone remodeling in the otic capsule.
**Authors:** Zehnder AF, Kristiansen AG, Adams JC, Merchant SN, McKenna MJ
**Journal:** Laryngoscope (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1097/01.mlg.0000150702.28451.35](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.mlg.0000150702.28451.35)

## Content

1. Laryngoscope. 2005 Jan;115(1):172-7. doi: 10.1097/01.mlg.0000150702.28451.35.

Osteoprotegerin in the inner ear may inhibit bone remodeling in the otic 
capsule.

Zehnder AF(1), Kristiansen AG, Adams JC, Merchant SN, McKenna MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, MA Eye and Ear Infirmary, and Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.

Comment in
    Laryngoscope. 2006 Jan;116(1):160-1. doi: 
10.1097/01.mlg.0000187403.56799.21.

OBJECTIVES: To elucidate factors that may be responsible for the inhibition of 
remodeling of bone within the otic capsule.
METHODS: Expression of osteoprotegerin (OPG), receptor activator of nuclear 
factor kappa B (RANK), and RANK ligand (RANKL) were assayed in samples of bone 
obtained from the otic capsule, calvarium, and femur, and from the soft tissue 
within the cochlea using semiquantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-PCR) in mice. Immunostaining was used for histologic localization 
of the gene products. An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) was used to 
quantify the amount of OPG within perilymph, serum, and cerebrospinal fluid. The 
micro-anatomy of the interface between the otic capsule and the fluid spaces of 
the cochlea was investigated by brightfield and phase-contrast microscopy and by 
three-dimensional reconstruction in the mouse and human.
RESULTS: OPG, a powerful inhibitor of bone remodeling, was expressed at 
extremely high levels within the soft tissue of the cochlea and was present in 
the perilymph at very high concentrations. The OPG produced within the inner ear 
may diffuse into the surrounding otic capsule, where it may be responsible for 
inhibition of bone turnover. Our anatomic studies revealed an extensive system 
of interconnected canaliculi within the otic capsule that had direct openings 
into the fluid spaces of the inner ear, thus providing a possible anatomic route 
for the diffusion of OPG from the inner ear into the surrounding bone.
CONCLUSION: OPG, a potent inhibitor of osteoclast formation and function, is 
expressed at high levels within the inner ear and is secreted into the perilymph 
and the surrounding bone and may serve to inhibit active bone remodeling within 
the otic capsule, especially immediately adjacent to the cochlea. By this means, 
the cochlear soft tissue may control the nature of the surrounding petrous bone.

DOI: 10.1097/01.mlg.0000150702.28451.35
PMID: 15630389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]