---
reference_id: "PMID:25161209"
title: "Nephronophthisis and retinal degeneration in tmem218-/- mice: a novel mouse model for Senior-Løken syndrome?"
authors:
- Vogel P
- Gelfman CM
- Issa T
- Payne BJ
- Hansen GM
- Read RW
- Jones C
- Pitcher MR
- Ding ZM
- DaCosta CM
- Shadoan MK
- Vance RB
- Powell DR
journal: Vet Pathol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1177/0300985814547392
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Nephronophthisis and retinal degeneration in tmem218-/- mice: a novel mouse model for Senior-Løken syndrome?
**Authors:** Vogel P, Gelfman CM, Issa T, Payne BJ, Hansen GM, Read RW, Jones C, Pitcher MR, Ding ZM, DaCosta CM, Shadoan MK, Vance RB, Powell DR
**Journal:** Vet Pathol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1177/0300985814547392](https://doi.org/10.1177/0300985814547392)

## Content

1. Vet Pathol. 2015 May;52(3):580-95. doi: 10.1177/0300985814547392. Epub 2014
Aug  26.

Nephronophthisis and retinal degeneration in tmem218-/- mice: a novel mouse 
model for Senior-Løken syndrome?

Vogel P(1), Gelfman CM(2), Issa T(2), Payne BJ(3), Hansen GM(4), Read RW(3), 
Jones C(2), Pitcher MR(2), Ding ZM(5), DaCosta CM(5), Shadoan MK(5), Vance 
RB(3), Powell DR(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Lexicon Pharmaceuticals Inc., The Woodlands, TX, USA 
peter.vogel@stjude.org.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology, Lexicon Pharmaceuticals Inc., The Woodlands, TX, 
USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Lexicon Pharmaceuticals Inc., The Woodlands, TX, 
USA.
(4)Department of Molecular Genetics, Lexicon Pharmaceuticals Inc., The 
Woodlands, TX, USA.
(5)Department of Metabolism, Lexicon Pharmaceuticals Inc., The Woodlands, TX, 
USA.

Mice deficient in TMEM218 (Tmem218(-/-) ) were generated as part of an effort to 
identify and validate pharmaceutically tractable targets for drug development 
through large-scale phenotypic screening of knockout mice. Routine diagnostics, 
expression analysis, histopathology, and electroretinogram analyses completed on 
Tmem218(-/-) mice identified a previously unknown role for TMEM218 in the 
development and function of the kidney and eye. The major observed phenotypes in 
Tmem218(-/-) mice were progressive cystic kidney disease and retinal 
degeneration. The renal lesions were characterized by diffuse renal cyst 
development with tubulointerstitial nephropathy and disruption of tubular 
basement membranes in essentially normal-sized kidneys. The retinal lesions were 
characterized by slow-onset loss of photoreceptors, which resulted in reduced 
electroretinogram responses. These renal and retinal lesions are most similar to 
those associated with nephronophthisis (NPHP) and retinitis pigmentosa in 
humans. At least 10% of NPHP cases present with extrarenal conditions, which 
most often include retinal degeneration. Senior-Løken syndrome is characterized 
by the concurrent development of autosomal recessive NPHP and retinitis 
pigmentosa. Since mutations in the known NPHP genes collectively account for 
only about 30% of NPHP cases, it is possible that TMEM218 could be involved in 
the development of similar ciliopathies in humans. In reviewing all other 
reported mouse models of NPHP, we suggest that Tmem218(-/-) mice could provide a 
useful model for elucidating the pathogenesis of cilia-associated disease in 
both the kidney and the retina, as well as in developing and testing novel 
therapeutic strategies for Senior-Løken syndrome.

© The Author(s) 2014.

DOI: 10.1177/0300985814547392
PMID: 25161209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]