---
reference_id: "PMID:38987603"
title: CryoET of β-amyloid and tau within postmortem Alzheimer's disease brain.
authors:
- Gilbert MAG
- Fatima N
- Jenkins J
- O'Sullivan TJ
- Schertel A
- Halfon Y
- Wilkinson M
- Morrema THJ
- Geibel M
- Read RJ
- Ranson NA
- Radford SE
- Hoozemans JJM
- Frank RAW
journal: Nature
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-07680-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CryoET of β-amyloid and tau within postmortem Alzheimer's disease brain.
**Authors:** Gilbert MAG, Fatima N, Jenkins J, O'Sullivan TJ, Schertel A, Halfon Y, Wilkinson M, Morrema THJ, Geibel M, Read RJ, Ranson NA, Radford SE, Hoozemans JJM, Frank RAW
**Journal:** Nature (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41586-024-07680-x](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-07680-x)

## Content

1. Nature. 2024 Jul;631(8022):913-919. doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-07680-x. Epub 2024
 Jul 10.

CryoET of β-amyloid and tau within postmortem Alzheimer's disease brain.

Gilbert MAG(#)(1), Fatima N(#)(1), Jenkins J(#)(1), O'Sullivan TJ(#)(2), 
Schertel A(3), Halfon Y(2), Wilkinson M(4), Morrema THJ(5), Geibel M(3), Read 
RJ(6), Ranson NA(4), Radford SE(4), Hoozemans JJM(4), Frank RAW(7).

Author information:
(1)Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, School of Biomedical 
Sciences, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
(2)Astbury Biostructure Laboratory CryoEM facility, Astbury Centre for 
Structural Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of 
Leeds, Leeds, UK.
(3)ZEISS Microscopy Customer Center Europe, Carl Zeiss Microscopy GmbH, 
Oberkochen, Germany.
(4)Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, School of Molecular and 
Cellular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, 
UK.
(5)Department of Pathology, Unit Neuropathology, Amsterdam University Medical 
Centers, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(7)Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, School of Biomedical 
Sciences, Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK. 
r.frank@leeds.ac.uk.
(#)Contributed equally

A defining pathological feature of most neurodegenerative diseases is the 
assembly of proteins into amyloid that form disease-specific structures1. In 
Alzheimer's disease, this is characterized by the deposition of β-amyloid and 
tau with disease-specific conformations. The in situ structure of amyloid in the 
human brain is unknown. Here, using cryo-fluorescence microscopy-targeted 
cryo-sectioning, cryo-focused ion beam-scanning electron microscopy lift-out and 
cryo-electron tomography, we determined in-tissue architectures of β-amyloid and 
tau pathology in a postmortem Alzheimer's disease donor brain. β-amyloid plaques 
contained a mixture of fibrils, some of which were branched, and protofilaments, 
arranged in parallel arrays and lattice-like structures. Extracellular vesicles 
and cuboidal particles defined the non-amyloid constituents of β-amyloid 
plaques. By contrast, tau inclusions formed parallel clusters of unbranched 
filaments. Subtomogram averaging a cluster of 136 tau filaments in a single 
tomogram revealed the polypeptide backbone conformation and filament polarity 
orientation of paired helical filaments within tissue. Filaments within most 
clusters were similar to each other, but were different between clusters, 
showing amyloid heterogeneity that is spatially organized by subcellular 
location. The in situ structural approaches outlined here for human donor 
tissues have applications to a broad range of neurodegenerative diseases.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41586-024-07680-x
PMCID: PMC11269202
PMID: 38987603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.