---
reference_id: "PMID:32707085"
title: Human iPSC Modeling Reveals Mutation-Specific Responses to Gene Therapy in a Genotypically Diverse Dominant Maculopathy.
authors:
- Sinha D
- Steyer B
- Shahi PK
- Mueller KP
- Valiauga R
- Edwards KL
- Bacig C
- Steltzer SS
- Srinivasan S
- Abdeen A
- Cory E
- Periyasamy V
- Siahpirani AF
- Stone EM
- Tucker BA
- Roy S
- Pattnaik BR
- Saha K
- Gamm DM
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.06.011
keywords:
- Alleles
- Bestrophins/genetics
- Calcium/metabolism
- Cell Line
- Channelopathies/genetics
- Eye Proteins/genetics
- Gene Editing/methods
- Genetic Therapy/methods
- Genotype
- HEK293 Cells
- Humans
- Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells/physiology
- Macular Degeneration/genetics
- Mutation/genetics
- Retinal Pigment Epithelium/physiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Human iPSC Modeling Reveals Mutation-Specific Responses to Gene Therapy in a Genotypically Diverse Dominant Maculopathy.
**Authors:** Sinha D, Steyer B, Shahi PK, Mueller KP, Valiauga R, Edwards KL, Bacig C, Steltzer SS, Srinivasan S, Abdeen A, Cory E, Periyasamy V, Siahpirani AF, Stone EM, Tucker BA, Roy S, Pattnaik BR, Saha K, Gamm DM
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.06.011](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.06.011)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2020 Aug 6;107(2):278-292. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.06.011.
Epub  2020 Jul 23.

Human iPSC Modeling Reveals Mutation-Specific Responses to Gene Therapy in a
Genotypically Diverse Dominant Maculopathy.

Sinha D(1), Steyer B(2), Shahi PK(3), Mueller KP(4), Valiauga R(5), Edwards
KL(5), Bacig C(5), Steltzer SS(4), Srinivasan S(4), Abdeen A(4), Cory E(4),
Periyasamy V(4), Siahpirani AF(4), Stone EM(6), Tucker BA(6), Roy S(7), Pattnaik
BR(8), Saha K(9), Gamm DM(10).

Author information:
(1)McPherson Eye Research Institute, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
WI 53705, USA; Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
53705, USA.
(2)McPherson Eye Research Institute, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
WI 53705, USA; Wisconsin Institute for Discovery, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53715, USA.
(3)McPherson Eye Research Institute, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
WI 53705, USA; Department of Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, WI 53792, USA.
(4)Wisconsin Institute for Discovery, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
WI 53715, USA.
(5)Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53705, USA.
(6)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Carver College of Medicine,
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
(7)Wisconsin Institute for Discovery, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
WI 53715, USA; Department of Biostatistics, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, WI 53792, USA.
(8)McPherson Eye Research Institute, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
WI 53705, USA; Department of Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, WI 53792, USA; Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53705, USA.
(9)McPherson Eye Research Institute, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
WI 53705, USA; Wisconsin Institute for Discovery, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53715, USA; Department of Biomedical Engineering,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA. Electronic address:
ksaha@wisc.edu.
(10)McPherson Eye Research Institute, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
WI 53705, USA; Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI
53705, USA; Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53705, USA. Electronic address: dgamm@wisc.edu.

Dominantly inherited disorders are not typically considered to be therapeutic
candidates for gene augmentation. Here, we utilized induced pluripotent stem
cell-derived retinal pigment epithelium (iPSC-RPE) to test the potential of gene
augmentation to treat Best disease, a dominant macular dystrophy caused by over
200 missense mutations in BEST1. Gene augmentation in iPSC-RPE fully restored
BEST1 calcium-activated chloride channel activity and improved rhodopsin
degradation in an iPSC-RPE model of recessive bestrophinopathy as well as in two
models of dominant Best disease caused by different mutations in regions
encoding ion-binding domains. A third dominant Best disease iPSC-RPE model did
not respond to gene augmentation, but showed normalization of BEST1 channel
activity following CRISPR-Cas9 editing of the mutant allele. We then subjected
all three dominant Best disease iPSC-RPE models to gene editing, which produced
premature stop codons specifically within the mutant BEST1 alleles. Single-cell
profiling demonstrated no adverse perturbation of retinal pigment epithelium
(RPE) transcriptional programs in any model, although off-target analysis
detected a silent genomic alteration in one model. These results suggest that
gene augmentation is a viable first-line approach for some individuals with
dominant Best disease and that non-responders are candidates for alternate
approaches such as gene editing. However, testing gene editing strategies for
on-target efficiency and off-target events using personalized iPSC-RPE model
systems is warranted. In summary, personalized iPSC-RPE models can be used to
select among a growing list of gene therapy options to maximize safety and
efficacy while minimizing time and cost. Similar scenarios likely exist for
other genotypically diverse channelopathies, expanding the therapeutic landscape
for affected individuals.

Copyright © 2020 American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.06.011
PMCID: PMC7413860
PMID: 32707085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
