---
reference_id: "PMID:20301583"
title: Cerebrotendinous Xanthomatosis.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Federico A
- Gallus GN
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cerebrotendinous Xanthomatosis.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Federico A, Gallus GN

## Content

1. Cerebrotendinous Xanthomatosis.

Federico A(1), Gallus GN(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors.
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle;
1993–2026.
2003 Jul 16 [updated 2024 Nov 14].

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Surgery and NeurosciencesMedical SchoolUniversity of
SienaSiena, Italy

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis (CTX) is a lipid
storage disease characterized by infantile-onset diarrhea, childhood-onset
cataract, adolescent- to young adult-onset tendon xanthomas, and adult-onset
progressive neurologic dysfunction (dementia, psychiatric disturbances,
pyramidal and/or cerebellar signs, dystonia, atypical parkinsonism, peripheral
neuropathy, and seizures). Chronic diarrhea from infancy and/or neonatal
cholestasis may be the earliest clinical manifestation. In approximately 75% of
affected individuals, cataracts are the first finding, often appearing in the
first decade of life. Xanthomas appear in the second or third decade; they occur
on the Achilles tendon, the extensor tendons of the elbow and hand, the patellar
tendon, and the neck tendons. Xanthomas have been reported in the lung, bones,
and central nervous system. Some individuals show cognitive impairment from
early infancy, whereas the majority have normal or only slightly impaired
intellectual function until puberty; dementia with slow deterioration in
intellectual abilities occurs in the third decade in more than 50% of
individuals. Neuropsychiatric symptoms such as behavioral changes,
hallucinations, agitation, aggression, depression, and suicide attempts may be
prominent. Pyramidal signs (i.e., spasticity) and/or cerebellar signs almost
invariably become evident between ages 20 and 30 years. The biochemical
abnormalities that distinguish CTX from other conditions with xanthomas include
high plasma and tissue cholestanol concentration, normal-to-low plasma
cholesterol concentration, decreased chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA), increased
concentration of bile alcohols and their glyconjugates, and increased
concentrations of cholestanol and apolipoprotein B in cerebrospinal fluid.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of CTX is established in a proband with
suggestive findings and biallelic pathogenic variants in CYP27A1 identified by
molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapy: Long-term treatment with chenodeoxycholic acid
(CDCA) normalizes plasma and cerebrospinal fluid concentration of cholestanol
and improves neurophysiologic findings. Supportive treatment: Inhibitors of
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) reductase alone or in
combination with CDCA are also effective in decreasing cholestanol concentration
and improving clinical signs; however, they may induce muscle damage. Cholic
acid treatment decreases cholestanol levels and improves neurologic symptoms in
the few individuals in whom it has been tried and may be useful in those who
experience side effects with CDCA treatments. Cataract extraction is typically
required in at least one eye by age 50 years. Epilepsy, spasticity, and
parkinsonism are treated symptomatically. Surveillance: Annual cholestanol
plasma concentration, neurologic and neuropsychological evaluation, brain MRI,
echocardiogram, and assessment of bone density. Agents/circumstances to avoid:
Caution has been suggested with statins. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is
appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and
younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as
early as possible those who would benefit from prompt initiation of CDCA
treatment and surveillance. Pregnancy management: Treatment with CDCA should not
be interrupted during pregnancy.
GENETIC COUNSELING: CTX is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. If both
parents are known to be heterozygous for a CYP27A1 pathogenic variant, each sib
of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being affected, a
50% chance of being a carrier, and a 25% chance of inheriting neither of the
familial pathogenic variants. Carrier testing for at-risk family members and
prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible if both CYP27A1
pathogenic variants in the family are known.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301583
