---
reference_id: "PMID:30614154"
title: "Global incidence and profile of ameloblastoma: A systematic review and meta-analysis."
authors:
- Hendra FN
- Van Cann EM
- Helder MN
- Ruslin M
- de Visscher JG
- Forouzanfar T
- de Vet HCW
journal: Oral Dis
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1111/odi.13031
keywords:
- Africa
- Ameloblastoma/epidemiology
- Australia
- Europe
- Humans
- Incidence
- Jaw Neoplasms/epidemiology
- Mandible/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Global incidence and profile of ameloblastoma: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
**Authors:** Hendra FN, Van Cann EM, Helder MN, Ruslin M, de Visscher JG, Forouzanfar T, de Vet HCW
**Journal:** Oral Dis (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1111/odi.13031](https://doi.org/10.1111/odi.13031)

## Content

1. Oral Dis. 2020 Jan;26(1):12-21. doi: 10.1111/odi.13031. Epub 2019 Jan 25.

Global incidence and profile of ameloblastoma: A systematic review and 
meta-analysis.

Hendra FN(1)(2), Van Cann EM(1)(3), Helder MN(1), Ruslin M(1)(4), de Visscher 
JG(1), Forouzanfar T(1), de Vet HCW(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery/Pathology, Amsterdam UMC and 
Academic Centre for Dentistry Amsterdam (ACTA), Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 
Cancer Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, Hasanuddin University, Makassar, 
Indonesia.
(3)Department of Head and Neck Surgical Oncology, UMC Utrecht Cancer Center, 
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Faculty of Dentistry, 
Hasanuddin University, Makassar, Indonesia.
(5)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, EMGO Institute for Health and 
Care Research, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the global incidence of ameloblastoma and to provide a 
profile of ameloblastoma patients.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A systematic review and meta-analysis was conducted. 
Searches were performed in PubMed, EMBASE, SCOPUS, and Web of Science for 
articles published from 1969 to 2018 for the global incidence and from 1995 to 
2018 for the profile of ameloblastoma patients.
RESULTS: Seven studies on the incidence rate of ameloblastoma were included in 
the meta-analysis. These studies only covered Europe, Africa, and Australia. The 
pooled incidence rate was 0.92 per million person-years (95% CI: 0.57-1.49), 
with significant heterogeneity between studies. Forty-two articles provided 
profile data of 6,446 ameloblastoma patients. Mean age was 34 years and the peak 
age incidence in the third decade of life. In Europe and North America, 
ameloblastoma mostly occurred at an older age when compared to Africa and South 
America. A slight male preference (53%) was found, and the mandible appeared to 
be the preferred site. The most common type of ameloblastoma was multicystic. 
The histopathologic patterns were mostly follicular and plexiform.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study assessing the global incidence of 
ameloblastoma. The pooled incidence rate was determined to be 0.92 per million 
person-years.

© 2019 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1111/odi.13031
PMID: 30614154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]