---
reference_id: "PMID:28055022"
title: "Laboratory diagnosis of creatine deficiency syndromes: a technical standard and guideline of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics."
authors:
- Sharer JD
- Bodamer O
- Longo N
- Tortorelli S
- Wamelink MM
- Young S
journal: Genet Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1038/gim.2016.203
keywords:
- "Amidinotransferases/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, deficiency, genetics, urine"
- "Amino Acid Metabolism, Inborn Errors/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, genetics, urine"
- "Brain Diseases, Metabolic, Inborn/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, genetics, urine"
- Clinical Laboratory Techniques/methods
- "Creatine/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, deficiency, genetics, metabolism, urine"
- "Developmental Disabilities/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, genetics, urine"
- Genetic Testing/standards
- "Genetics, Medical/standards"
- Genomics
- "Guanidinoacetate N-Methyltransferase/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, deficiency, genetics, urine"
- Guidelines as Topic
- Humans
- "Intellectual Disability/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, genetics, urine"
- "Language Development Disorders/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, genetics, urine"
- "X-Linked Intellectual Disability/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, genetics, urine"
- "Movement Disorders/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, congenital, genetics, urine"
- "Plasma Membrane Neurotransmitter Transport Proteins/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, deficiency, genetics, urine"
- "Repressor Proteins/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, genetics, urine"
- "Speech Disorders/blood, cerebrospinal fluid, genetics, urine"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Laboratory diagnosis of creatine deficiency syndromes: a technical standard and guideline of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics.
**Authors:** Sharer JD, Bodamer O, Longo N, Tortorelli S, Wamelink MM, Young S
**Journal:** Genet Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1038/gim.2016.203](https://doi.org/10.1038/gim.2016.203)

## Content

1. Genet Med. 2017 Feb;19(2):256-263. doi: 10.1038/gim.2016.203. Epub 2017 Jan 5.

Laboratory diagnosis of creatine deficiency syndromes: a technical standard and
guideline of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics.

Sharer JD(1), Bodamer O(2), Longo N(3), Tortorelli S(4)(5), Wamelink MM(6),
Young S(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham School of
Medicine, Birmingham, Alabama, USA.
(2)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Boston Children's Hospital/Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake
City, Utah, USA.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.
(5)Department of Clinical Genomics, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester,
Minnesota, USA.
(6)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Metabolic Unit, VU University Medical
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(7)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, North
Carolina, USA.

Disclaimer: These ACMG Standards and Guidelines are intended as an educational
resource for clinical laboratory geneticists to help them provide quality
clinical laboratory genetic services. Adherence to these standards and
guidelines is voluntary and does not necessarily assure a successful medical
outcome. These Standards and Guidelines should not be considered inclusive of
all proper procedures and tests or exclusive of others that are reasonably
directed to obtaining the same results. In determining the propriety of any
specific procedure or test, clinical laboratory geneticists should apply their
professional judgment to the specific circumstances presented by the patient or
specimen. Clinical laboratory geneticists are encouraged to document in the
patient's record the rationale for the use of a particular procedure or test,
whether or not it is in conformance with these Standards and Guidelines. They
also are advised to take notice of the date any particular guideline was
adopted, and to consider other relevant medical and scientific information that
becomes available after that date. It also would be prudent to consider whether
intellectual property interests may restrict the performance of certain tests
and other procedures.Cerebral creatine deficiency syndromes are neurometabolic
conditions characterized by intellectual disability, seizures, speech delay, and
behavioral abnormalities. Several laboratory methods are available for
preliminary and confirmatory diagnosis of these conditions, including
measurement of creatine and related metabolites in biofluids using liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry or gas chromatography-mass spectrometry,
enzyme activity assays in cultured cells, and DNA sequence analysis. These
guidelines are intended to standardize these procedures to help optimize the
diagnosis of creatine deficiency syndromes. While biochemical methods are
emphasized, considerations for confirmatory molecular testing are also
discussed, along with variables that influence test results and
interpretation.Genet Med 19 2, 256-263.

DOI: 10.1038/gim.2016.203
PMID: 28055022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
