---
reference_id: "PMID:36969340"
title: "Efficacy of faecal microbiota transplantation in patients with progressive supranuclear palsy-Richardson's syndrome: a phase 2, single centre, randomised clinical trial."
authors:
- Tian H
- Wang J
- Feng R
- Zhang R
- Liu H
- Qin C
- Meng L
- Chen Y
- Fu Y
- Liang D
- Yuan X
- Zhai Y
- Zhu Q
- Jin L
- Teng J
- Ding X
- Wang X
journal: EClinicalMedicine
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2023.101888
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Efficacy of faecal microbiota transplantation in patients with progressive supranuclear palsy-Richardson's syndrome: a phase 2, single centre, randomised clinical trial.
**Authors:** Tian H, Wang J, Feng R, Zhang R, Liu H, Qin C, Meng L, Chen Y, Fu Y, Liang D, Yuan X, Zhai Y, Zhu Q, Jin L, Teng J, Ding X, Wang X
**Journal:** EClinicalMedicine (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.eclinm.2023.101888](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eclinm.2023.101888)

## Content

1. EClinicalMedicine. 2023 Mar 17;58:101888. doi: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2023.101888. 
eCollection 2023 Apr.

Efficacy of faecal microbiota transplantation in patients with progressive 
supranuclear palsy-Richardson's syndrome: a phase 2, single centre, randomised 
clinical trial.

Tian H(1)(2), Wang J(1)(2), Feng R(1)(2), Zhang R(1)(2), Liu H(1)(2), Qin 
C(1)(2), Meng L(1)(2), Chen Y(1)(2), Fu Y(1)(2), Liang D(1)(2), Yuan X(1)(2), 
Zhai Y(1)(2), Zhu Q(1)(2), Jin L(3), Teng J(1)(2), Ding X(1)(2), Wang X(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou 
University, Zhengzhou, Henan, 450052, China.
(2)Institute of Parkinson and Movement Disorder, Zhengzhou University, 
Zhengzhou, Henan, 450052, China.
(3)Department of Neurology and Neurological Rehabilitation, Shanghai Yangzhi 
Rehabilitation Hospital, School of Medicine, Tongji University, Shanghai, 
200092, China.

BACKGROUND: Faecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) has demonstrated efficacy in 
treating gastrointestinal (GI) diseases, such as Clostridium difficile infection 
(CDI) and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). GI dysfunction is a frequent and 
occasionally dominating symptom of progressive supranuclear palsy-Richardson's 
syndrome (PSP-RS). However, it is not known whether FMT has clinical efficacy 
for PSP-RS.
METHODS: This 36-week, randomised, placebo-controlled, parallel-group, phase 2 
clinical trial was performed at a university tertiary referral hospital in 
China. From August 15 2021 to December 31 2021, a total of 68 newly diagnosed 
patients with PSP-RS (male 40 [59%], female 28 [41%]) who had never received any 
antiparkinsonian medications were enrolled and randomly assigned to receive 
either healthy donor FMT (n = 34, FMT group) or a mixture of 0.9% saline and 
food colouring (E150c) as sham transplantation (n = 34, placebo group) through 
transendoscopic enteral tubing (TET). Two days after oral antibiotics, 
participants received 1 week of transplantation. After an interval of 4 weeks, 
retransplantation was performed. Then, the last transplantation was given after 
another interval of 4 weeks, and the participants were followed up for 24 weeks 
(week 36). Clinicaltrials.gov identifier: ChiCTR-2100045397.
FINDINGS: Among 68 patients who were randomised (mean age, 67.2 (SD 5.1); 40 
[59%] were male, 28 [41%] were female), 63 participants completed the trial. 
Efficacy analyses were performed on the intention-to-treat (ITT) analysis set. 
At week 16, the mean PSP Rating Scale (PSPRS) scores (the primary outcome) 
improved from 40.1 (SD 7.6) to 36.9 (SD 5.9) in the FMT group, whereas the 
scores changed from 40.1 (SD 6.9) to 41.7 (SD 6.2) in the placebo group, for a 
treatment benefit of 4.3 (95% CI, 3.2-5.4) (P < 0.0001). After 3-cycle 
intervention, symptoms of constipation, depression, and anxiety (the secondary 
outcome) improved significantly at week 16 in the FMT group compared with the 
placebo group, the majority of which were maintained at the 24-week follow-up 
(week 36).
INTERPRETATION: Our findings suggest that, compared with placebo, FMT treatment 
significantly improved motor and nonmotor symptoms in patients with PSP-RS, as 
well as reduced intestinal inflammation and enhanced the intestinal barrier by 
regulating the intestinal microbiota composition.
FUNDING: The National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 82122022, 
82171248, 81873791, and 82230084), Natural Science Foundation of Henan Province 
for Excellent Young Scholars (no. 202300410357), and Henan Province Young and 
Middle-Aged Health Science and Technology Innovation Talent Project 
(YXKC2020033).

© 2023 The Authors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.eclinm.2023.101888
PMCID: PMC10034412
PMID: 36969340

Conflict of interest statement: All the authors disclose no conflicts of 
interest.