---
reference_id: "PMID:28176630"
title: "Novel Drugs for Hypertension and Heart Failure: Struggling for a Place Under the Sun."
authors:
- Faselis C
- Boutari C
- Doumas M
- Imprialos K
- Stavropoulos K
- Kokkinos P
journal: Curr Pharm Des
year: '2017'
doi: 10.2174/1381612823666170206154706
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Novel Drugs for Hypertension and Heart Failure: Struggling for a Place Under the Sun.
**Authors:** Faselis C, Boutari C, Doumas M, Imprialos K, Stavropoulos K, Kokkinos P
**Journal:** Curr Pharm Des (2017)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1381612823666170206154706](https://doi.org/10.2174/1381612823666170206154706)

## Content

1. Curr Pharm Des. 2017;23(10):1540-1550. doi: 10.2174/1381612823666170206154706.

Novel Drugs for Hypertension and Heart Failure: Struggling for a Place Under the 
Sun.

Faselis C(1), Boutari C(2), Doumas M(3), Imprialos K(2), Stavropoulos K(2), 
Kokkinos P(3).

Author information:
(1)VA Medical Center, 50 Irving Street, NW, Washington, DC 20422, United States.
(2)Aristotle University, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(3)VAMC and George Washington University, Washington, DC, United States.

Backgound: Current drug therapy for the management of arterial hypertension and 
heart failure has provided substantial benefits but has also some limitations. 
LCZ696, a dual inhibitor of angiotensin receptor blockers and neprilysin, and 
finerenone, a non-steroidal mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist, are two 
recently developed novel agents for the management of these conditions.
METHODS: This review aims to present the pathophysiological basis for the use of 
these two novel drugs, critically discuss available clinical data, and provide 
future perspectives.
RESULTS: LCZ696 seems a very promising antihypertensive agent, that additionally 
generates clinically meaningful benefits in patients with heart failure with 
reduced injection fraction and raises expectations for the management of 
patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Finerenone aims to 
be safer than current aldosterone antagonists and has been so far tested in 
patients with heart failure and in patients with albuminuria. First available 
data are very promising for the efficacy of the drug, while it provides a better 
safety profile than current mineralocorticoid antagonists.
CONCLUSION: LCZ696 and finerenone are two novel drugs for the management of 
arterial hypertension and heart failure. First available data point toward 
important clinical benefits from their use. Future large trials further 
investigating the cardiovascular profile of these agents will establish the use 
of these drugs.

Copyright© Bentham Science Publishers; For any queries, please email at 
epub@benthamscience.org.

DOI: 10.2174/1381612823666170206154706
PMID: 28176630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]