---
reference_id: "PMID:21634087"
title: Branchiooculofacial Syndrome.
authors:
- Adam MP
- Bick S
- Mirzaa GM
- Pagon RA
- Wallace SE
- Amemiya A
- Haldeman-Englert CR
- Lin AE
- Milunsky JM
year: '1993'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Branchiooculofacial Syndrome.
**Authors:** Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Haldeman-Englert CR, Lin AE, Milunsky JM

## Content

1. Branchiooculofacial Syndrome.

Haldeman-Englert CR(1), Lin AE(2), Milunsky JM(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2011 May 31 [updated 2025 Aug 14].

Author information:
(1)Cone Health, Greensboro, North Carolina
(2)Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital for Children, Boston, 
Massachusetts
(3)Director, Clinical Genetics, Senior Director, Molecular Genetics, 
Co-Director, Center for Human Genetics, Inc, Cambridge, Massachusetts

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Branchiooculofacial syndrome (BOFS) is characterized 
by branchial (cervical or infra- or supra-auricular) skin defects that range 
from barely perceptible thin skin or hair patch to erythematous "hemangiomatous" 
lesions to large weeping erosions; ocular anomalies that can include 
microphthalmia, anophthalmia, coloboma, cataract, and nasolacrimal duct 
stenosis/atresia; and facial anomalies that can include dolichocephaly, 
hypertelorism or telecanthus, broad nasal tip, upslanted palpebral fissures, 
cleft lip or prominent philtral pillars that give the appearance of a repaired 
cleft lip (formerly called "pseudocleft lip") with or without cleft palate, 
upper lip pits, and lower facial weakness (asymmetric crying face or partial 
weakness of cranial nerve VII). Malformed and prominent pinnae and hearing loss 
from inner ear and/or petrous bone anomalies are common. Intellect is usually 
normal.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of BOFS is established in a proband with 
characteristic clinical findings and a heterozygous pathogenic variant in TFAP2A 
identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: In general, children with BOFS should 
be managed by a multispecialty team including craniofacial specialists, plastic 
surgeons, otolaryngologists, and speech-language therapists. Small, linear, or 
superficial branchial skin defects may heal spontaneously; however, some require 
surgical intervention. Treatment of ophthalmic manifestations is per pediatric 
ophthalmologist. Nasolacrimal duct stenosis or atresia often requires surgery. 
Anophthalmia or severe microphthalmia may require a conformer (a structure, 
usually plastic, inserted into the eye socket to encourage its growth). It is 
recommended that cleft lip be repaired by an experienced pediatric plastic 
surgeon. Nasal tip abnormalities, lesser forms of cleft lip ("pseudocleft"), and 
malformed pinnae may need surgical correction. Standard treatments for hearing 
loss, renal malformations, dental manifestations, and congenital heart defects. 
Treatment of sensory, psychologic, and developmental challenges with supportive 
therapies. Surveillance: Ophthalmology examination and vision assessment as 
recommended by ophthalmologist; audiology evaluation as recommended by 
otolaryngologist and/or audiologist; at each visit assess for a recurrent 
urinary tract infection suggestive of vesicoureteral reflux, assess teeth for 
size, number, carries, and malocclusion, and assess for new cysts; developmental 
and behavioral assessment annually or as needed; monitor for signs of low 
self-esteem and other psychological issues at each visit in older children as 
they enter adolescence.
GENETIC COUNSELING: BOFS is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. De novo 
pathogenic variants are observed in 50%-60% of affected individuals. Each child 
of an individual with BOFS has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic 
variant. Once the TFAP2A pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected 
family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 21634087