---
reference_id: "PMID:33018795"
title: "Facial Electromyography Mapping in Healthy and Bell's Palsy Subjects: A High-Density Surface EMG Study."
authors:
- Cui H
- Zhong W
- Zhu M
- Jiang N
- Huang X
- Lan K
- Hu L
- Chen S
- Yang Z
- Yu H
- Li G
journal: Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1109/EMBC44109.2020.9175316
keywords:
- Bell Palsy/diagnosis
- Electromyography
- Face
- Facial Paralysis/diagnosis
- Humans
- Pilot Projects
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Facial Electromyography Mapping in Healthy and Bell's Palsy Subjects: A High-Density Surface EMG Study.
**Authors:** Cui H, Zhong W, Zhu M, Jiang N, Huang X, Lan K, Hu L, Chen S, Yang Z, Yu H, Li G
**Journal:** Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1109/EMBC44109.2020.9175316](https://doi.org/10.1109/EMBC44109.2020.9175316)

## Content

1. Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2020 Jul;2020:3662-3665. doi: 
10.1109/EMBC44109.2020.9175316.

Facial Electromyography Mapping in Healthy and Bell's Palsy Subjects: A 
High-Density Surface EMG Study.

Cui H, Zhong W, Zhu M, Jiang N, Huang X, Lan K, Hu L, Chen S, Yang Z, Yu H, Li 
G.

Bell's palsy impairs the symmetry of facial appearance and movement. Detailed 
examination of facial muscle activities should be important for the diagnosis 
and treatment of the Bell's palsy. In this study, facial muscle activities in 
normal and Bell's palsy conditions were measured using a high-density (HD) 
electromyography (EMG) technique. The EMG signals during active tasks (four 
different facial expressions) and resting task were collected with a HD array of 
EMG electrodes from forehead and cheek muscles. To visualize facial EMG 
activities, the EMG maps were reconstructed from the HD-EMG recordings. The 
two-dimension (2D) correlation coefficients between right and left sides of 
facial EMG maps were calculated to evaluate the symmetry of facial muscle 
activities during these tasks. Our experimental results showed that the 2D 
correlation coefficients during active tasks were different significantly 
(P<0.01) between the healthy group(n=4) and Bell's palsy group(n=3). These 
results demonstrated that the synchronism of facial muscle activities during 
active tasks in healthy subjects is greater than that in the Bell's palsy 
subjects. This pilot study suggested that HD-EMG would be a potential technique 
to assess abnormal asymmetric activities of facial muscles for Bell's palsy.

DOI: 10.1109/EMBC44109.2020.9175316
PMID: 33018795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]