---
reference_id: "PMID:25107275"
title: A role of OCRL in clathrin-coated pit dynamics and uncoating revealed by studies of Lowe syndrome cells.
authors:
- Nández R
- Balkin DM
- Messa M
- Liang L
- Paradise S
- Czapla H
- Hein MY
- Duncan JS
- Mann M
- De Camilli P
journal: Elife
year: '2014'
doi: 10.7554/eLife.02975
keywords:
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Clathrin/metabolism
- "Clathrin-Coated Vesicles/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- "Coated Pits, Cell-Membrane/metabolism, ultrastructure"
- Endocytosis/genetics
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- HEK293 Cells
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- "Luminescent Proteins/genetics, metabolism"
- "Microscopy, Confocal"
- "Microscopy, Electron"
- "Microscopy, Fluorescence/methods"
- Mutation
- "Oculocerebrorenal Syndrome/genetics, metabolism, pathology"
- Phosphatidylinositol Phosphates/metabolism
- "Phosphoric Monoester Hydrolases/genetics, metabolism"
- Protein Binding
- "Proteome/genetics, metabolism"
- Proteomics/methods
- RNA Interference
- "Sorting Nexins/genetics, metabolism"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A role of OCRL in clathrin-coated pit dynamics and uncoating revealed by studies of Lowe syndrome cells.
**Authors:** Nández R, Balkin DM, Messa M, Liang L, Paradise S, Czapla H, Hein MY, Duncan JS, Mann M, De Camilli P
**Journal:** Elife (2014)
**DOI:** [10.7554/eLife.02975](https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02975)

## Content

1. Elife. 2014 Aug 8;3:e02975. doi: 10.7554/eLife.02975.

A role of OCRL in clathrin-coated pit dynamics and uncoating revealed by studies
of Lowe syndrome cells.

Nández R(1), Balkin DM(1), Messa M(1), Liang L(2), Paradise S(1), Czapla H(1),
Hein MY(3), Duncan JS(2), Mann M(3), De Camilli P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, United States.
(2)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, United States.
(3)Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of
Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany.

Mutations in the inositol 5-phosphatase OCRL cause Lowe syndrome and Dent's
disease. Although OCRL, a direct clathrin interactor, is recruited to late-stage
clathrin-coated pits, clinical manifestations have been primarily attributed to
intracellular sorting defects. Here we show that OCRL loss in Lowe syndrome
patient fibroblasts impacts clathrin-mediated endocytosis and results in an
endocytic defect. These cells exhibit an accumulation of clathrin-coated
vesicles and an increase in U-shaped clathrin-coated pits, which may result from
sequestration of coat components on uncoated vesicles. Endocytic vesicles that
fail to lose their coat nucleate the majority of the numerous actin comets
present in patient cells. SNX9, an adaptor that couples late-stage endocytic
coated pits to actin polymerization and which we found to bind OCRL directly,
remains associated with such vesicles. These results indicate that OCRL acts as
an uncoating factor and that defects in clathrin-mediated endocytosis likely
contribute to pathology in patients with OCRL mutations.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.02975
PMCID: PMC4358339
PMID: 25107275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that no competing interests
exist.
