---
reference_id: PMID:27050202
title: Seeking environmental causes of neurodegenerative disease and envisioning primary prevention.
authors:
- Spencer PS
- Palmer VS
- Kisby GE
journal: Neurotoxicology
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2016.03.017
keywords:
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- "Environmental Exposure/adverse effects, statistics & numerical data"
- Female
- Guam/epidemiology
- Humans
- Male
- "Neurodegenerative Diseases/epidemiology, etiology, prevention & control"
- Primary Prevention
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Seeking environmental causes of neurodegenerative disease and envisioning primary prevention.
**Authors:** Spencer PS, Palmer VS, Kisby GE
**Journal:** Neurotoxicology (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.neuro.2016.03.017](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro.2016.03.017)

## Content

1. Neurotoxicology. 2016 Sep;56:269-283. doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2016.03.017. Epub 
2016 Apr 2.

Seeking environmental causes of neurodegenerative disease and envisioning 
primary prevention.

Spencer PS(1), Palmer VS(2), Kisby GE(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Portland, OR, USA; Oregon Institute of Occupational Health Sciences, 
Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, USA. Electronic address: 
spencer@ohsu.edu.
(2)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Portland, OR, USA.
(3)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Western University of Health Sciences, 
College of Osteopathic Medicine of the Pacific Northwest, Lebanon, OR, USA.

Pathological changes of the aging brain are expressed in a range of 
neurodegenerative disorders that will impact increasing numbers of people across 
the globe. Research on the causes of these disorders has focused heavily on 
genetics, and strategies for prevention envision drug-induced slowing or 
arresting disease advance before its clinical appearance. We discuss a strategic 
shift that seeks to identify the environmental causes or contributions to 
neurodegeneration, and the vision of primary disease prevention by removing or 
controlling exposure to culpable agents. The plausibility of this approach is 
illustrated by the prototypical neurodegenerative disease amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia complex (ALS-PDC). This often-familial 
long-latency disease, once thought to be an inherited genetic disorder but now 
known to have a predominant or exclusive environmental origin, is in the process 
of disappearing from the three heavily affected populations, namely Chamorros of 
Guam and Rota, Japanese residents of Kii Peninsula, Honshu, and Auyu and Jaqai 
linguistic groups on the island of New Guinea in West Papua, Indonesia. Exposure 
via traditional food and/or medicine (the only common exposure in all three 
geographic isolates) to one or more neurotoxins in seed of cycad plants is the 
most plausible if yet unproven etiology. Neurotoxin dosage and/or subject age at 
exposure might explain the stratified epidemic of neurodegenerative disease on 
Guam in which high-incidence ALS peaked and declined before that of PD, only to 
be replaced today by a dementing disorder comparable to Alzheimer's disease. 
Exposure to the Guam environment is also linked to the delayed development of 
ALS among a subset of Chamorro and non-Chamorro Gulf War/Era veterans, a summary 
of which is reported here for the first time. Lessons learned from this study 
and from 65 years of research on ALS-PDC include the exceptional value of 
initial, field-based informal investigation of disease-affected individuals and 
communities, the results of which can provide an invaluable guide to steer 
cogent epidemiological and laboratory-based research.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuro.2016.03.017
PMID: 27050202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]