---
reference_id: "PMID:25586652"
title: Predictors of AA amyloidosis in familial Mediterranean fever.
authors:
- Mukhin NA
- Kozlovskaya LV
- Bogdanova MV
- Rameev VV
- Moiseev SV
- Simonyan AKh
journal: Rheumatol Int
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s00296-014-3205-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Predictors of AA amyloidosis in familial Mediterranean fever.
**Authors:** Mukhin NA, Kozlovskaya LV, Bogdanova MV, Rameev VV, Moiseev SV, Simonyan AKh
**Journal:** Rheumatol Int (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00296-014-3205-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00296-014-3205-x)

## Content

1. Rheumatol Int. 2015 Jul;35(7):1257-61. doi: 10.1007/s00296-014-3205-x. Epub
2015  Jan 14.

Predictors of AA amyloidosis in familial Mediterranean fever.

Mukhin NA(1), Kozlovskaya LV, Bogdanova MV, Rameev VV, Moiseev SV, Simonyan AKh.

Author information:
(1)The Clinic of Nephrology, Internal and Occupational Diseases, The Sechenov 
First Moscow State Medical University, Rossolimo Str., 11/5, Moscow, 119435, 
Russia.

The aim of the study was to evaluate the clinical and genetic predictors of AA 
amyloidosis in patients with familial Mediterranean fever (FMF). We 
retrospectively studied 170 Armenian patients who were admitted to the two 
tertiary centers in 2003-2014. The diagnosis of amyloidosis that was suspected 
clinically (new proteinuria or nephrotic syndrome) was confirmed histologically. 
Screening for MEFV gene mutations was performed in 70 patients. The most common 
genotype was M694V/M694V (in 36 % of patients). Biopsy-proven AA amyloidosis was 
found in 102 (60 %) of 170 patients. AA amyloidosis was diagnosed in 17 (68 %) 
of 25 patients with homozygous M694V mutation, 17 (53 %) of 32 patients with 
heterozygous M694V allele and 4 (31 %) of 13 patients with other MEFV gene 
mutations. The M694V homozygosity and heterozygosity were associated with 
increased risk of AA amyloidosis, but this association did not reach statistical 
significance (odds ratio 2.43; 95 % CI 0.87-6.76, and 3.33; 0.91-12.1, 
respectively). Male gender, early onset of disease, severity of FMF, frequent 
attacks, peritonitis, pleuritis and erysipelas-like erythema also did not 
predict AA amyloidosis development. Recurrent arthritis was the only clinical 
finding that was significantly associated with AA amyloidosis (odds ratio 2.28; 
95 % CI 1.17-4.42). Involvement of the joint synovial membrane, that is capable 
of active serum amyloid A production, is the main predictor of renal amyloidosis 
in FMF.

DOI: 10.1007/s00296-014-3205-x
PMID: 25586652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]