---
reference_id: "PMID:40981307"
title: "Milder Form of Cobalamin C Disease May Be Missed by Newborn Screening: The Importance of Methylmalonic Acid Assessment."
authors:
- Nardecchia F
- De Giorgi A
- Santagata S
- Giovanniello T
- Tolve M
- Angeloni A
- Leuzzi V
- Pisani F
- Carducci C
journal: Int J Neonatal Screen
year: '2025'
doi: 10.3390/ijns11030077
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Milder Form of Cobalamin C Disease May Be Missed by Newborn Screening: The Importance of Methylmalonic Acid Assessment.
**Authors:** Nardecchia F, De Giorgi A, Santagata S, Giovanniello T, Tolve M, Angeloni A, Leuzzi V, Pisani F, Carducci C
**Journal:** Int J Neonatal Screen (2025)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijns11030077](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijns11030077)

## Content

1. Int J Neonatal Screen. 2025 Sep 12;11(3):77. doi: 10.3390/ijns11030077.

Milder Form of Cobalamin C Disease May Be Missed by Newborn Screening: The
Importance of Methylmalonic Acid Assessment.

Nardecchia F(1), De Giorgi A(1), Santagata S(2), Giovanniello T(2), Tolve M(2),
Angeloni A(3), Leuzzi V(1), Pisani F(1), Carducci C(3).

Author information:
(1)Unit of Child Neurology and Psychiatry, Department of Human Neuroscience,
Sapienza University of Rome, Via dei Sabelli 108, 00141 Rome, Italy.
(2)Unit of Clinical Pathology, Policlinico Umberto I University Hospital, 00161
Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, 00185 Rome,
Italy.

CblC deficiency is the most common intracellular disorder of vitamin B12
metabolism. Expanded newborn screening (NBS) plays a key role in early
diagnosis, allowing timely treatment and preventing serious complications.
However, traditional first-tier markers-such as propionylcarnitine (C3) and its
ratios with other metabolites (e.g., methionine, carnitine, and
acetylcarnitine)-have limited sensitivity, particularly for mild forms, leading
to missed or delayed diagnoses. In this study, we analyzed data from the NBS
Center of the Lazio region (Italy) and identified nine newborns with confirmed
CblC deficiency. All were recalled due to abnormalities in C3 or related ratios,
along with elevated methylmalonic acid (MMA) levels. Notably, three infants had
completely normal C3 levels and ratios during the second screening test, yet
they showed MMA levels above the cut-off value (2 µmol/L), enabling a diagnosis
of otherwise undetectable mild CblC cases. Our center regularly measures MMA in
dried blood spots, even when first-tier markers return to normal on the second
sample. This approach allows for early diagnosis and immediate treatment with
hydroxocobalamin in patients with mild CblC deficiency, resulting in early
intervention, effective metabolic control, and, based on current follow-up,
normal neurodevelopmental outcomes. Our findings highlight the essential role of
second-tier MMA testing in improving the detection of mild CblC deficiency
during NBS.

DOI: 10.3390/ijns11030077
PMCID: PMC12452357
PMID: 40981307

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
