---
reference_id: "PMID:21565291"
title: "Gain-of-function mutations of ARHGAP31, a Cdc42/Rac1 GTPase regulator, cause syndromic cutis aplasia and limb anomalies."
authors:
- Southgate L
- Machado RD
- Snape KM
- Primeau M
- Dafou D
- Ruddy DM
- Branney PA
- Fisher M
- Lee GJ
- Simpson MA
- He Y
- Bradshaw TY
- Blaumeiser B
- Winship WS
- Reardon W
- Maher ER
- FitzPatrick DR
- Wuyts W
- Zenker M
- Lamarche-Vane N
- Trembath RC
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.04.013
keywords:
- Actins/metabolism
- Cell Adhesion
- Cell Movement
- Cell Polarity
- Cell Proliferation
- Chromosome Mapping
- Cytoskeleton/metabolism
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- "Ectodermal Dysplasia/embryology, genetics"
- Female
- GTPase-Activating Proteins/genetics
- Gene Expression Regulation
- HEK293 Cells
- HeLa Cells
- Humans
- "Limb Deformities, Congenital/embryology, genetics"
- Male
- Mutation
- "Scalp Dermatoses/congenital, embryology, genetics"
- Signal Transduction
- cdc42 GTP-Binding Protein/metabolism
- rac1 GTP-Binding Protein/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gain-of-function mutations of ARHGAP31, a Cdc42/Rac1 GTPase regulator, cause syndromic cutis aplasia and limb anomalies.
**Authors:** Southgate L, Machado RD, Snape KM, Primeau M, Dafou D, Ruddy DM, Branney PA, Fisher M, Lee GJ, Simpson MA, He Y, Bradshaw TY, Blaumeiser B, Winship WS, Reardon W, Maher ER, FitzPatrick DR, Wuyts W, Zenker M, Lamarche-Vane N, Trembath RC
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.04.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.04.013)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 2011 May 13;88(5):574-85. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.04.013.

Gain-of-function mutations of ARHGAP31, a Cdc42/Rac1 GTPase regulator, cause 
syndromic cutis aplasia and limb anomalies.

Southgate L(1), Machado RD, Snape KM, Primeau M, Dafou D, Ruddy DM, Branney PA, 
Fisher M, Lee GJ, Simpson MA, He Y, Bradshaw TY, Blaumeiser B, Winship WS, 
Reardon W, Maher ER, FitzPatrick DR, Wuyts W, Zenker M, Lamarche-Vane N, 
Trembath RC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, King's College London, School 
of Medicine, Guy's Hospital, London, London, UK.

Regulation of cell proliferation and motility is essential for normal 
development. The Rho family of GTPases plays a critical role in the control of 
cell polarity and migration by effecting the cytoskeleton, membrane trafficking, 
and cell adhesion. We investigated a recognized developmental disorder, 
Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS), characterized by the combination of aplasia cutis 
congenita (ACC) and terminal transverse limb defects (TTLD). Through a 
genome-wide linkage analysis, we detected a locus for autosomal-dominant 
ACC-TTLD on 3q generating a maximum LOD score of 4.93 at marker rs1464311. 
Candidate-gene- and exome-based sequencing led to the identification of 
independent premature truncating mutations in the terminal exon of the Rho 
GTPase-activating protein 31 gene, ARHGAP31, which encodes a Cdc42/Rac1 
regulatory protein. Mutant transcripts are stable and increase ARHGAP31 activity 
in vitro through a gain-of-function mechanism. Constitutively active ARHGAP31 
mutations result in a loss of available active Cdc42 and consequently disrupt 
actin cytoskeletal structures. Arhgap31 expression in the mouse is substantially 
restricted to the terminal limb buds and craniofacial processes during early 
development; these locations closely mirror the sites of impaired organogenesis 
that characterize this syndrome. These data identify the requirement for 
regulated Cdc42 and/or Rac1 signaling processes during early human development.

Copyright © 2011 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2011.04.013
PMCID: PMC3146732
PMID: 21565291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]