---
reference_id: "PMID:9559103"
title: Developmental lead exposure alters the distribution of protein kinase C activity in the rat hippocampus.
authors:
- Chen HH
- Ma T
- Hume AS
- Ho IK
journal: Biomed Environ Sci
year: '1998'
keywords:
- Animals
- "Animals, Newborn"
- Body Weight/drug effects
- Cell Membrane/enzymology
- Cytosol/enzymology
- Enzyme Activation/drug effects
- Female
- "Hippocampus/drug effects, enzymology, ultrastructure"
- Lactation
- "Lead/blood, toxicity"
- Pregnancy
- Prenatal Exposure Delayed Effects
- Protein Kinase C/metabolism
- Rats
- "Rats, Sprague-Dawley"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Developmental lead exposure alters the distribution of protein kinase C activity in the rat hippocampus.
**Authors:** Chen HH, Ma T, Hume AS, Ho IK
**Journal:** Biomed Environ Sci (1998)

## Content

1. Biomed Environ Sci. 1998 Mar;11(1):61-9.

Developmental lead exposure alters the distribution of protein kinase C activity 
in the rat hippocampus.

Chen HH(1), Ma T, Hume AS, Ho IK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Mississippi Medical 
Center, Jackson 39216, USA.

Chronic low-level lead (Pb) exposure in children is known to cause a deficit in 
learning and memory. In vitro studies have demonstrated that Pb altered protein 
kinase C (PKC) activity. Especially, hippocampal PKC has been correlated with 
performance in several learning tasks. The effects of Pb exposure on hippocampal 
PKC were investigated during development at various postnatal ages: postnatal 
day (PN) 7, 14, 28, and 56. Two-tenth % Pb acetate was administered to pregnant 
and lactating dams and then administered to weanling rats in drinking water. PKC 
activity was measured in both membrane and cytosolic fractions from the 
hippocampi of the controls and Pb-exposed animals. Pb-induced increase in PKC 
activity in the cytosolic fraction was observed in the PN56 rats. In contrast, 
PKC activity was decreased by Pb at PN7 in the membrane fraction. Furthermore, a 
significant decrease in the ratio of membrane to cytosolic PKC activity which is 
representative of PKC distribution was observed in the PN28 and PN56 Pb-exposed 
rats relative to the same-age controls. This study indicates that chronic Pb 
exposure during development influences hippocampal PKC activity and 
distribution. These changes may be involved in the subclinical neurotoxicity of 
chronic Pb exposure in young children.

PMID: 9559103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]