---
reference_id: "PMID:36589157"
title: "Case Report: Adenosine kinase deficiency diagnosed 10 years after liver transplantation: Novel phenotypic insights."
authors:
- Lipiński P
- Ciara E
- Jurkiewicz D
- Pronicki M
- Jurkiewicz E
- Bogdańska A
- Płoski R
- Jankowska I
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2022.1061043
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case Report: Adenosine kinase deficiency diagnosed 10 years after liver transplantation: Novel phenotypic insights.
**Authors:** Lipiński P, Ciara E, Jurkiewicz D, Pronicki M, Jurkiewicz E, Bogdańska A, Płoski R, Jankowska I
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2022.1061043](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2022.1061043)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2022 Dec 14;10:1061043. doi: 10.3389/fped.2022.1061043. 
eCollection 2022.

Case Report: Adenosine kinase deficiency diagnosed 10 years after liver 
transplantation: Novel phenotypic insights.

Lipiński P(1), Ciara E(2), Jurkiewicz D(2), Pronicki M(3), Jurkiewicz E(4), 
Bogdańska A(5), Płoski R(6), Jankowska I(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nutrition and Metabolic Diseases, The Children's 
Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, The Children's Memorial Health Institute, 
Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Department of Pathology, The Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, 
Poland.
(4)Department of Diagnostic Imaging, The Children's Memorial Health Institute, 
Warsaw, Poland.
(5)Department of Biochemistry, Radioimmunology and Experimental Medicine, The 
Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.
(6)Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.
(7)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, Nutritional Disorders and 
Paediatrics, Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland.

Adenosine kinase (ADK) deficiency is a rare inborn error of methionine and 
adenosine metabolism. So far, a total of 27 patients with ADK deficiency have 
been reported. Here, we describe the first Polish patient diagnosed with ADK 
deficiency, aiming to highlight the clinical presentation of disease, emphasize 
diagnostic difficulties, and report the long-term follow-up. Six-month-old 
patient presented with cholestatic liver disease, macrocytic anemia, 
developmental delay, generalized hypotonia, delayed brain myelination, and 
elevated levels of serum methionine. A decrease of mitochondrial respiratory 
chain complex II and III activity were found in the postnuclear supernatants 
obtained from skeletal muscle biopsy. The patient underwent living-donor liver 
transplantation (LTx) at 14 months of age. Ten-year follow-up after LTx revealed 
a preserved good liver function, persistent regenerative macrocytic anemia, 
progressive neurological disease but disappearance of brain MR changes, short 
stature, and cortisol deficiency. Whole exome sequencing revealed the patient to 
be affected with two novel ADK variants, which pathogenicity was confirmed 
biochemically by demonstration of elevated concentration of 
S-adenosylhomocysteine.

© 2022 Lipiński, Ciara, Jurkiewicz, Pronicki, Jurkiewicz, Bogdańska, Płoski and 
Jankowska.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2022.1061043
PMCID: PMC9794844
PMID: 36589157

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.