---
reference_id: "PMID:33988877"
title: "Isolated autosomal recessive woolly hair/hypotrichosis: genetics, pathogenesis and therapies."
authors:
- Akiyama M
journal: J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1111/jdv.17350
keywords:
- "Genes, Recessive"
- Hair
- Hair Diseases/genetics
- Humans
- Hypotrichosis/genetics
- Lipase/genetics
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- Phenotype
- "Receptors, Lysophosphatidic Acid/genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Isolated autosomal recessive woolly hair/hypotrichosis: genetics, pathogenesis and therapies.
**Authors:** Akiyama M
**Journal:** J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1111/jdv.17350](https://doi.org/10.1111/jdv.17350)

## Content

1. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2021 Sep;35(9):1788-1796. doi:
10.1111/jdv.17350.  Epub 2021 Jun 4.

Isolated autosomal recessive woolly hair/hypotrichosis: genetics, pathogenesis 
and therapies.

Akiyama M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Nagoya, Japan.

Isolated autosomal recessive woolly hair/hypotrichosis (ARWH) is a rare 
hereditary hair disease characterized by tightly curled sparse hair at birth or 
in early infancy. Patients with ARWH consist of genetically heterogeneous 
groups. Woolly hair autosomal recessive 1 (ARWH1) (MIM #278150), woolly hair 
autosomal recessive 2 (ARWH2) (MIM #604379) and woolly hair autosomal recessive 
3 (ARWH3) (MIM #616760) are caused by mutations in LPAR6, LIPH and KRT25, 
respectively. In addition, nonsense variants in C3ORF52 (*611956) were 
identified in ARWH patients. The frequencies of the mutations in the causative 
genes in ARWH patients are thought to differ by ethnicity and 
country/geographical area. Large numbers of ARWH families with LIPH mutations 
have been described only in populations from Japan, Pakistan and the Volga-Ural 
region of Russia. In that region of Russia, most ARWH families have an extremely 
prevalent founder mutation, the deletion of exon 4, in LIPH. In the Pakistani 
population, 47.2% of ARWH families had the disease due to LIPH mutations and 
52.8% of them carried LPAR6 mutations. The prevalent, recurrent LIPH mutation 
c.659_660delTA (p.Ile220Argfs*29) was found in more than half of Pakistani ARWH 
families with LIPH mutations. Most Japanese ARWH families (98.7%) harbour LIPH 
mutations, including the two highly prevalent, recurrent LIPH mutations c.736T>A 
(p.Cys246Ser) and c.742C>A (p.His248Asn). In ARWH patients whose disease was due 
to LIPH, LPAR6 or C3ORF52 mutations, the loss of function of LIPH, LPAR6 or 
C3ORF52 leads to reduced LIPH-LPA-LPAR6 signalling, resulting in the decreased 
transactivation of EGFR signalling and the phenotype of underdeveloped hairs. 
Our recent prospective interventional study suggests that topical minoxidil 
might be a promising treatment for ARWH due to LIPH mutations, although 
sufficiently effective treatments have not been established for ARWH yet.

© 2021 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

DOI: 10.1111/jdv.17350
PMID: 33988877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]