---
reference_id: "PMID:22559870"
title: "The role of inhaled corticosteroids in asthma treatment: a health economic perspective."
authors:
- Spangler DL
journal: Am J Manag Care
year: '2012'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The role of inhaled corticosteroids in asthma treatment: a health economic perspective.
**Authors:** Spangler DL
**Journal:** Am J Manag Care (2012)

## Content

1. Am J Manag Care. 2012 Jan;18(2 Suppl):S35-9.

The role of inhaled corticosteroids in asthma treatment: a health economic 
perspective.

Spangler DL(1).

Author information:
(1)Children's Healthcare, Atlanta, GA, USA. dspangler@atlantaallergy.com

Asthma affects approximately 23 million American children and adults, resulting 
in almost 15 million physician office and hospital visits, and nearly 2 million 
emergency department visits each year. Despite the publication of National 
Asthma Education and Prevention Program guidelines, asthma remains poorly 
controlled, with annual costs estimated at up to $56 billion. Current guidelines 
recommend long-term treatment with inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) because of 
their superior effectiveness in managing the chronic airway inflammation that 
characterizes persistent asthma. ICS monotherapy should be explored before 
alternatives such as leukotriene modifiers and long-acting beta agonists (LABAs) 
are attempted, especially after the US Food and Drug Administration's 2010 
warning that LABAs should never be used alone to treat asthma due to the 
increased risk of severe exacerbations leading to hospitalization in both 
children and adults, with a possibility of death. In the past, asthma treatment 
focused solely on the central airways, rather than the small, more distant 
airways, and most traditional ICS therapies are aerosols which deliver large 
particles to the central airways. Today, the importance of the role of small 
airway disease in asthma, particularly inflammation, is known. Targeting the 
small airways may help improve clinical outcomes and reduce healthcare 
utilization and costs. The ICS beclomethasone dipropionate HFA does not require 
a spacer and is characterized by small particle sizes that result in more of the 
drug being deposited in both the large and small airways. Studies have 
demonstrated that beclomethasone dipropionate HFA is clinically effective and 
cost efficient compared with other asthma monotherapies or combination 
therapies.

PMID: 22559870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]