---
reference_id: "PMID:37568198"
title: "A novel ELOVL4 variant, L168S, causes early childhood-onset Spinocerebellar ataxia-34 and retinal dysfunction: a case report."
authors:
- Gyening YK
- Boris K
- Cyril M
- Brush RS
- Nassogne MC
- Agbaga MP
journal: Acta Neuropathol Commun
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1186/s40478-023-01628-4
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A novel ELOVL4 variant, L168S, causes early childhood-onset Spinocerebellar ataxia-34 and retinal dysfunction: a case report.
**Authors:** Gyening YK, Boris K, Cyril M, Brush RS, Nassogne MC, Agbaga MP
**Journal:** Acta Neuropathol Commun (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s40478-023-01628-4](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40478-023-01628-4)

## Content

1. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2023 Aug 11;11(1):131. doi:
10.1186/s40478-023-01628-4.

A novel ELOVL4 variant, L168S, causes early childhood-onset Spinocerebellar 
ataxia-34 and retinal dysfunction: a case report.

Gyening YK(1)(2)(3), Boris K(4)(3), Cyril M(3)(5), Brush RS(1)(2)(3), Nassogne 
MC(6), Agbaga MP(7)(8)(9).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 
DMEI 423 Parke Pavilion, 608 Stanton L. Young Boulevard, Oklahoma City, OK, 
73104, USA.
(2)Department of Ophthalmology and Dean McGee Eye Institute, University of 
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, USA.
(3)Unité Déficiences Intellectuelles/Troubles du, Développement, Service de 
Génétique Clinique et Médicale, AP-HP. Sorbonne Université -Hôpital de La 
Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
(4)UF de Génomique du Développement, Centre de Génétique Moléculaire et 
Chromosomique, AP-HP.Sorbonne Université - Hôpital de La Pitié-Salpêtrière, 
Paris, France.
(5)Centre de Référence des Maladies Héréditaires du Métabolisme - Service de 
NeurologiePédiatrique, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc -UCLouvain, Avenue 
Hippocrate, 10, 1200, Brussels, Belgium.
(6)Centre de Référence des Maladies Héréditaires du Métabolisme - Service de 
NeurologiePédiatrique, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc -UCLouvain, Avenue 
Hippocrate, 10, 1200, Brussels, Belgium. 
marie-cecile.nassogne@saintluc.uclouvain.be.
(7)Department of Cell Biology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 
DMEI 423 Parke Pavilion, 608 Stanton L. Young Boulevard, Oklahoma City, OK, 
73104, USA. martin-paul-agbaga@ouhsc.edu.
(8)Department of Ophthalmology and Dean McGee Eye Institute, University of 
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, USA. 
martin-paul-agbaga@ouhsc.edu.
(9)Unité Déficiences Intellectuelles/Troubles du, Développement, Service de 
Génétique Clinique et Médicale, AP-HP. Sorbonne Université -Hôpital de La 
Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France. martin-paul-agbaga@ouhsc.edu.

Spinocerebellar ataxia 34 (SCA34) is an autosomal dominant inherited disease 
characterized by age-related cerebellar degeneration and ataxia caused by 
mutations in the Elongation of Very Long Chain Fatty Acid-4 (ELOVL4) gene. The 
ELOVL4 enzyme catalyzes the biosynthesis of both very long chain saturated fatty 
acids (VLC-SFA) and very long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (VLC-PUFA) that 
are important for neuronal, reproductive, and skin function. Several variants in 
ELOVL4 have been shown to cause different tissue-specific disorders including 
SCA34 with or without Erythrokeratodermia Variabilis (EKV), a skin condition 
characterized by dry, scaly skin, Autosomal Dominant Stargardt-Like Macular 
Dystrophy (STGD3), and seizures associated with neuro-ichthyotic disorders. What 
is puzzling is how different mutations in the same gene seem to cause different 
tissue-specific disorders. To date, no SCA34 patients have presented with both 
SCA34 and STGD3 pathology that is caused by ELOVL4 variants that cause 
truncation of ELOVL4. Here, we report a novel case of an early childhood onset 
and rapidly progressive cerebellar degeneration and retinal dysfunction in a 
Belgian-Italian girl who developed severe dysarthria and gait problems starting 
at about 3.5 years of age and progressed to immobility by 4.5 years of age. 
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed progressive vermian, cerebellar, 
cortical atrophy, progressive corpus callosum slimming, and hot cross bun sign 
visible on the MRI. Ophthalmological examinations also revealed progressive 
macular dysfunction as measured by electroretinography. Using exome sequencing, 
we identified a novel heterozygous ELOVL4 variant, c.503 T > C (p. L168S) in the 
patient. To understand the enzymatic function of this novel ELOVL4 variant and 
how it alters the levels of VLC-PUFA and VLC-SFA biosynthesis to contribute to 
cerebellar and retinal dysfunction, we expressed wild-type ELOVL4 or the L168S 
ELOVL4 variant in cell culture and supplemented the cultures with VLC-PUFA or 
VLC-SFA precursors. We showed that the L168S ELOVL4 variant is deficient in the 
biosynthesis of VLC-SFA and VLC-PUFA. Our work suggests that differential 
depletion of these fatty acids may be a contributing factor to the pathogenic 
mechanism of SCA34 with or without EKV. Further studies will help further define 
how the different ELOVL4 variants cause different tissue-specific disorders with 
variable ages of onset.

© 2023. BioMed Central Ltd., part of Springer Nature.

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-023-01628-4
PMCID: PMC10416515
PMID: 37568198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.