---
reference_id: "PMID:40614342"
title: Tiered approach to molecular testing of thyroid fine needle aspiration samples may improve preoperative diagnosis.
authors:
- George N
- Chu S
- Manning S
- Lim KZ
- Mond M
- Tay E
- Yellapu B
- Jones K
- Fellowes A
- Kumar B
- Serpell J
- Grodski S
- Shackleton M
- Yannakou CK
- Lee JC
journal: Eur J Surg Oncol
year: '2025'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejso.2025.110082
keywords:
- Humans
- "Biopsy, Fine-Needle"
- Female
- "Thyroid Nodule/genetics, pathology, diagnosis, surgery"
- Middle Aged
- Male
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics
- "Thyroid Neoplasms/genetics, pathology, diagnosis, surgery"
- High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing
- Adult
- Aged
- Mutation
- Prospective Studies
- Sensitivity and Specificity
- Predictive Value of Tests
- Immunohistochemistry
- "Aged, 80 and over"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Tiered approach to molecular testing of thyroid fine needle aspiration samples may improve preoperative diagnosis.
**Authors:** George N, Chu S, Manning S, Lim KZ, Mond M, Tay E, Yellapu B, Jones K, Fellowes A, Kumar B, Serpell J, Grodski S, Shackleton M, Yannakou CK, Lee JC
**Journal:** Eur J Surg Oncol (2025)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejso.2025.110082](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejso.2025.110082)

## Content

1. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2025 Sep;51(9):110082. doi: 10.1016/j.ejso.2025.110082. Epub
 2025 Apr 22.

Tiered approach to molecular testing of thyroid fine needle aspiration samples
may improve preoperative diagnosis.

George N(1), Chu S(1), Manning S(2), Lim KZ(3), Mond M(4), Tay E(5), Yellapu
B(6), Jones K(7), Fellowes A(7), Kumar B(8), Serpell J(9), Grodski S(10),
Shackleton M(11), Yannakou CK(6), Lee JC(12).

Author information:
(1)Hormone Cancer Therapeutics, Hudson Institute of Medical Research, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia.
(2)Monash University Endocrine Surgery Unit, Alfred Health, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia.
(3)Monash University Endocrine Surgery Unit, Alfred Health, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia; Department of General Surgery, Monash Health, Clayton, Victoria,
Australia.
(4)Hormone Cancer Therapeutics, Hudson Institute of Medical Research, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia; Department of Endocrinology, Monash Health, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia.
(5)Department of General Surgery, Monash Health, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.
(6)Epworth HealthCare, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(7)Nexomics, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(8)Department of Pathology, Monash Health, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.
(9)Monash University Endocrine Surgery Unit, Alfred Health, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia; School of Translational Medicine, Monash University, Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia.
(10)Monash University Endocrine Surgery Unit, Alfred Health, Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia; Department of General Surgery, Monash Health, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia; School of Translational Medicine, Monash University,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(11)Department of Oncology, Alfred Health, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; The
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(12)Monash University Endocrine Surgery Unit, Alfred Health, Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia; Department of General Surgery, Monash Health, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia; School of Translational Medicine, Monash University,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. Electronic address: James.Lee@monash.edu.

BACKGROUND: Patients with indeterminate thyroid nodules continue to be a
challenge to clinicians. Molecular testing on fine needle aspirates (FNA) is
well established in the United States, but its access is limited elsewhere. We
aimed to explore the utility of a pre-existing Next Generation Sequencing (NGS)
platform, and the role of BRAF mutation in patient selection for preoperative
molecular testing.
METHODS: Patients were recruited from the Monash University Endocrine Surgery
Database for BRAF immunohistochemistry status on histopathological samples; and
prospectively for NGS testing of preoperative FNA samples, using the Archer DX
VariantPlex (31 genes) and FusionPlex (40 genes) Comprehensive Thyroid and Lung
panels.
RESULTS: The mean age of 90 patients (103 nodules) for NGS testing was 53, with
58 % female. Most of the nodules (n = 72, 70 %) had indeterminate cytology.
Histology showed malignancy in 52 (50 %) nodules; of these, 45 had pathogenic
DNA mutations and 3 had pathogenic RNA fusions on NGS testing of needle
aspirates. The NGS panels were able to detect malignancy in indeterminate
nodules with 75 % sensitivity, 85 % specificity, 80 % positive predictive value,
and 81 % negative predictive value. 74 % of the papillary thyroid cancer
population had BRAF mutations on immunohistochemistry, which showed 88 %
concordance with the NGS results.
CONCLUSION: This is the first Australian study to demonstrate that pre-existing,
non-proprietary NGS mutation and fusion panels can achieve high diagnostic
specificity and positive predictive value for malignancy in indeterminate
thyroid nodules. Furthermore, we propose exploration of using BRAF V600E testing
to select patients for full NGS analysis.

Copyright © 2025. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejso.2025.110082
PMID: 40614342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
