---
reference_id: "PMID:37680668"
title: "Spontaneous regression of small cell lung cancer associated with Lambert-Eaton Myasthenic Syndrome: Case report."
authors:
- Otani M
- Nishimori M
- Iwasa H
- Iwamura M
- Izumi T
- Nakaji K
- Nitta N
- Miyatake K
- Yoshimatsu R
- Yamanishi T
- Matsumoto T
- Osaki Y
- Wada N
- Toi M
- Yamamoto M
- Nakatani Y
- Kubota T
- Yamagami T
journal: Radiol Case Rep
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.radcr.2023.08.059
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Spontaneous regression of small cell lung cancer associated with Lambert-Eaton Myasthenic Syndrome: Case report.
**Authors:** Otani M, Nishimori M, Iwasa H, Iwamura M, Izumi T, Nakaji K, Nitta N, Miyatake K, Yoshimatsu R, Yamanishi T, Matsumoto T, Osaki Y, Wada N, Toi M, Yamamoto M, Nakatani Y, Kubota T, Yamagami T
**Journal:** Radiol Case Rep (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.radcr.2023.08.059](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.radcr.2023.08.059)

## Content

1. Radiol Case Rep. 2023 Sep 2;18(11):4036-4041. doi:
10.1016/j.radcr.2023.08.059.  eCollection 2023 Nov.

Spontaneous regression of small cell lung cancer associated with Lambert-Eaton 
Myasthenic Syndrome: Case report.

Otani M(1), Nishimori M(1), Iwasa H(1), Iwamura M(1), Izumi T(1), Nakaji K(1), 
Nitta N(1), Miyatake K(1), Yoshimatsu R(1), Yamanishi T(1), Matsumoto T(1), 
Osaki Y(2), Wada N(3), Toi M(3), Yamamoto M(4), Nakatani Y(5), Kubota T(5), 
Yamagami T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology, Kochi Medical School, 
Kochi University, Kohasu, Oko-cho, Nankoku, Kochi, 783-8505, Japan.
(2)Department of Neurology, Kochi Medical School, Kochi University, Kohasu, 
Oko-cho, Nankoku, Kochi, Japan.
(3)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Kochi Medical School, Kochi University, 
Kohasu, Oko-cho, Nankoku, Kochi, Japan.
(4)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Kochi Medical School, Kochi University, 
Kohasu, Oko-cho, Nankoku, Kochi, Japan.
(5)Department of Respiratory Medicine and Allergology, Kochi Medical School, 
Kochi University, Kohasu, Oko-cho, Nankoku, Kochi, Japan.

Spontaneous regression (SR) of cancer is very rare, especially of small cell 
lung cancer (SCLC). Recently, an association of paraneoplastic neurological 
syndrome (PNS) has been reported as a cause of SR of cancer, and onconeural 
antibodies are a possible factor in the SR of cancer associated with PNS. We 
herein report the first case of SR of SCLC combined with anti-P/Q-type of 
voltage-gated calcium channel (VGCC) antibody-positive Lambert-Eaton myasthenic 
syndrome (LEMS), a subtype of PNS. This case report suggests that SCLC may be 
spontaneously reduced by an autoimmune response induced by VGCC antibodies 
associated with LEMS. Our finding may help elucidate the mechanisms that inhibit 
tumor growth and cause the regression of tumors.

© 2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of University of 
Washington.

DOI: 10.1016/j.radcr.2023.08.059
PMCID: PMC10480669
PMID: 37680668