---
reference_id: "PMID:34705483"
title: "Hedgehog-induced ciliary trafficking of kinesin-4 motor KIF7 requires intraflagellar transport but not KIF7's microtubule binding."
authors:
- Yue Y
- Engelke MF
- Blasius TL
- Verhey KJ
journal: Mol Biol Cell
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1091/mbc.E21-04-0215
keywords:
- Animals
- COS Cells
- Chlorocebus aethiops
- Cilia/metabolism
- Hedgehog Proteins/metabolism
- "Kinesins/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
- Mice
- Microtubules/metabolism
- NIH 3T3 Cells
- Protein Binding
- Signal Transduction/physiology
- Transcription Factors/metabolism
- Zinc Finger Protein GLI1/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hedgehog-induced ciliary trafficking of kinesin-4 motor KIF7 requires intraflagellar transport but not KIF7's microtubule binding.
**Authors:** Yue Y, Engelke MF, Blasius TL, Verhey KJ
**Journal:** Mol Biol Cell (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1091/mbc.E21-04-0215](https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.E21-04-0215)

## Content

1. Mol Biol Cell. 2022 Jan 1;33(1):br1. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E21-04-0215. Epub 2021
Oct  27.

Hedgehog-induced ciliary trafficking of kinesin-4 motor KIF7 requires 
intraflagellar transport but not KIF7's microtubule binding.

Yue Y(1), Engelke MF(2), Blasius TL(1), Verhey KJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical 
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109.
(2)School of Biological Sciences, Illinois State University, Normal, IL 61790.

The kinesin-4 motor KIF7 is a conserved regulator of the Hedgehog signaling 
pathway. In vertebrates, Hedgehog signaling requires the primary cilium, and 
KIF7 and Gli transcription factors accumulate at the cilium tip in response to 
Hedgehog activation. Unlike conventional kinesins, KIF7 is an immotile kinesin 
and its mechanism of ciliary accumulation is unknown. We generated KIF7 variants 
with altered microtubule binding or motility. We demonstrate that microtubule 
binding of KIF7 is not required for the increase in KIF7 or Gli localization at 
the cilium tip in response to Hedgehog signaling. In addition, we show that the 
immotile behavior of KIF7 is required to prevent ciliary localization of Gli 
transcription factors in the absence of Hedgehog signaling. Using an engineered 
kinesin-2 motor that enables acute inhibition of intraflagellar transport, we 
demonstrate that kinesin-2 KIF3A/KIF3B/KAP mediates the translocation of KIF7 to 
the cilium tip in response to Hedgehog pathway activation. Together, these 
results suggest that KIF7's role at the tip of the cilium is unrelated to its 
ability to bind to microtubules.

DOI: 10.1091/mbc.E21-04-0215
PMCID: PMC8886809
PMID: 34705483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]