---
reference_id: "PMID:39273584"
title: Deep Intronic ETFDH Variants Represent a Recurrent Pathogenic Event in Multiple Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency.
authors:
- Martino S
- "D'Addabbo P"
- Turchiano A
- Radio FC
- Bruselles A
- Cordeddu V
- Mancini C
- Stella A
- Laforgia N
- Capodiferro D
- Simonetti S
- Bagnulo R
- Palumbo O
- Marzano F
- Tabaku O
- Garganese A
- Stasi M
- Tartaglia M
- Pesole G
- Resta N
journal: Int J Mol Sci
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3390/ijms25179637
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Deep Intronic ETFDH Variants Represent a Recurrent Pathogenic Event in Multiple Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency.
**Authors:** Martino S, D'Addabbo P, Turchiano A, Radio FC, Bruselles A, Cordeddu V, Mancini C, Stella A, Laforgia N, Capodiferro D, Simonetti S, Bagnulo R, Palumbo O, Marzano F, Tabaku O, Garganese A, Stasi M, Tartaglia M, Pesole G, Resta N
**Journal:** Int J Mol Sci (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3390/ijms25179637](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25179637)

## Content

1. Int J Mol Sci. 2024 Sep 5;25(17):9637. doi: 10.3390/ijms25179637.

Deep Intronic ETFDH Variants Represent a Recurrent Pathogenic Event in Multiple 
Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase Deficiency.

Martino S(1), D'Addabbo P(2), Turchiano A(1), Radio FC(3), Bruselles A(4), 
Cordeddu V(4), Mancini C(3), Stella A(1), Laforgia N(5), Capodiferro D(5), 
Simonetti S(6), Bagnulo R(1), Palumbo O(7), Marzano F(8), Tabaku O(1), Garganese 
A(9), Stasi M(1), Tartaglia M(3), Pesole G(2)(8), Resta N(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Precision and Regenerative Medicine and 
Ionian Area (DiMePRe-J), University of Bari "Aldo Moro", 70124 Bari, Italy.
(2)Department of Biosciences, Biotechnologies & Environment, University of Bari 
"Aldo Moro", Via Edoardo Orabona 4, 70125 Bari, Italy.
(3)Molecular Genetics and Functional Genomics, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, 
IRCCS, Viale di San Paolo 15, 00146 Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 
Viale Regina Elena 299, 00161 Rome, Italy.
(5)Section of Neonatology and Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, Department of 
Interdisciplinary Medicine, University of Bari "Aldo Moro", 70121 Bari, Italy.
(6)Clinical Pathology and Neonatal Screening, Hospital "Giovanni XXIII", 
University Hospital Consortium Corporation Polyclinics of Bari, 70124 Bari, 
Italy.
(7)Division of Medical Genetics, Fondazione IRCCS-Casa Sollievo della 
Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, 71013 Foggia, Italy.
(8)Institute of Biomembranes, Bioenergetics and Molecular Biotechnologies, 
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Via Amendola 122/O, 70126 Bari, Italy.
(9)Medical Genetic Unit, University Hospital Consortium Corporation Polyclinics 
of Bari, 70124 Bari, Italy.

Multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (MADD) is a rare inborn error of 
metabolism affecting fatty acid and amino acid oxidation with an incidence of 1 
in 200,000 live births. MADD has three clinical phenotypes: severe 
neonatal-onset with or without congenital anomalies, and a milder late-onset 
form. Clinical diagnosis is supported by urinary organic acid and blood 
acylcarnitine analysis using tandem mass spectrometry in newborn screening 
programs. MADD is an autosomal recessive trait caused by biallelic mutations in 
the ETFA, ETFB, and ETFDH genes encoding the alpha and beta subunits of the 
electron transfer flavoprotein (ETF) and ETF-coenzyme Q oxidoreductase enzymes. 
Despite significant advancements in sequencing techniques, many patients remain 
undiagnosed, impacting their access to clinical care and genetic counseling. In 
this report, we achieved a definitive molecular diagnosis in a newborn by 
combining whole-genome sequencing (WGS) with RNA sequencing (RNA-seq). 
Whole-exome sequencing and next-generation gene panels fail to detect variants, 
possibly affecting splicing, in deep intronic regions. Here, we report a unique 
deep intronic mutation in intron 1 of the ETFDH gene, c.35-959A>G, in a patient 
with early-onset lethal MADD, resulting in pseudo-exon inclusion. The identified 
variant is the third mutation reported in this region, highlighting ETFDH intron 
1 vulnerability. It cannot be excluded that these intronic sequence features may 
be more common in other genes than is currently believed. This study highlights 
the importance of incorporating RNA analysis into genome-wide testing to reveal 
the functional consequences of intronic mutations.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms25179637
PMCID: PMC11395610
PMID: 39273584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.