---
reference_id: "PMID:35086064"
title: "Detecting Mental Health Behaviors Using Mobile Interactions: Exploratory Study Focusing on Binge Eating."
authors:
- Vega J
- Bell BT
- Taylor C
- Xie J
- Ng H
- Honary M
- McNaney R
journal: JMIR Ment Health
year: '2022'
doi: 10.2196/32146
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Detecting Mental Health Behaviors Using Mobile Interactions: Exploratory Study Focusing on Binge Eating.
**Authors:** Vega J, Bell BT, Taylor C, Xie J, Ng H, Honary M, McNaney R
**Journal:** JMIR Ment Health (2022)
**DOI:** [10.2196/32146](https://doi.org/10.2196/32146)

## Content

1. JMIR Ment Health. 2022 Apr 25;9(4):e32146. doi: 10.2196/32146.

Detecting Mental Health Behaviors Using Mobile Interactions: Exploratory Study 
Focusing on Binge Eating.

Vega J(1), Bell BT(2), Taylor C(3), Xie J(4), Ng H(4), Honary M(5), McNaney 
R(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United 
States.
(2)University of York, York, United Kingdom.
(3)York St John University, York, United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Human Centred Computing, Monash University, Clayton, Australia.
(5)Lancaster University, Lancaster, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Binge eating is a subjective loss of control while eating, which 
leads to the consumption of large amounts of food. It can cause significant 
emotional distress and is often accompanied by purging behaviors (eg, meal 
skipping, overexercising, or vomiting).
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to explore the potential of mobile sensing 
to detect indicators of binge-eating episodes, with a view toward informing the 
design of future context-aware mobile interventions.
METHODS: This study was conducted in 2 stages. The first involved the 
development of the DeMMI (Detecting Mental health behaviors using Mobile 
Interactions) app. As part of this, we conducted a consultation session to 
explore whether the types of sensor data we were proposing to capture were 
useful and appropriate, as well as to gather feedback on some specific app 
features relating to self-reporting. The second stage involved conducting a 
6-week period of data collection with 10 participants experiencing binge eating 
(logging both their mood and episodes of binge eating) and 10 comparison 
participants (logging only mood). An optional interview was conducted after the 
study, which discussed their experience using the app, and 8 participants (n=3, 
38% binge eating and n=5, 63% comparisons) consented.
RESULTS: The findings showed unique differences in the types of sensor data that 
were triangulated with the individuals' episodes (with nearby Bluetooth devices, 
screen and app use features, mobility features, and mood scores showing 
relevance). Participants had a largely positive opinion about the app, its 
unobtrusive role, and its ease of use. Interacting with the app increased 
participants' awareness of and reflection on their mood and phone usage 
patterns. Moreover, they expressed no privacy concerns as these were alleviated 
by the study information sheet.
CONCLUSIONS: This study contributes a series of recommendations for future 
studies wishing to scale our approach and for the design of bespoke mobile 
interventions to support this population.

©Julio Vega, Beth T Bell, Caitlin Taylor, Jue Xie, Heidi Ng, Mahsa Honary, 
Roisin McNaney. Originally published in JMIR Mental Health 
(https://mental.jmir.org), 25.04.2022.

DOI: 10.2196/32146
PMCID: PMC9086876
PMID: 35086064

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.