---
reference_id: "PMID:29566257"
title: Seven additional families with spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome with novel biallelic deleterious variants in FLNB.
authors:
- Salian S
- Shukla A
- Shah H
- Bhat SN
- Bhat VR
- Nampoothiri S
- Shenoy R
- Phadke SR
- Hariharan SV
- Girisha KM
journal: Clin Genet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1111/cge.13252
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Seven additional families with spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome with novel biallelic deleterious variants in FLNB.
**Authors:** Salian S, Shukla A, Shah H, Bhat SN, Bhat VR, Nampoothiri S, Shenoy R, Phadke SR, Hariharan SV, Girisha KM
**Journal:** Clin Genet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1111/cge.13252](https://doi.org/10.1111/cge.13252)

## Content

1. Clin Genet. 2018 Jul;94(1):159-164. doi: 10.1111/cge.13252. Epub 2018 Apr 14.

Seven additional families with spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome with 
novel biallelic deleterious variants in FLNB.

Salian S(1), Shukla A(1), Shah H(2), Bhat SN(2), Bhat VR(1), Nampoothiri S(3), 
Shenoy R(4), Phadke SR(5), Hariharan SV(6), Girisha KM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal Academy of 
Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka, India.
(2)Department of Orthopedics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal Academy of 
Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka, India.
(3)Department of Pediatric Genetics, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and 
Research Centre, Cochin, Kerala, India.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, KS Hegde Medical Academy, Mangalore, Karnataka, 
India.
(5)Department of Medical Genetics, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of 
Medical Sciences, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Sree Avittom Thirunal Hospital, Government Medical 
College, Trivandrum, Kerala, India.

The location and/or type of variants in FLNB result in a spectrum of 
osteochondrodysplasias ranging from mild forms, like spondylocarpotarsal 
synostosis syndrome and Larsen syndrome, to severe perinatal lethal forms, such 
as atelosteogenesis I and III and Boomerang dysplasia. Spondylocarpotarsal 
synostosis syndrome is characterized by disproportionate short stature, 
vertebral anomalies and fusion of carpal and tarsal bones. Biallelic 
loss-of-function variants in FLNB are known to cause spondylocarpotarsal 
synostosis syndrome and 9 families and 9 pathogenic variants have been reported 
so far. We report clinical features of 10 additional patients from 7 families 
with spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome due to 7 novel deleterious variants 
in FLNB, thus expanding the clinical and molecular repertoire of 
spondylocarpotarsal synostosis syndrome. Our report validates key clinical 
(fused thoracic vertebrae and carpal and tarsal coalition) and molecular 
(truncating variants in FLNB) characteristics of this condition.

© 2018 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cge.13252
PMID: 29566257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]