---
reference_id: "PMID:36324907"
title: Isolated central nervous system Whipple disease.
authors:
- Barbero-Aznarez P
- Perez-Tanoira R
- Aguirre-Mollehuanca D
- Trascasa-Caño A
- Fortes-Alen J
- Manzarbeitia-Arrambari F
- Castillo-Alvarez J
- Montoya-Bordon J
- Petkova-Saiz E
- Prieto-Perez L
journal: Surg Neurol Int
year: '2022'
doi: 10.25259/SNI_591_2022
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Isolated central nervous system Whipple disease.
**Authors:** Barbero-Aznarez P, Perez-Tanoira R, Aguirre-Mollehuanca D, Trascasa-Caño A, Fortes-Alen J, Manzarbeitia-Arrambari F, Castillo-Alvarez J, Montoya-Bordon J, Petkova-Saiz E, Prieto-Perez L
**Journal:** Surg Neurol Int (2022)
**DOI:** [10.25259/SNI_591_2022](https://doi.org/10.25259/SNI_591_2022)

## Content

1. Surg Neurol Int. 2022 Oct 21;13:477. doi: 10.25259/SNI_591_2022. eCollection 
2022.

Isolated central nervous system Whipple disease.

Barbero-Aznarez P(1), Perez-Tanoira R(2), Aguirre-Mollehuanca D(3), 
Trascasa-Caño A(4), Fortes-Alen J(5), Manzarbeitia-Arrambari F(5), 
Castillo-Alvarez J(6), Montoya-Bordon J(7), Petkova-Saiz E(6), Prieto-Perez 
L(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Instituto Clavel, San Francisco De Asis 
University Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Principe de Asturias University Hospital, Madrid, 
Spain.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Fundacion Jimenez Diaz University Hospital, 
Madrid, Spain.
(4)Department of Pathology, Infanta Elena University Hospital, Valdemoro, Spain.
(5)Department of Pathology, Fundacion Jimenez Diaz University Hospital, Madrid, 
Spain.
(6)Internal Medicine, Fundacion Jimenez Diaz University Hospital, Madrid, Spain.
(7)Radiology, Fundacion Jimenez Diaz University Hospital, Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Whipple disease (WD) is an infection caused by Tropheryma whipplei, 
which might present in three different forms: classical, localized, and isolated 
in the central nervous system (CNS).
METHODS: We report the result of a systematic review of the literature on WD 
unusually presenting with exclusively neurological symptoms, including two 
previously unpublished cases. A description of two cases with isolated CNS WD 
was performed, as well as a literature search in Cochrane, Scielo, and PubMed.
RESULTS: Two male adult patients presented with exclusively neurological 
symptomatology. Both magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an intracranial 
mass suggestive of brain tumor. The histopathological examination was consistent 
with WD, with no systemic involvement. In the review of the literature, 35 cases 
of isolated CNS WD were retrieved. The median age at diagnosis was 43.5 (IQR 
31.5-51.5). In 13 patients, the MRI showed a brain mass consistent with a brain 
tumor. The most common finding in the biopsy was the periodic-acid 
Schiff-stained foamy macrophages. Only five cases presented the pathognomonic 
sign of oculomasticatory myorhythmia. Thirteen cases had an adverse outcome that 
resulted in death during follow-up, whereas another 13 improved. The other nine 
patients remained stable or presented moderate improvement.
CONCLUSION: Isolated CNS WD is a rare disease that should be considered among 
the differential diagnosis of CNS mass lesions. Brain biopsy is necessary to 
establish the diagnosis. It is stressed in the literature that an extended 
antibiotic course is required to prevent relapses and to control the disease.

Copyright: © 2022 Surgical Neurology International.

DOI: 10.25259/SNI_591_2022
PMCID: PMC9609810
PMID: 36324907

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of Interest.