---
reference_id: PMID:17115047
title: Correction of junctional epidermolysis bullosa by transplantation of genetically modified epidermal stem cells.
authors:
- Mavilio F
- Pellegrini G
- Ferrari S
- Di Nunzio F
- Di Iorio E
- Recchia A
- Maruggi G
- Ferrari G
- Provasi E
- Bonini C
- Capurro S
- Conti A
- Magnoni C
- Giannetti A
- De Luca M
journal: Nat Med
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1038/nm1504
keywords:
- 3T3 Cells
- Adult
- Animals
- Cell Adhesion Molecules/genetics
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Epidermal Cells
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa, Junctional/therapy"
- Feasibility Studies
- Genetic Therapy/methods
- Genetic Vectors
- Humans
- Male
- Mice
- Retroviridae
- Stem Cell Transplantation
- Tissue Engineering/methods
- Kalinin
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Correction of junctional epidermolysis bullosa by transplantation of genetically modified epidermal stem cells.
**Authors:** Mavilio F, Pellegrini G, Ferrari S, Di Nunzio F, Di Iorio E, Recchia A, Maruggi G, Ferrari G, Provasi E, Bonini C, Capurro S, Conti A, Magnoni C, Giannetti A, De Luca M
**Journal:** Nat Med (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nm1504](https://doi.org/10.1038/nm1504)

## Content

1. Nat Med. 2006 Dec;12(12):1397-402. doi: 10.1038/nm1504. Epub 2006 Nov 19.

Correction of junctional epidermolysis bullosa by transplantation of genetically 
modified epidermal stem cells.

Mavilio F(1), Pellegrini G, Ferrari S, Di Nunzio F, Di Iorio E, Recchia A, 
Maruggi G, Ferrari G, Provasi E, Bonini C, Capurro S, Conti A, Magnoni C, 
Giannetti A, De Luca M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, 
Via Campi 287, 41100 Modena, Italy. fulvio.mavilio@unimore.it

Comment in
    Nature. 2017 Nov 8;551(7679):141. doi: 10.1038/551141a.

The continuous renewal of human epidermis is sustained by stem cells contained 
in the epidermal basal layer and in hair follicles. Cultured keratinocyte stem 
cells, known as holoclones, generate sheets of epithelium used to restore severe 
skin, mucosal and corneal defects. Mutations in genes encoding the basement 
membrane component laminin 5 (LAM5) cause junctional epidermolysis bullosa 
(JEB), a devastating and often fatal skin adhesion disorder. Epidermal stem 
cells from an adult patient affected by LAM5-beta3-deficient JEB were transduced 
with a retroviral vector expressing LAMB3 cDNA (encoding LAM5-beta3), and used 
to prepare genetically corrected cultured epidermal grafts. Nine grafts were 
transplanted onto surgically prepared regions of the patient's legs. Engraftment 
was complete after 8 d. Synthesis and proper assembly of normal levels of 
functional LAM5 were observed, together with the development of a firmly 
adherent epidermis that remained stable for the duration of the follow-up (1 
year) in the absence of blisters, infections, inflammation or immune response. 
Retroviral integration site analysis indicated that the regenerated epidermis is 
maintained by a defined repertoire of transduced stem cells. These data show 
that ex vivo gene therapy of JEB is feasible and leads to full functional 
correction of the disease.

DOI: 10.1038/nm1504
PMID: 17115047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]