---
reference_id: PMID:20929962
title: "GPR56-related bilateral frontoparietal polymicrogyria: further evidence for an overlap with the cobblestone complex."
authors:
- Bahi-Buisson N
- Poirier K
- Boddaert N
- Fallet-Bianco C
- Specchio N
- Bertini E
- Caglayan O
- Lascelles K
- Elie C
- Rambaud J
- Baulac M
- An I
- Dias P
- des Portes V
- Moutard ML
- Soufflet C
- El Maleh M
- Beldjord C
- Villard L
- Chelly J
journal: Brain
year: '2010'
doi: 10.1093/brain/awq259
keywords:
- "Abortion, Induced"
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Cobblestone Lissencephaly/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Female
- "Fetal Diseases/genetics, pathology"
- Frameshift Mutation
- Frontal Lobe/pathology
- "Genes, Overlapping"
- Humans
- Infant
- Male
- "Malformations of Cortical Development/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- "Mutation, Missense"
- Parietal Lobe/pathology
- Pedigree
- "Receptors, G-Protein-Coupled/genetics"
- Syndrome
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# GPR56-related bilateral frontoparietal polymicrogyria: further evidence for an overlap with the cobblestone complex.
**Authors:** Bahi-Buisson N, Poirier K, Boddaert N, Fallet-Bianco C, Specchio N, Bertini E, Caglayan O, Lascelles K, Elie C, Rambaud J, Baulac M, An I, Dias P, des Portes V, Moutard ML, Soufflet C, El Maleh M, Beldjord C, Villard L, Chelly J
**Journal:** Brain (2010)
**DOI:** [10.1093/brain/awq259](https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awq259)

## Content

1. Brain. 2010 Nov;133(11):3194-209. doi: 10.1093/brain/awq259. Epub 2010 Oct 7.

GPR56-related bilateral frontoparietal polymicrogyria: further evidence for an 
overlap with the cobblestone complex.

Bahi-Buisson N(1), Poirier K, Boddaert N, Fallet-Bianco C, Specchio N, Bertini 
E, Caglayan O, Lascelles K, Elie C, Rambaud J, Baulac M, An I, Dias P, des 
Portes V, Moutard ML, Soufflet C, El Maleh M, Beldjord C, Villard L, Chelly J.

Author information:
(1)Service de Neurologie pédiatrique, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris 
(AP-HP), hôpital Necker, Paris, France. nadia.bahi-buisson@nck.aphp.fr

GPR56 mutations cause an autosomal recessive polymicrogyria syndrome that has 
distinctive radiological features combining bilateral frontoparietal 
polymicrogyria, white matter abnormalities and cerebellar hypoplasia. Recent 
investigations of a GPR56 knockout mouse model suggest that bilateral 
bifrontoparietal polymicrogyria shares some features of the cobblestone brain 
malformation and demonstrate that loss of GPR56 leads to a dysregulation of the 
maintenance of the pial basement membrane integrity in the forebrain and the 
rostral cerebellum. In light of these findings and other data in the literature, 
this study aimed to refine the clinical features with the first description of a 
foetopathological case and to define the range of cobblestone-like features in 
GPR56 bilateral bifrontoparietal polymicrogyria in a sample of 14 patients. We 
identified homozygous GPR56 mutations in 14 patients from eight consanguineous 
families with typical bilateral bifrontoparietal polymicrogyria and in one 
foetal case, out of 30 patients with bifrontoparietal polymicrogyria referred 
for molecular screening. The foetal case, which was terminated at 35 weeks of 
gestation in view of suspicion of Walker Warburg syndrome, showed a 
cobblestone-like lissencephaly with a succession of normal, polymicrogyric and 
'cobblestone-like' cortex with ectopic neuronal overmigration, agenesis of the 
cerebellar vermis and hypoplastic cerebellar hemispheres with additional 
neuronal overmigration in the pons and the cerebellar cortex. The 14 patients 
with GPR56 mutations (median 8.25 years, range 1.5-33 years) were phenotypically 
homogeneous with a distinctive clinical course characterized by pseudomyopathic 
behaviour at onset that subsequently evolved into severe mental and motor 
retardation. Generalized seizures (12/14) occurred later with onset ranging from 
2.5 to 10 years with consistent electroencephalogram findings of predominantly 
anterior bursts of low amplitude α-like activity. Neuroimaging demonstrated a 
common phenotype with bilateral frontoparietally predominant polymicrogyria 
(13/13), cerebellar dysplasia with cysts mainly affecting the superior vermis 
(11/13) and patchy to diffuse myelination abnormalities (13/13). Additionally, 
the white matter abnormalities showed a peculiar evolution from severe 
hypomyelination at 4 months to patchy lesions later in childhood. Taken as a 
whole, these observations collectively demonstrate that GPR56 bilateral 
bifrontoparietal polymicrogyria combines all the features of a cobblestone-like 
lissencephaly and also suggest that GRP56-related defects produce a phenotypic 
continuum ranging from bilateral bifrontoparietal polymicrogyria to 
cobblestone-like lissencephaly.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awq259
PMID: 20929962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]