---
reference_id: "PMID:28442284"
title: Fitness Fatness Index and Alzheimer-specific mortality.
authors:
- Frith E
- Loprinzi PD
journal: Eur J Intern Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2017.04.015
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Fitness Fatness Index and Alzheimer-specific mortality.
**Authors:** Frith E, Loprinzi PD
**Journal:** Eur J Intern Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ejim.2017.04.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejim.2017.04.015)

## Content

1. Eur J Intern Med. 2017 Jul;42:51-53. doi: 10.1016/j.ejim.2017.04.015. Epub
2017  Apr 22.

Fitness Fatness Index and Alzheimer-specific mortality.

Frith E(1), Loprinzi PD(2).

Author information:
(1)Physical Activity Epidemiology Laboratory, Department of Health, Exercise 
Science and Recreation Management, University of Mississippi, MS 38677, United 
States; Exercise Psychology Laboratory, Department of Health, Exercise Science 
and Recreation Management, University of Mississippi, MS 38677, United States.
(2)Physical Activity Epidemiology Laboratory, Department of Health, Exercise 
Science and Recreation Management, University of Mississippi, MS 38677, United 
States; Exercise Psychology Laboratory, Department of Health, Exercise Science 
and Recreation Management, University of Mississippi, MS 38677, United States; 
Jackson Heart Study Vanguard Center of Oxford, Department of Health, Exercise 
Science and Recreation Management, University of Mississippi, MS 38677, United 
States. Electronic address: pdloprin@olemiss.edu.

OBJECTIVE: We evaluated the specific association between a Fitness Fat Index 
(FFI) and Alzheimer's-specific mortality among a national sample of the broader 
U.S. adult population.
METHODS: FFI was calculated as cardiorespiratory fitness (CRF) divided by 
waist-to-height ratio (WHR). Data from the 1999-2006 National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) were used to identify 16,146 participants, 
ages 20-85. Data from participants in these cycles were linked to death 
certificate data from the National Death Index. Person-months of follow-up were 
calculated from the date of the interview until date of death or censoring on 
December 31, 2011, whichever came first.
RESULTS: In a Cox proportional hazard model, for every 1 FFI unit increase, 
participants had a 14% reduced hazard of Alzheimer-specific death (HR=0.86; 95% 
CI: 0.83-0.90; P<0.001). When including diabetes and hypertension (via 
physician-diagnosis) as covariates, results were unchanged (HR=0.87; 95% CI: 
0.82-0.91; P<0.001). Results were also unchanged when restricting the sample to 
those 50+years (HR=0.92; 95% CI: 0.88-0.97; P=0.005) or stratifying by men 
(HR=0.85; 95% CI: 0.81-0.91; P<0.001) or women (HR=0.86; 95% CI: 0.79-0.94; 
P=0.002).
CONCLUSION: In this national sample of individuals at risk for Alzheimer's 
disease, increased FFI was associated with reduced risk of Alzheimer's-specific 
death. Thus, a more favorable fitness-to-fatness ratio is associated with 
reduced risk of Alzheimer's-specific mortality, underscoring the importance of 
fitness promoting and fatness reducing strategies.

Copyright © 2017 European Federation of Internal Medicine. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejim.2017.04.015
PMID: 28442284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]