---
reference_id: "PMID:37545826"
title: "Hidradenitis suppurativa and squamous cell carcinoma: a systematic review of the literature."
authors:
- Gierek M
- Niemiec P
- Szyluk K
- Ochala-Gierek G
- Bergler-Czop B
journal: Postepy Dermatol Alergol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.5114/ada.2023.126563
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hidradenitis suppurativa and squamous cell carcinoma: a systematic review of the literature.
**Authors:** Gierek M, Niemiec P, Szyluk K, Ochala-Gierek G, Bergler-Czop B
**Journal:** Postepy Dermatol Alergol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.5114/ada.2023.126563](https://doi.org/10.5114/ada.2023.126563)

## Content

1. Postepy Dermatol Alergol. 2023 Jun;40(3):350-354. doi:
10.5114/ada.2023.126563.  Epub 2023 Apr 21.

Hidradenitis suppurativa and squamous cell carcinoma: a systematic review of the 
literature.

Gierek M(1), Niemiec P(2), Szyluk K(3)(4), Ochala-Gierek G(5), Bergler-Czop 
B(6).

Author information:
(1)Dr Stanisław Sakiel Center for Burns Treatment, Siemianowice Śląskie, Poland.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences 
in Katowice, Medical University of Silesia in Katowice, Poland.
(3)Department of Physiotherapy, Faculty of Health Sciences in Katowice, Medical 
University of Silesia in Katowice, Poland.
(4)District Hospital of Orthopaedics and Trauma Surgery, Piekary Śląskie, 
Poland.
(5)Dermatology Department, City Hospital, Sosnowiec, Poland.
(6)Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland.

Hidradenitis suppurativa (HS) is a chronic disease which is often recurrent and 
occurs as abscesses of the apocrine gland. The most common locations of HS are 
gluteal/perianal, axillary or inguinal. It is reasonable to assume that squamous 
cell carcinoma may arise from HS. As researchers in the field of dermatology, HS 
surgery and conventional surgical oncology, we studied whether there is any 
correlation between HS and neoplasms. Evidence shows a correlation between HS 
and squamous cell carcinoma. The aim of the study was to find literature about 
HS and SCC and analyse potential risk factors. This is a systemic review 
concerning squamous cell carcinoma and hidradenitis suppurativa.

Copyright: © 2023 Termedia Sp. z o. o.

DOI: 10.5114/ada.2023.126563
PMCID: PMC10399683
PMID: 37545826

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.