---
reference_id: "PMID:27463098"
title: Epidemiology of Inherited Epidermolysis Bullosa Based on Incidence and Prevalence Estimates From the National Epidermolysis Bullosa Registry.
authors:
- Fine JD
journal: JAMA Dermatol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2016.2473
keywords:
- Cross-Sectional Studies
- "Epidermolysis Bullosa/classification, epidemiology, genetics, pathology"
- Follow-Up Studies
- Humans
- Incidence
- Longitudinal Studies
- Prevalence
- Prospective Studies
- "Registries/statistics & numerical data"
- United States/epidemiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Epidemiology of Inherited Epidermolysis Bullosa Based on Incidence and Prevalence Estimates From the National Epidermolysis Bullosa Registry.
**Authors:** Fine JD
**Journal:** JAMA Dermatol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1001/jamadermatol.2016.2473](https://doi.org/10.1001/jamadermatol.2016.2473)

## Content

1. JAMA Dermatol. 2016 Nov 1;152(11):1231-1238. doi: 
10.1001/jamadermatol.2016.2473.

Epidemiology of Inherited Epidermolysis Bullosa Based on Incidence and 
Prevalence Estimates From the National Epidermolysis Bullosa Registry.

Fine JD(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Dermatology, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University School 
of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee2Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt 
University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee3National Epidermolysis 
Bullosa Registry, Nashville, Tennessee.

IMPORTANCE: Accurate estimation of the incidence and prevalence of each subtype 
of epidermolysis bullosa (EB) is essential before clinical trials can be 
designed and sufficient funding allocated by government agencies and third-party 
insurers for the care of these individuals.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the incidence and prevalence of inherited EB stratified 
by subtype in the United States during a 16-year period.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Prospective cross-sectional and longitudinal 
study. Data were obtained from 3271 patients consecutively enrolled in the 
National Epidermolysis Bullosa Registry from January 1, 1986, through December 
31, 2002, using a detailed instrument created with the assistance of the 
National Institutes of Health. Analyses were performed in January 1999 and April 
2015. Participants were patients of all ages with EB.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Extensive clinical and laboratory data were 
collected on patients who were subclassified and serially revalidated based on 
published diagnostic recommendations by an international panel of experts. 
Pertinent to this report, estimates were made of the incidence and prevalence 
during 2 time frames.
RESULTS: During the first 5 years of funding of the registry, the overall 
incidence and prevalence of inherited EB were 19.60 and 8.22 per 1 million live 
births, respectively. When reassessed over the entire 16 years of the study, the 
prevalence rose to 11.07, whereas the overall incidence remained unchanged at 
19.57 cases. Changes were also observed within some disease subsets as increased 
numbers of patients were identified, recruited, followed up longitudinally, and 
resubclassified as needed over time. For example, in 2002, the prevalence of EBS 
overall and localized EBS had increased considerably by 30.4% and 25.5%, 
respectively, whereas the prevalence of generalized intermediate EBS declined by 
76.7% as a result of later subclassification of some of those patients into 
other subtypes. In contrast, no significant change was noted in the overall 
prevalence of JEB or generalized severe JEB, although there was a 73.0% decline 
in the prevalence of generalized intermediate JEB.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Precise estimates of the incidence and prevalence of 
each major subtype of inherited EB in the United States are now available that 
should assist investigators in choosing which subtypes are amenable to properly 
designed, large-scale, clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1001/jamadermatol.2016.2473
PMID: 27463098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]