---
reference_id: "PMID:26889246"
title: "Infantile Pompe disease: A case report and review of the Chinese literature."
authors:
- Liu Y
- Yang Y
- Wang B
- Wu L
- Liang H
- Kan Q
- Cao Z
- Zhao Y
- Zhou X
journal: Exp Ther Med
year: '2016'
doi: 10.3892/etm.2015.2862
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Infantile Pompe disease: A case report and review of the Chinese literature.
**Authors:** Liu Y, Yang Y, Wang B, Wu L, Liang H, Kan Q, Cao Z, Zhao Y, Zhou X
**Journal:** Exp Ther Med (2016)
**DOI:** [10.3892/etm.2015.2862](https://doi.org/10.3892/etm.2015.2862)

## Content

1. Exp Ther Med. 2016 Jan;11(1):235-238. doi: 10.3892/etm.2015.2862. Epub 2015
Nov  12.

Infantile Pompe disease: A case report and review of the Chinese literature.

Liu Y(1), Yang Y(1), Wang B(1), Wu L(1), Liang H(1), Kan Q(1), Cao Z(1), Zhao
Y(1), Zhou X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neonates, Nanjing Children's Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210008, P.R. China.

Pompe disease, also known as glycogen storage disease type II, is caused by acid
maltase deficiency, and can lead to lysosomal glycogen storage. The primal
manifestations may be observed in children and adults, and also in infants. In
general, the clinical spectrum in infants is more progressive and lethal than
that in older patients. This case report describes the case of a newborn who was
found to have cardiac hypertrophy, hepatomegaly and elevated serum enzyme
levels, which was characterized by an aspartate aminotransferase level of 95
U/l, lactate dehydrogenase level of 778 U/l and creatine kinase level of 1,299
U/l. On the basis of the clinical signs and laboratory results, dried blood
spots from the baby were tested to determine the acid α-glucosidase (GAA)
activity, and the result confirmed that the GAA activity was only 0.10
pmol/punch/h (normal reference range, 2.88-89.02 pmol/punch/h) at pH 3.8, which
was clearly lower than the normal range, leading to a diagnosis of Pompe
disease. Pompe disease is incurable, and before the introduction of enzyme
replacement therapy (ERT), pain relief was the main treatment. Recognizing this
disease earlier and starting ERT in infants prior to the development of clinical
symptoms is likely to improve the quality of life of patients.

DOI: 10.3892/etm.2015.2862
PMCID: PMC4726885
PMID: 26889246
