---
reference_id: "PMID:25343126"
title: Radiographic characteristics of the hand and cervical spine in fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva.
authors:
- Mishima K
- Kitoh H
- Haga N
- Nakashima Y
- Kamizono J
- Katagiri T
- Susami T
- Matsushita M
- Ishiguro N
journal: Intractable Rare Dis Res
year: '2014'
doi: 10.5582/irdr.2014.01009
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Radiographic characteristics of the hand and cervical spine in fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva.
**Authors:** Mishima K, Kitoh H, Haga N, Nakashima Y, Kamizono J, Katagiri T, Susami T, Matsushita M, Ishiguro N
**Journal:** Intractable Rare Dis Res (2014)
**DOI:** [10.5582/irdr.2014.01009](https://doi.org/10.5582/irdr.2014.01009)

## Content

1. Intractable Rare Dis Res. 2014 May;3(2):46-51. doi: 10.5582/irdr.2014.01009.

Radiographic characteristics of the hand and cervical spine in fibrodysplasia
ossificans progressiva.

Mishima K(1), Kitoh H(2), Haga N(3), Nakashima Y(3), Kamizono J(3), Katagiri
T(3), Susami T(3), Matsushita M(1), Ishiguro N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Nagoya University Graduate School of
Medicine, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan;
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Nagoya University Graduate School of
Medicine, Nagoya, Aichi, Japan; ; The Research Committee on Fibrodysplasia
Ossificans Progressiva, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)The Research Committee on Fibrodysplasia Ossificans Progressiva, Tokyo,
Japan.

Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva (FOP) is a disabling heritable disorder of
connective tissue characterized by progressive heterotopic ossification in
various extraskeletal sites. Early correct diagnosis of FOP is important to
prevent additional iatrogenic harm or trauma. Congenital malformation of the
great toes is a well-known diagnostic clue, but some patients show
normal-appearing great toes. The thumb shortening and cervical spine
abnormalities are other skeletal features often observed in FOP. This study
aimed to address the quantitative assessment of these features in a cohort of
patients with FOP, which potentially helps early diagnosis of FOP. Radiographs
of the hand and cervical spine were retrospectively analyzed from a total of 18
FOP patients (9 males and 9 females) with an average age of 13.9 years (range
0.7-39.3 years). The elevated ratio of the second metacarpal bone to the distal
phalanx of the thumb (> +1SD) was a consistent finding irrespective of the
patient's age and gender. Infant FOP patients, in addition, exhibited an
extremely high ratio of the second metacarpal bone to the first metacarpal bone
(> +3SD). The height/depth ratio of the C5 vertebra increased in patients over 4
years of age (> +2SD). Additionally, the ratio of (height+depth) of the C5
spinous process to the C5 vertebral depth was markedly elevated in young
patients (> +2SD). We quantitatively demonstrated the hand and cervical spine
characteristics of FOP. These findings, which can be seen from early infancy,
could be useful for early diagnosis of FOP even in patients without great toe
abnormalities.

DOI: 10.5582/irdr.2014.01009
PMCID: PMC4204539
PMID: 25343126
