---
reference_id: "PMID:41727503"
title: "First 2-year experience of nationwide newborn screening for severe forms of T and B cell immunodeficiency: 2.3 million newborns analyzed using TREC and KREC in Russia."
authors:
- Marakhonov A
- Mukhina A
- Efimova I
- Balinova N
- Ampleeva M
- Bobreshova A
- Rodina Y
- Pershin D
- Zabnenkova V
- Ryzhkova O
- Markova Z
- Shilova N
- Zhanin I
- Savostyanov K
- Matulevich S
- Bilalov F
- Koroteev A
- Donnikov A
- Trofimov D
- Bairova T
- Seitova G
- Mordanov S
- Nikolaeva E
- Esmurzieva Z
- Skorobogatova E
- Olkhova L
- Vakhonina L
- Kostenko D
- Bronin G
- Zimin S
- Bykova T
- Balashov D
- Zinchenko R
- Grachev N
- Voronin S
- Shcherbina A
- Kutsev S
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2026'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2026.1742811
keywords:
- Humans
- Neonatal Screening/methods
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Russia/epidemiology
- Male
- Female
- B-Lymphocytes/immunology
- T-Lymphocytes/immunology
- Severe Combined Immunodeficiency/diagnosis
- Exome Sequencing
- "Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/diagnosis, epidemiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# First 2-year experience of nationwide newborn screening for severe forms of T and B cell immunodeficiency: 2.3 million newborns analyzed using TREC and KREC in Russia.
**Authors:** Marakhonov A, Mukhina A, Efimova I, Balinova N, Ampleeva M, Bobreshova A, Rodina Y, Pershin D, Zabnenkova V, Ryzhkova O, Markova Z, Shilova N, Zhanin I, Savostyanov K, Matulevich S, Bilalov F, Koroteev A, Donnikov A, Trofimov D, Bairova T, Seitova G, Mordanov S, Nikolaeva E, Esmurzieva Z, Skorobogatova E, Olkhova L, Vakhonina L, Kostenko D, Bronin G, Zimin S, Bykova T, Balashov D, Zinchenko R, Grachev N, Voronin S, Shcherbina A, Kutsev S
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2026)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2026.1742811](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2026.1742811)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2026 Feb 6;17:1742811. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2026.1742811. 
eCollection 2026.

First 2-year experience of nationwide newborn screening for severe forms of T 
and B cell immunodeficiency: 2.3 million newborns analyzed using TREC and KREC 
in Russia.

Marakhonov A(1), Mukhina A(1)(2), Efimova I(1), Balinova N(1), Ampleeva M(1), 
Bobreshova A(1), Rodina Y(2), Pershin D(2), Zabnenkova V(1), Ryzhkova O(1), 
Markova Z(1), Shilova N(1), Zhanin I(3), Savostyanov K(3), Matulevich S(4), 
Bilalov F(5), Koroteev A(6), Donnikov A(7), Trofimov D(7), Bairova T(8), Seitova 
G(9), Mordanov S(10), Nikolaeva E(11), Esmurzieva Z(12), Skorobogatova E(13), 
Olkhova L(13), Vakhonina L(14), Kostenko D(14), Bronin G(12), Zimin S(12), 
Bykova T(15), Balashov D(2), Zinchenko R(1), Grachev N(2), Voronin S(1), 
Shcherbina A(2), Kutsev S(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russia.
(2)Dmitry Rogachev National Medical Research Center of Pediatric Hematology, 
Oncology and Immunology, Moscow, Russia.
(3)Federal State Autonomous Institution (FSAI) «National Medical Research Center 
for Children's Health» of the Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation, 
Moscow, Russia.
(4)S.V.Ochapovsky Regional Clinical Hospital №1, Krasnodar, Russia.
(5)Republican Medical Genetic Centre, Ufa, Russia.
(6)Diagnostic Centre (Medical Genetic), Saint-Petersburg, Russia.
(7)National Medical Research Center for Obstetrics, Gynecology and Perinatology 
named after Academician V.I. Kulakov, Moscow, Russia.
(8)Scientific Centre for Family Health and Human Reproduction Problems, 
Irkutsk, Russia.
(9)Tomsk National Research Medical Center of the Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Tomsk, Russia.
(10)Rostov State Medical University, Rostov-on-Don, Russia.
(11)Clinical Diagnostic Centre «Mother and Child Healthcare», 
Yekaterinburg, Russia.
(12)Morozovskaya Children's City Clinical Hospital of the Moscow City Health 
Department, Moscow, Russia.
(13)Russian Children's Clinical Hospital of the N.I. Pirogov Russian National 
Research Medical University of the Ministry of Healthcare of the Russian 
Federation, Moscow, Russia.
(14)Pediatric Oncology & Hematology Center, Regional Children's Hospital, 
Yekaterinburg, Russia.
(15)Raisa Gorbacheva Memorial Research Institute for Pediatric Oncology, 
Hematology and Transplantation, Pavlov First Saint Petersburg State Medical 
University, Saint-Petersburg, Russia.

INTRODUCTION: Here, we present the results of a nationwide newborn screening 
(NBS) program in Russia, covering over 2.3 million newborns and employing TREC 
and KREC quantification to improve the identification of severe forms of T 
and/or B cell immunodeficiencies and enable early treatment initiation.
METHODS: A two-tier PCR testing strategy was used to define the screen-positive 
cohort, followed by confirmatory flow cytometry and genetic diagnostics, 
including fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and whole-exome sequencing 
(WES).
RESULTS: A total of 191 patients were diagnosed with defined forms of primary 
immunodeficiencies (PID), encompassing several groups of inborn errors of 
immunity (IEI): severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID), agammaglobulinemia, 
combined immunodeficiency less severe than SCID, and syndromic forms of PID. The 
overall birth prevalence of severe forms of T and/or B cell immunodeficiencies 
was 1 in 12,298 live births (95%CI: 1:10,672-1:14,247), corresponding to 8.13 
cases per 100,000 newborns (95%CI: 7.02-9.37). Although the positive predictive 
value of KREC-based screening was relatively low, its use enabled the detection 
of a substantial proportion of patients with syndromic forms of PID, including 
Nijmegen breakage syndrome and ataxia-telangiectasia, along with various forms 
of agammaglobulinemia. Interestingly, 16% of diagnosed newborns had a positive 
family history, often with previously undiagnosed affected siblings or parents. 
Additionally, a considerable number of newborns detected by NBS presented with 
syndromic disorders not currently classified as IEI, suggesting potential 
avenues for future expansion of the IEI list.
DISCUSSION: Importantly, early diagnosis through NBS allowed for the timely 
initiation of disease-specific treatments, including hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation (HSCT), immunoglobulin replacement therapy, and targeted 
immunosuppressive or supportive care strategies. Early intervention may reduce 
the risk of severe infections, improve neurodevelopmental outcomes, and prevent 
irreversible organ damage or malignancies in predisposed syndromes. Overall, our 
study demonstrates the effectiveness of large-scale implementation of 
TREC/KREC-based NBS in identifying a broad spectrum of immunodeficiencies and 
highlights future directions for improving NBS algorithms, follow-up protocols, 
and individualized medical management for affected infants.

Copyright © 2026 Marakhonov, Mukhina, Efimova, Balinova, Ampleeva, Bobreshova, 
Rodina, Pershin, Zabnenkova, Ryzhkova, Markova, Shilova, Zhanin, Savostyanov, 
Matulevich, Bilalov, Koroteev, Donnikov, Trofimov, Bairova, Seitova, Mordanov, 
Nikolaeva, Esmurzieva, Skorobogatova, Olkhova, Vakhonina, Kostenko, Bronin, 
Zimin, Bykova, Balashov, Zinchenko, Grachev, Voronin, Shcherbina and Kutsev.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2026.1742811
PMCID: PMC12920452
PMID: 41727503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared that this work was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.