---
reference_id: "PMID:35358002"
title: "Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli: intestinal pathogenesis mechanisms and colonization resistance by gut microbiota."
authors:
- Zhang Y
- Tan P
- Zhao Y
- Ma X
journal: Gut Microbes
year: '2022'
doi: 10.1080/19490976.2022.2055943
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli: intestinal pathogenesis mechanisms and colonization resistance by gut microbiota.
**Authors:** Zhang Y, Tan P, Zhao Y, Ma X
**Journal:** Gut Microbes (2022)
**DOI:** [10.1080/19490976.2022.2055943](https://doi.org/10.1080/19490976.2022.2055943)

## Content

1. Gut Microbes. 2022 Jan-Dec;14(1):2055943. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2022.2055943.

Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli: intestinal pathogenesis mechanisms and 
colonization resistance by gut microbiota.

Zhang Y(1), Tan P(1), Zhao Y(1), Ma X(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition, Department of Animal Nutrition and 
Feed Science, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China.

Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli (ETEC) is a major cause of diarrhea in children 
and travelers in developing countries. ETEC is characterized by the ability to 
produce major virulence factors including colonization factors (CFs) and 
enterotoxins, that bind to specific receptors on epithelial cells and induce 
diarrhea. The gut microbiota is a stable and sophisticated ecosystem that 
performs a range of beneficial functions for the host, including protection 
against pathogen colonization. Understanding the pathogenic mechanisms of ETEC 
and the interaction between the gut microbiota and ETEC represents not only a 
research need but also an opportunity and challenge to develop precautions for 
ETEC infection. Herein, this review focuses on recent discoveries about ETEC 
etiology, pathogenesis and clinical manifestation, and discusses the 
colonization resistances mediated by gut microbiota, as well as preventative 
strategies against ETEC with an aim to provide novel insights that can reduce 
the adverse effect on human health.

DOI: 10.1080/19490976.2022.2055943
PMCID: PMC8973357
PMID: 35358002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.