---
reference_id: "PMID:37147851"
title: "Gene Therapy for Dopamine Dyshomeostasis: From Parkinson's to Primary Neurotransmitter Diseases."
authors:
- Ng J
- Barral S
- Waddington SN
- Kurian MA
journal: Mov Disord
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1002/mds.29416
keywords:
- Neurotransmitter Agents
- Dystonic Disorders
- "Aromatic-L-Amino-Acid Decarboxylases/genetics, therapeutic use"
- Humans
- Dopamine
- Genetic Therapy
- Child
- "Parkinson Disease/therapy, drug therapy"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gene Therapy for Dopamine Dyshomeostasis: From Parkinson's to Primary Neurotransmitter Diseases.
**Authors:** Ng J, Barral S, Waddington SN, Kurian MA
**Journal:** Mov Disord (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mds.29416](https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.29416)

## Content

1. Mov Disord. 2023 Jun;38(6):924-936. doi: 10.1002/mds.29416. Epub 2023 May 5.

Gene Therapy for Dopamine Dyshomeostasis: From Parkinson's to Primary 
Neurotransmitter Diseases.

Ng J(1)(2), Barral S(3), Waddington SN(1)(4), Kurian MA(3)(5).

Author information:
(1)Gene Transfer Technology Group, EGA-Institute for Women's Health, University 
College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Genetic Therapy Accelerator Centre, Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, 
Queen Square Institute of Neurology, University College London, London, United 
Kingdom.
(3)Developmental Neurosciences, Zayed Centre for Research into Rare Disease in 
Children, GOS-Institute of Child Health, University College London, London, 
United Kingdom.
(4)Wits/SAMRC Antiviral Gene Therapy Research Unit, Faculty of Health Sciences, 
University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.
(5)Department of Neurology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London, 
United Kingdom.

Neurological disorders encompass a broad range of neurodegenerative and 
neurodevelopmental diseases that are complex and almost universally without 
disease modifying treatments. There is, therefore, significant unmet clinical 
need to develop novel therapeutic strategies for these patients. Viral gene 
therapies are a promising approach, where gene delivery is achieved through 
viral vectors such as adeno-associated virus and lentivirus. The clinical 
efficacy of such gene therapies has already been observed in two neurological 
disorders of pediatric onset; for spinal muscular atrophy and aromatic L-amino 
acid decarboxylase (AADC) deficiency, gene therapy has significantly modified 
the natural history of disease in these life-limiting neurological disorders. 
Here, we review recent advances in gene therapy, focused on the targeted 
delivery of dopaminergic genes for Parkinson's disease and the primary 
neurotransmitter disorders, AADC deficiency and dopamine transporter deficiency 
syndrome (DTDS). Although recent European Medicines Agency and Medicines and 
Healthcare products Regulatory Agency approval of Upstaza (eladocagene 
exuparvovec) signifies an important landmark, numerous challenges remain. Future 
research will need to focus on defining the optimal therapeutic window for 
clinical intervention, better understanding of the duration of therapeutic 
efficacy, and improved brain targeting. © 2023 The Authors. Movement Disorders 
published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on behalf of International Parkinson and 
Movement Disorder Society.

© 2023 The Authors. Movement Disorders published by Wiley Periodicals LLC on 
behalf of International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.29416
PMCID: PMC10946997
PMID: 37147851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]