---
reference_id: "PMID:33527178"
title: Clinical implications of thrombocytosis in acute phase Kawasaki disease.
authors:
- Park JH
- Choi HJ
journal: Eur J Pediatr
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1007/s00431-021-03966-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Clinical implications of thrombocytosis in acute phase Kawasaki disease.
**Authors:** Park JH, Choi HJ
**Journal:** Eur J Pediatr (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00431-021-03966-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00431-021-03966-8)

## Content

1. Eur J Pediatr. 2021 Jun;180(6):1841-1846. doi: 10.1007/s00431-021-03966-8.
Epub  2021 Feb 1.

Clinical implications of thrombocytosis in acute phase Kawasaki disease.

Park JH(1), Choi HJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keimyung University School of Medicine, Keimyung 
University Dongsan Hospital, 1095 Dalgubeol-daero, Dalseo-gu, Daegu, 42601, 
Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Keimyung University School of Medicine, Keimyung 
University Dongsan Hospital, 1095 Dalgubeol-daero, Dalseo-gu, Daegu, 42601, 
Republic of Korea. joung756@dsmc.or.kr.

In Kawasaki disease (KD), thrombocytosis is commonly found in the subacute 
phase. However, the exact significance of thrombocytosis in the acute phase of 
KD is unclear. To evaluate serum platelet counts in patients during the acute 
phase of KD and assess the clinical outcomes according to the degree of 
thrombocytosis, we collected data of KD patients between 2009 and 2017. A total 
of 505 patients with KD were enrolled, and 249 (49.3%) patients had 
thrombocytosis, including mild (69.5%), moderate (21.7%), severe (4.8%), and 
extreme (4.0%) thrombocytosis. Correlation analysis revealed a positive 
correlation between the maximum platelet count and admission duration (r = 
0.359, p < 0.001) and fever duration (r = 0.204, p < 0.001). The maximum 
platelet count was significantly higher in IVIG non-responders than that in IVIG 
responders (629 ± 201 × 109/L vs. 499 ± 154 × 109/L, p < 0.001), and in patients 
with coronary artery dilatation (CAD) than in those without CAD (602 ± 201 × 
109/L vs. 512 ± 164 × 109/L, p < 0.001).Conclusion: Thrombocytosis in acute 
phase KD was associated with poor clinical outcomes such as IVIG 
non-responsiveness, CAD, and prolonged admission and fever durations. What is 
Known: • Thrombocytopenia in the acute phase of KD is related to 
non-responsiveness to IVIG and the risk of coronary artery dilatation. • The 
exact significance of thrombocytosis in the acute phase of KD as a benign 
phenomenon or a signal of poor outcome of KD is unclear. What is New: • 
Thrombocytosis in acute phase KD was associated with poor clinical outcomes such 
as IVIG non-responsiveness, CAD, and prolonged admission and fever durations.

DOI: 10.1007/s00431-021-03966-8
PMID: 33527178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]