---
reference_id: "PMID:21219212"
title: Misdiagnosis of Addison's disease in a patient with end-stage renal disease.
authors:
- Kocyigit I
- Unal A
- Tanriverdi F
- Hayri Sipahioglu M
- Tokgoz B
- Oymak O
- Utas C
journal: Ren Fail
year: '2011'
doi: 10.3109/0886022X.2010.528114
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Misdiagnosis of Addison's disease in a patient with end-stage renal disease.
**Authors:** Kocyigit I, Unal A, Tanriverdi F, Hayri Sipahioglu M, Tokgoz B, Oymak O, Utas C
**Journal:** Ren Fail (2011)
**DOI:** [10.3109/0886022X.2010.528114](https://doi.org/10.3109/0886022X.2010.528114)

## Content

1. Ren Fail. 2011;33(1):88-91. doi: 10.3109/0886022X.2010.528114.

Misdiagnosis of Addison's disease in a patient with end-stage renal disease.

Kocyigit I(1), Unal A, Tanriverdi F, Hayri Sipahioglu M, Tokgoz B, Oymak O, Utas 
C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nephrology, Erciyes University Medical School, Kayseri, Turkey. 
ikocyigit@erciyes.edu.tr

Addison's disease is a rare disorder in patients with end-stage renal disease 
(ESRD). In patients, the diagnosis of Addison's disease is difficult in clinical 
practice because most of the clinical findings of this disease are similar to 
those of the renal failure. We present a 51-year-old male patient, who underwent 
hemodialysis therapy for 8 years, diagnosed with Addison's disease after having 
myalgia, skin hyperpigmentation, weight loss, sweating, and nausea for the past 
few weeks. The physical examination was completely normal except for muscle 
weakness, hyperpigmentation on labial mucosa and skin in a patient. The 
laboratory tests revealed anemia and hypoglycemia. Serum cortisol, 
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) levels, and ACTH stimulation test results 
were consistent with Addison's disease. Adrenal computerized tomography revealed 
bilateral atrophic glands. Additionally, it was found that elevated serum 
thyroid stimulating hormone levels and antithyroid peroxidase antibody titer 
were positive. Our purpose is to emphasize that physicians should be alert to 
the potential for additional different conditions particularly in terms of 
adrenal failure in patients with ESRD.

DOI: 10.3109/0886022X.2010.528114
PMID: 21219212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]