---
reference_id: "PMID:15934115"
title: "Activation of the endoplasmic reticulum stress response in autoimmune myositis: potential role in muscle fiber damage and dysfunction."
authors:
- Nagaraju K
- Casciola-Rosen L
- Lundberg I
- Rawat R
- Cutting S
- Thapliyal R
- Chang J
- Dwivedi S
- Mitsak M
- Chen YW
- Plotz P
- Rosen A
- Hoffman E
- Raben N
journal: Arthritis Rheum
year: '2005'
doi: 10.1002/art.21103
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Activation of the endoplasmic reticulum stress response in autoimmune myositis: potential role in muscle fiber damage and dysfunction.
**Authors:** Nagaraju K, Casciola-Rosen L, Lundberg I, Rawat R, Cutting S, Thapliyal R, Chang J, Dwivedi S, Mitsak M, Chen YW, Plotz P, Rosen A, Hoffman E, Raben N
**Journal:** Arthritis Rheum (2005)
**DOI:** [10.1002/art.21103](https://doi.org/10.1002/art.21103)

## Content

1. Arthritis Rheum. 2005 Jun;52(6):1824-35. doi: 10.1002/art.21103.

Activation of the endoplasmic reticulum stress response in autoimmune myositis: 
potential role in muscle fiber damage and dysfunction.

Nagaraju K(1), Casciola-Rosen L, Lundberg I, Rawat R, Cutting S, Thapliyal R, 
Chang J, Dwivedi S, Mitsak M, Chen YW, Plotz P, Rosen A, Hoffman E, Raben N.

Author information:
(1)Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA. 
knagaraj@jhmi.edu

OBJECTIVE: The etiology and pathogenesis of human inflammatory myopathies remain 
unclear. Findings of several studies suggest that the degree of inflammation 
does not correlate consistently with the severity of clinical disease or of 
structural changes in the muscle fibers, indicating that nonimmune pathways may 
contribute to the pathogenesis of myositis. This study was undertaken to 
investigate these pathways in myositis patients and in a class I major 
histocompatibility complex (MHC)-transgenic mouse model of myositis.
METHODS: We examined muscle tissue from human myositis patients and from class I 
MHC-transgenic mice for nonimmune pathways, using biochemical, 
immunohistochemical, and gene expression profiling assays.
RESULTS: Up-regulation of class I MHC in skeletal muscle fibers was an early and 
consistent feature of human inflammatory myopathies. Class I MHC staining in 
muscle fibers of myositis patients showed both cell surface and a reticular 
pattern of internal reactivity. The pathways of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) 
stress response, the unfolded protein response (glucose-regulated protein 78 
pathway), and the ER overload response (NF-kappaB pathway) were significantly 
activated in muscle tissue of human myositis patients and in the mouse model. 
Ectopic expression of wild-type mouse class I MHC (H-2K(b)) but not degradable 
glycosylation mutants of H-2K(b) induced ER stress response in C(2)C(12) 
skeletal muscle cells.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that the ER stress response may be a major 
nonimmune mechanism responsible for skeletal muscle damage and dysfunction in 
autoimmune myositis. Strategies to interfere with this pathway may have 
therapeutic value in patients with this disease.

DOI: 10.1002/art.21103
PMID: 15934115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]