---
reference_id: "PMID:34077889"
title: "Impact of recurrent outbreaks of Ebola virus disease in Africa: a meta-analysis of case fatality rates."
authors:
- Kawuki J
- Musa TH
- Yu X
journal: Public Health
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1016/j.puhe.2021.03.027
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Impact of recurrent outbreaks of Ebola virus disease in Africa: a meta-analysis of case fatality rates.
**Authors:** Kawuki J, Musa TH, Yu X
**Journal:** Public Health (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.puhe.2021.03.027](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.puhe.2021.03.027)

## Content

1. Public Health. 2021 Jun;195:89-97. doi: 10.1016/j.puhe.2021.03.027. Epub 2021 
May 30.

Impact of recurrent outbreaks of Ebola virus disease in Africa: a meta-analysis 
of case fatality rates.

Kawuki J(1), Musa TH(2), Yu X(3).

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Environmental Medicine Engineering, Ministry of Education, 
Global Health, School of Public Health, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210009, 
Jiangsu Province, China; Centre for Health Behaviours Research, Jockey Club 
School of Public Health and Primary Care, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese 
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China. Electronic address: 
joseks256@gmail.com.
(2)Key Laboratory of Environmental Medicine Engineering, Ministry of Education, 
Department Epidemiology and Health Statistics, School of Public Health, 
Southeast University, Nanjing, 210009, Jiangsu Province, China; Biomedical 
Research Institute, Darfur College, Nyala, Sudan.
(3)Key Laboratory of Environmental Medicine Engineering, Ministry of Education, 
Global Health, School of Public Health, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210009, 
Jiangsu Province, China; Key Laboratory of Environmental Medicine Engineering, 
Ministry of Education, Department Epidemiology and Health Statistics, School of 
Public Health, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210009, Jiangsu Province, China. 
Electronic address: xiaojinyu@seu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVES: Between 2010 and 2020, Africa witnessed several outbreaks of Ebola 
virus disease (EVD), each presenting with varying case fatality rate (CFR) and 
other socio-economic impacts. This study aims to summarize the CFR and identify 
potential factors that influenced the severity of EVD outbreaks in Africa.
STUDY DESIGN: This was a systematic review and meta-analysis of EVD outbreaks 
published between January 2010 and March 2020, using Web of Science, Scopus, and 
PubMed databases.
METHODS: Only English-language articles and reports, including the number of 
cases and deaths during the outbreak in Africa, were considered. The quality of 
the included articles was assessed using Murad's quality assessment tool. The 
analysis was conducted using Stata (version 12), pooled effect sizes were 
calculated using the random-effects model, and heterogeneity was tested for 
using the I2 statistic.
RESULTS: Thirteen studies with 32,300 cases and 13,727 deaths were identified, 
whose pooled CFR was 60% (95% confidence interval [CI]: 47-73%). The most 
EVD-affected countries were the Democratic Republic of Congo with five outbreaks 
and a pooled CFR of 65% (95% CI: 59-71%), followed by Uganda with three 
outbreaks and CFR of 83% (95% CI: 60-99%). Zaire ebolavirus caused the most 
outbreaks (10), with a CFR of 58% (95% CI: 45-71%). Besides, outbreaks with 
fewer than 1000 cases reported a higher CFR rate (65%, 95% CI: 54-75%) compared 
with those with more cases (51%, 95% CI: 33-69%).
CONCLUSION: The study has revealed a considerably high CFR caused by the 
recurrent EVD outbreaks in Africa. It also notes an implementation gap in the 
prevention and control strategies and thus identifies a need to strengthen the 
surveillance systems and response mechanisms to enable early detection and 
prompt control of future outbreaks.

Copyright © 2021 The Royal Society for Public Health. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.puhe.2021.03.027
PMID: 34077889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]