---
reference_id: "PMID:28639230"
title: Intracellular Pharmacokinetics of Antibacterials and Their Clinical Implications.
authors:
- Pea F
journal: Clin Pharmacokinet
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s40262-017-0572-y
keywords:
- Animals
- "Anti-Bacterial Agents/administration & dosage, chemistry, pharmacokinetics"
- "Bacterial Infections/drug therapy, microbiology"
- Critical Illness
- "Dose-Response Relationship, Drug"
- Humans
- Hydrophobic and Hydrophilic Interactions
- "Sepsis/drug therapy, physiopathology"
- Tissue Distribution
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Intracellular Pharmacokinetics of Antibacterials and Their Clinical Implications.
**Authors:** Pea F
**Journal:** Clin Pharmacokinet (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s40262-017-0572-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40262-017-0572-y)

## Content

1. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2018 Feb;57(2):177-189. doi: 10.1007/s40262-017-0572-y.

Intracellular Pharmacokinetics of Antibacterials and Their Clinical 
Implications.

Pea F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Santa Maria della Misericordia University 
Hospital of Udine, P.le S. Maria della Misericordia 3, 33100, Udine, Italy. 
federico.pea@asuiud.sanita.fvg.it.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Udine, Udine, Italy. 
federico.pea@asuiud.sanita.fvg.it.

The intracellular pharmacokinetics of the different classes of antimicrobials 
into surrogate markers of tissue accumulation (alveolar macrophages and/or total 
alveolar cells collected by means of bronchoalveolar lavage or peripheral white 
blood cells) was reviewed. The aim of this review was to discuss the clinical 
implications of the intracellular pharmacokinetics of antibacterials, either 
from the therapeutic or toxicological perspective. The different pharmacokinetic 
behaviour of antimicrobials within cells is mainly related to their 
physicochemical properties (hydrophilicity and lipophilicity), and may have 
several clinical implications. Therapeutic efficacy against intracellular 
pathogens has been correlated mainly with the intracellular concentrations 
achieved by the different antimicrobial agents. This is relevant especially for 
macrolides, tetracyclines, fluoroquinolones and rifampicin in the treatment of 
bacterial infections such as Legionella pneumophila pneumonia, Mycoplasma 
pneumoniae pneumonia, non-gonococcal urethritis and chronic staphylococcal 
infections. Additionally, intracellular accumulation of antibacterials was 
correlated with the possibility of causing organ-specific toxicity, as in the 
case of aminoglycosides in regard to the risk of nephrotoxicity. Finally, it 
should be kept in mind that intracellular accumulation may also represent a drug 
reservoir in the case of lipophilic antimicrobials. This may become extremely 
relevant from the clinical standpoint when treating critically ill patients with 
sepsis with antibacterials. The pathophysiology of sepsis may explain why it is 
necessary to start therapy with an increased loading dose of hydrophilic 
antimicrobials to promptly achieve therapeutically effective concentrations.

DOI: 10.1007/s40262-017-0572-y
PMID: 28639230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]