---
reference_id: "PMID:23572237"
title: "International Pediatric Multiple Sclerosis Study Group criteria for pediatric multiple sclerosis and immune-mediated central nervous system demyelinating disorders: revisions to the 2007 definitions."
authors:
- Krupp LB
- Tardieu M
- Amato MP
- Banwell B
- Chitnis T
- Dale RC
- Ghezzi A
- Hintzen R
- Kornberg A
- Pohl D
- Rostasy K
- Tenembaum S
- Wassmer E
- International Pediatric Multiple Sclerosis Study Group
journal: Mult Scler
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1177/1352458513484547
keywords:
- Child
- "Demyelinating Autoimmune Diseases, CNS/diagnosis"
- "Encephalomyelitis, Acute Disseminated/diagnosis"
- Humans
- Multiple Sclerosis/diagnosis
- Neuromyelitis Optica/diagnosis
- Pediatrics/standards
content_type: abstract_only
---

# International Pediatric Multiple Sclerosis Study Group criteria for pediatric multiple sclerosis and immune-mediated central nervous system demyelinating disorders: revisions to the 2007 definitions.
**Authors:** Krupp LB, Tardieu M, Amato MP, Banwell B, Chitnis T, Dale RC, Ghezzi A, Hintzen R, Kornberg A, Pohl D, Rostasy K, Tenembaum S, Wassmer E, International Pediatric Multiple Sclerosis Study Group
**Journal:** Mult Scler (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1177/1352458513484547](https://doi.org/10.1177/1352458513484547)

## Content

1. Mult Scler. 2013 Sep;19(10):1261-7. doi: 10.1177/1352458513484547. Epub 2013
Apr  9.

International Pediatric Multiple Sclerosis Study Group criteria for pediatric 
multiple sclerosis and immune-mediated central nervous system demyelinating 
disorders: revisions to the 2007 definitions.

Krupp LB(1), Tardieu M, Amato MP, Banwell B, Chitnis T, Dale RC, Ghezzi A, 
Hintzen R, Kornberg A, Pohl D, Rostasy K, Tenembaum S, Wassmer E; International 
Pediatric Multiple Sclerosis Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Lourie Center for Pediatric MS. Stony Brook University Medical Center, USA. 
lauren.krupp@stonybrook.edu

BACKGROUND: There has been tremendous growth in research in pediatric multiple 
sclerosis (MS) and immune mediated central nervous system demyelinating 
disorders since operational definitions for these conditions were first proposed 
in 2007. Further, the International Pediatric Multiple Sclerosis Study Group 
(IPMSSG), which proposed the criteria, has expanded substantially in membership 
and in its international scope.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this review is to revise the 2007 definitions in order 
to incorporate advances in delineating the clinical and neuroradiologic features 
of these disorders.
METHODS: Through a consensus process, in which input was sought from the 150 
members of the Study Group, criteria were drafted, revised and finalized. Final 
approval was sought through a web survey.
RESULTS: Revised criteria are proposed for pediatric acute disseminated 
encephalomyelitis, pediatric clinically isolated syndrome, pediatric 
neuromyelitis optica and pediatric MS. These criteria were approved by 93% or 
more of the 56 Study Group members who responded to the final survey.
CONCLUSIONS: These definitions are proposed for clinical and research purposes. 
Their utility will depend on the outcomes of their application in prospective 
research.

DOI: 10.1177/1352458513484547
PMID: 23572237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]