---
reference_id: "PMID:36573834"
title: Gut microbiome signatures reflect different subtypes of irritable bowel syndrome.
authors:
- Su Q
- Tun HM
- Liu Q
- Yeoh YK
- Mak JWY
- Chan FK
- Ng SC
journal: Gut Microbes
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1080/19490976.2022.2157697
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Irritable Bowel Syndrome/microbiology
- Gastrointestinal Microbiome
- Diarrhea/microbiology
- Constipation/complications
- Dysbiosis/microbiology
- Bacteria/genetics
- Feces/microbiology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Gut microbiome signatures reflect different subtypes of irritable bowel syndrome.
**Authors:** Su Q, Tun HM, Liu Q, Yeoh YK, Mak JWY, Chan FK, Ng SC
**Journal:** Gut Microbes (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1080/19490976.2022.2157697](https://doi.org/10.1080/19490976.2022.2157697)

## Content

1. Gut Microbes. 2023 Jan-Dec;15(1):2157697. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2022.2157697.

Gut microbiome signatures reflect different subtypes of irritable bowel
syndrome.

Su Q(1)(2), Tun HM(1)(3), Liu Q(1)(2), Yeoh YK(1), Mak JWY(1)(2), Chan FK(1)(2),
Ng SC(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Microbiota I-Center (MagIC), Hong Kong SAR, China.
(2)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Institute of Digestive Disease, The
Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
(3)The Jockey Club School of Public Health and Primary Care, Faculty of
Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.

Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a heterogeneous condition with multifactorial
pathogenesis. We studied deeply phenotyped individuals with microbiota
sequencing enrolled in the American Gut Project. The IBS subjects were matched
by age, gender, body mass index, geography, and dietary patterns with non-IBS
controls. A total of 942 subjects with IBS-Diarrhea (IBS-D), IBS-Constipation
(IBS-C), unclassified IBS (IBS-U), and 942 non-IBS controls were included. We
compared taxonomic and functional composition of gut microbiota based on 16S
sequencing data and linked them with clinical characteristics and dietary
factors. Subjects with IBS-D or IBS-U but not IBS-C showed significantly reduced
bacterial diversity (Shannon; p < .01). Distinct bacterial signatures were
associated with different IBS subtypes, and the related functional changes were
related to IBS pathogenesis, such as the increased hydrogen sulfide production
pathway in IBS-D and the increased palmitoleate biosynthesis pathway in IBS-C.
IBS subjects with depression showed lower abundance of Bifidobacterium,
Sutterella, Butyricimonas and higher abundance of Proteus than those without
depression. The relative abundance of microbial short-chain fatty acid
production pathways was significantly lower in IBS patients with depression than
those without depression in all three subtypes. Female, younger age in IBS-D,
and older age in IBS-C were associated with more severe microbiota dysbiosis,
and distinct dietary factors had significant effects on the gut microbiota in
different IBS subtypes. Our analysis identified the compositional uniqueness of
gut microbiota in different IBS subtypes. Distinct associations of the gut
microbiota with depression in IBS provide insights into shared pathways in
disease pathogenesis. These findings highlight the importance of personalized
gut microbiome modulation approaches in different subtypes for optimal
therapeutic effects.

DOI: 10.1080/19490976.2022.2157697
PMCID: PMC9809927
PMID: 36573834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: FKLC and SCN are the scientific co-founders and
sit on the board of Directors of GenieBiome Ltd. SCN has served as an advisory
board member for Pfizer, Ferring, Janssen, and Abbvie and a speaker for Ferring,
Tillotts, Menarini, Janssen, Abbvie, and Takeda. She has received research
grants from Olympus, Ferring, and Abbvie. FKLC has served as an advisor and
lecture speaker for Eisai Co. Ltd., AstraZeneca, Pfizer Inc., Takeda
Pharmaceutical Co., and Takeda (China) Holdings Co. Ltd. All other co-authors
have no conflict of interest.
