---
reference_id: "PMID:39412085"
title: Type II RAF inhibitor tovorafenib for the treatment of pediatric low-grade glioma.
authors:
- Zhang T
- Xu B
- Tang F
- He Z
- Zhou J
journal: Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1080/17512433.2024.2418405
keywords:
- Child
- Humans
- Infant
- "Antineoplastic Agents/pharmacology, administration & dosage"
- "Brain Neoplasms/drug therapy, pathology, genetics"
- "Glioma/drug therapy, pathology, genetics"
- Mutation
- Neoplasm Grading
- "Protein Kinase Inhibitors/pharmacology, administration & dosage, adverse effects"
- "Proto-Oncogene Proteins B-raf/genetics, antagonists & inhibitors"
- Pyridines
- Pyrimidines
- Thiazoles
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Type II RAF inhibitor tovorafenib for the treatment of pediatric low-grade glioma.
**Authors:** Zhang T, Xu B, Tang F, He Z, Zhou J
**Journal:** Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1080/17512433.2024.2418405](https://doi.org/10.1080/17512433.2024.2418405)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2024 Nov;17(11):999-1008. doi:
10.1080/17512433.2024.2418405. Epub 2024 Oct 19.

Type II RAF inhibitor tovorafenib for the treatment of pediatric low-grade
glioma.

Zhang T(1)(2)(3)(4), Xu B(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), Tang F(1)(2)(3)(4), He Z(1)(2)(3),
Zhou J(1)(2)(3)(4)(5).

Author information:
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital, Hunan Provincial Clinical Medical Research
Center for Drug Evaluation of Major Chronic Diseases, Hengyang Medical School,
University of South China, Hengyang, Hunan, China.
(2)The First Affiliated Hospital, Hengyang Clinical Pharmacology Research
Center, Hengyang Medical School, University of South China, Hengyang, Hunan,
China.
(3)The First Affiliated Hospital, Hengyang Key Laboratory of Clinical
Pharmacology, Hengyang Medical School, University of South China, Hengyang,
Hunan, China.
(4)The First Affiliated Hospital, Pharmacy Department, Hengyang Medical School,
University of South China, Hengyang, Hunan, China.
(5)School of Pharmaceutical Science, Hengyang Medical School, University of
South China, Hengyang, Hunan, China.

INTRODUCTION: Pediatric low-grade glioma (pLGG) is the most prevalent childhood
brain tumor group, currently regarded as a chronic disease. On 23 April 2024,
the U.S. FDA approved a new type II RAF inhibitor, tovorafenib (OJEMDATM),
previously known as DAY101, for the treatment of patients aged 6 months and
older with relapsed or refractory (R/R) pLGG harboring a BRAF fusion or
rearrangement, or BRAF V600E mutation.
AREAS COVERED: This article aims to review the pharmacological properties of
tovorafenib and evaluate its efficacy and safety in the treatment of R/R pLGG.
We conducted a systematic search of PubMed and Web of Science databases for
English-language publications related to tovorafenib, including journal articles
and conference abstracts, up through 20 August 2024.
EXPERT OPINION: As the first and only FDA-approved medicine for children with
BRAF fusions or rearrangements, which are the most common molecular alteration
in pLGG, tovorafenib shows superior central nervous system penetration without
the paradoxical activation of the MAPK pathway reported for type I BRAF
inhibitors. Phase 1 and the pivotal phase 2 trials have demonstrated that
tovorafenib monotherapy is generally well-tolerated and exhibits encouraging
signs of meaningful, rapid and sustained clinical activity in children and young
adults with BRAF-altered pLGG.

DOI: 10.1080/17512433.2024.2418405
PMID: 39412085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
