---
reference_id: "PMID:29559713"
title: Skeletal changes during and after spaceflight.
authors:
- Vico L
- Hargens A
journal: Nat Rev Rheumatol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2018.37
keywords:
- "Absorptiometry, Photon"
- "Adaptation, Physiological"
- Aging/physiology
- Animals
- Bone Density
- "Bone and Bones/diagnostic imaging, physiology"
- Energy Metabolism
- Humans
- Psychomotor Performance
- Space Flight
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Skeletal changes during and after spaceflight.
**Authors:** Vico L, Hargens A
**Journal:** Nat Rev Rheumatol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1038/nrrheum.2018.37](https://doi.org/10.1038/nrrheum.2018.37)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2018 Mar 21;14(4):229-245. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2018.37.

Skeletal changes during and after spaceflight.

Vico L(1), Hargens A(2).

Author information:
(1)INSERM, U1059 Sainbiose, Université de Lyon-Université Jean Monnet, Faculté 
de Médecine, Campus Santé Innovation, Saint-Étienne, France.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, CA, USA.

Space sojourns are challenging for life. The ability of the human body to adapt 
to these extreme conditions has been noted since the beginning of human space 
travel. Skeletal alterations that occur during spaceflight are now better 
understood owing to tools such as dual-energy X-ray densitometry and 
high-resolution peripheral quantitative CT, and murine models help researchers 
to understand cellular and matrix changes that occur in bone and that are 
difficult to measure in humans. However, questions remain with regard to bone 
adaptation and osteocyte fate, as well as to interactions of the skeleton with 
fluid shifts towards the head and with the vascular system. Further 
investigations into the relationships between the musculoskeletal system, energy 
metabolism and sensory motor acclimatisation are needed. In this regard, an 
integrated intervention is required that will address multiple systems 
simultaneously. Importantly, radiation and isolation-related stresses are 
gaining increased attention as the prospect of human exploration into deep space 
draws nearer. Although space is a unique environment, clear parallels exist 
between the effects of spaceflight, periods of immobilization and ageing, with 
possibly irreversible features. Space travel offers an opportunity to establish 
integrated deconditioning and ageing interventions that combine nutritional, 
physical and pharmaceutical strategies.

DOI: 10.1038/nrrheum.2018.37
PMID: 29559713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]