---
reference_id: "PMID:18840652"
title: Lkb1 is required for TGFbeta-mediated myofibroblast differentiation.
authors:
- Vaahtomeri K
- Ventelä E
- Laajanen K
- Katajisto P
- Wipff PJ
- Hinz B
- Vallenius T
- Tiainen M
- Mäkelä TP
journal: J Cell Sci
year: '2008'
doi: 10.1242/jcs.032706
keywords:
- AMP-Activated Protein Kinases
- Actins/metabolism
- Animals
- Cell Differentiation
- Fibroblasts/metabolism
- Gene Deletion
- Gene Expression Regulation
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Models, Biological"
- Muscle Contraction
- Muscles/metabolism
- "Protein Serine-Threonine Kinases/genetics, metabolism, physiology"
- Serum Response Factor/metabolism
- Smad Proteins/metabolism
- Transforming Growth Factor beta/metabolism
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lkb1 is required for TGFbeta-mediated myofibroblast differentiation.
**Authors:** Vaahtomeri K, Ventelä E, Laajanen K, Katajisto P, Wipff PJ, Hinz B, Vallenius T, Tiainen M, Mäkelä TP
**Journal:** J Cell Sci (2008)
**DOI:** [10.1242/jcs.032706](https://doi.org/10.1242/jcs.032706)

## Content

1. J Cell Sci. 2008 Nov 1;121(Pt 21):3531-40. doi: 10.1242/jcs.032706. Epub 2008
Oct 7.

Lkb1 is required for TGFbeta-mediated myofibroblast differentiation.

Vaahtomeri K(1), Ventelä E, Laajanen K, Katajisto P, Wipff PJ, Hinz B, Vallenius
T, Tiainen M, Mäkelä TP.

Author information:
(1)Genome-Scale Biology Program, Institute of Biomedicine, Biomedicum Helsinki,
P.O. Box 63, 00014 University of Helsinki, Finland.

Inactivating mutations of the tumor-suppressor kinase gene LKB1 underlie
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome (PJS), which is characterized by gastrointestinal
hamartomatous polyps with a prominent smooth-muscle and stromal component.
Recently, it was noted that PJS-type polyps develop in mice in which Lkb1
deletion is restricted to SM22-expressing mesenchymal cells. Here, we
investigated the stromal functions of Lkb1, which possibly underlie tumor
suppression. Ablation of Lkb1 in primary mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) leads
to attenuated Smad activation and TGFbeta-dependent transcription. Also,
myofibroblast differentiation of Lkb1(-/-) MEFs is defective, resulting in a
markedly decreased formation of alpha-smooth muscle actin (SMA)-positive stress
fibers and reduced contractility. The myofibroblast differentiation defect was
not associated with altered serum response factor (SRF) activity and was rescued
by exogenous TGFbeta, indicating that inactivation of Lkb1 leads to defects in
myofibroblast differentiation through attenuated TGFbeta signaling. These
results suggest that tumorigenesis by Lkb1-deficient SM22-positive cells
involves defective myogenic differentiation.

DOI: 10.1242/jcs.032706
PMID: 18840652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
