---
reference_id: "PMID:25456501"
title: "Ankyrin-B syndrome: a case of sinus node dysfunction, atrial fibrillation and prolonged QT in a young adult."
authors:
- Robaei D
- Ford T
- Ooi SY
journal: Heart Lung Circ
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1016/j.hlc.2014.09.013
keywords:
- Adult
- Ankyrins/genetics
- "Atrial Fibrillation/complications, genetics"
- "Genetic Diseases, Inborn/complications, genetics"
- Humans
- "Long QT Syndrome/complications, genetics"
- Male
- "Sick Sinus Syndrome/complications, genetics"
- "Torsades de Pointes/complications, genetics"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Ankyrin-B syndrome: a case of sinus node dysfunction, atrial fibrillation and prolonged QT in a young adult.
**Authors:** Robaei D, Ford T, Ooi SY
**Journal:** Heart Lung Circ (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.hlc.2014.09.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hlc.2014.09.013)

## Content

1. Heart Lung Circ. 2015 Feb;24(2):e31-4. doi: 10.1016/j.hlc.2014.09.013. Epub
2014  Sep 30.

Ankyrin-B syndrome: a case of sinus node dysfunction, atrial fibrillation and
prolonged QT in a young adult.

Robaei D(1), Ford T(2), Ooi SY(2).

Author information:
(1)Eastern Heart Clinic, Prince of Wales Hospital, Barker Street Randwick NSW,
Australia; University of New South Wales, Randwick NSW, Australia. Electronic
address: daniel.robaei@unsw.edu.au.
(2)Eastern Heart Clinic, Prince of Wales Hospital, Barker Street Randwick NSW,
Australia; University of New South Wales, Randwick NSW, Australia.

Ankyrin-B protein is involved in regulating expression and localisation of
cardiac ion channels and transporters. Mutations of the ANK2 gene in the rare
condition Ankyrin-B syndrome result in loss of function of the ankyrin-B protein
which in turn leads to abnormal regulation of intracellular sodium and calcium
and a predisposition to cardiac arrhythmia including torsades de pointes. We
describe a rare case of this condition characterised by sinus node dysfunction,
atrial fibrillation and prolonged QT syndrome in a young patient with a family
history of sudden death. The management of Ankyrin-B syndrome may include
avoidance of QT prolonging medications, insertion of a permanent pacemaker for
sinus node dysfunction, or a cardioverter defibrillator for those at high-risk
of sudden death from torsades de pointes.

Crown Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hlc.2014.09.013
PMID: 25456501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
