---
reference_id: "PMID:29258516"
title: Neutrophil elastase in bronchiectasis.
authors:
- Gramegna A
- Amati F
- Terranova L
- Sotgiu G
- Tarsia P
- Miglietta D
- Calderazzo MA
- Aliberti S
- Blasi F
journal: Respir Res
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1186/s12931-017-0691-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Neutrophil elastase in bronchiectasis.
**Authors:** Gramegna A, Amati F, Terranova L, Sotgiu G, Tarsia P, Miglietta D, Calderazzo MA, Aliberti S, Blasi F
**Journal:** Respir Res (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12931-017-0691-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12931-017-0691-x)

## Content

1. Respir Res. 2017 Dec 19;18(1):211. doi: 10.1186/s12931-017-0691-x.

Neutrophil elastase in bronchiectasis.

Gramegna A(1), Amati F(1), Terranova L(2), Sotgiu G(3), Tarsia P(1), Miglietta 
D(4), Calderazzo MA(5), Aliberti S(6), Blasi F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, University of Milan, 
Internal Medicine Department, Respiratory Unit and Cystic Fibrosis Adult Center, 
Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Clinical Sciences and Community Health University of Milano, 
Paediatric Highly Intensive Care Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale 
Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Clinical Epidemiology and Medical 
Statistics Unit, University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy.
(4)Corporate Pre-Clinical R&D, Chiesi Farmaceutici SpA, Parma, Italy.
(5)Global Clinical Development, Chiesi Farmaceutici SpA, Parma, Italy.
(6)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, University of Milan, 
Internal Medicine Department, Respiratory Unit and Cystic Fibrosis Adult Center, 
Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy. 
stefano.aliberti@unimi.it.

The role of neutrophil elastase (NE) is poorly understood in bronchiectasis 
because of the lack of preclinical data and so most of the assumptions made 
about NE inhibitor potential benefit is based on data from CF. In this context, 
NE seems to be a predictor of long-term clinical outcomes and a possible target 
of treatment. In order to better evaluate the role of NE in bronchiectasis, a 
systematic search of scientific evidence was performed.Two investigators 
independently performed the search on PubMed and included studies published up 
to May 15, 2017 according to predefined criteria. A final pool of 31 studies was 
included in the systematic review, with a total of 2679 patients. For each paper 
data of interest were extracted and reported in table.In this review sputum NE 
has proved useful as an inflammatory marker both in stable state bronchiectasis 
and during exacerbations and local or systemic antibiotic treatment. NE has also 
been associated with risk of exacerbation, time to next exacerbation and 
all-cause mortality. This study reviews also the role of NE as a specific target 
of treatment in bronchiectasis. Inhibition of NE is at a very early stage and 
future interventional studies should evaluate safety and efficacy for new 
molecules and formulations.

DOI: 10.1186/s12931-017-0691-x
PMCID: PMC5735855
PMID: 29258516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: SA 
reports grant support from AstraZeneca, Bayer Healthcare, Pfizer Ltd. and 
GlaxoSmithKline. FB reports research grants from Boehringer Ingelheim, Chiesi, 
Zambon, and Pfizer, congress lecture fees from Boehringer Ingelheim, 
Guidotti-Malesci, Menarini, GSK, Chiesi, Pfizer and Novartis, and consultancy 
fees from AstraZeneca, Menarini, Mundipharma, Novartis, GSK, Teva and Pfizer; DM 
and MAC are employees of Chiesi Farmaceutici. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: Springer Nature 
remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.