---
reference_id: "PMID:36746589"
title: Research progress on the extraction technology and activity study of Epimedium polysaccharides.
authors:
- Ke L
- Duan X
- Cui J
- Song X
- Ma W
- Zhang W
- Liu Y
- Fan Y
journal: Carbohydr Polym
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.carbpol.2023.120602
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Research progress on the extraction technology and activity study of Epimedium polysaccharides.
**Authors:** Ke L, Duan X, Cui J, Song X, Ma W, Zhang W, Liu Y, Fan Y
**Journal:** Carbohydr Polym (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.carbpol.2023.120602](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2023.120602)

## Content

1. Carbohydr Polym. 2023 Apr 15;306:120602. doi: 10.1016/j.carbpol.2023.120602. 
Epub 2023 Jan 18.

Research progress on the extraction technology and activity study of Epimedium 
polysaccharides.

Ke L(1), Duan X(1), Cui J(1), Song X(1), Ma W(1), Zhang W(1), Liu Y(1), Fan 
Y(2).

Author information:
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 
712100, PR China.
(2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi 
712100, PR China. Electronic address: ypfan@nwsuaf.edu.cn.

More pharmacological effects of polysaccharides from traditional Chinese 
medicines have been discovered in recent years. Epimedium has been used for 
thousands of years as a traditional Chinese medicine in China. Water-soluble 
Epimedium polysaccharides is one of the main ingredients of Epimedium, which is 
one of the main active ingredients of Epimedium, mainly composed of mannose, 
rhamnose, galacturonic acid, glucose, and galactose. The extraction methods of 
Epimedium polysaccharides including hot water extraction, cellulase extraction, 
ultrasonic extraction, microwave-assisted extraction, ultrasound compound enzyme 
and ultra-high pressure extraction, they affect the yield of Epimedium 
polysaccharides. The characteristics of deproteinization including enzyme 
deproteinization, macroporous resin deproteinization and Sevag methods are 
introduced respectively. Some chemical modification methods of Epimedium 
polysaccharides are also involved such as phosphorylation, sulfation, 
selenization, and lipids encapsulated. Epimedium polysaccharides have a variety 
of pharmacological activities, including immune promotion, reproduction 
promotion, anti-osteoporosis, anti-tumor, antioxidant, anti-fatigue and 
antivirus, also beneficial to nervous and hematopoietic systems. At present, the 
research of Epimedium polysaccharides has been in depth. In this paper, the 
research progress on extraction, purification, chemical modification methods and 
pharmacological activity of Epimedium polysaccharides summarized. The aim is to 
provide reference for further research and development of Epimedium 
polysaccharides.

Copyright © 2023. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.carbpol.2023.120602
PMID: 36746589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of competing interest We declare 
that we have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships 
that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.