---
reference_id: "PMID:24224040"
title: "L265P mutation of the MYD88 gene is frequent in Waldenström's macroglobulinemia and its absence in myeloma."
authors:
- Mori N
- Ohwashi M
- Yoshinaga K
- Mitsuhashi K
- Tanaka N
- Teramura M
- Okada M
- Shiseki M
- Tanaka J
- Motoji T
journal: PLoS One
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080088
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- Female
- Genotype
- Humans
- Lymphoma/genetics
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Multiple Myeloma/genetics
- Mutation
- Myeloid Differentiation Factor 88/genetics
- Polymerase Chain Reaction
- Waldenstrom Macroglobulinemia/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# L265P mutation of the MYD88 gene is frequent in Waldenström's macroglobulinemia and its absence in myeloma.
**Authors:** Mori N, Ohwashi M, Yoshinaga K, Mitsuhashi K, Tanaka N, Teramura M, Okada M, Shiseki M, Tanaka J, Motoji T
**Journal:** PLoS One (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1371/journal.pone.0080088](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0080088)

## Content

1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 5;8(11):e80088. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080088.
eCollection 2013.

L265P mutation of the MYD88 gene is frequent in Waldenström's macroglobulinemia
and its absence in myeloma.

Mori N(1), Ohwashi M, Yoshinaga K, Mitsuhashi K, Tanaka N, Teramura M, Okada M,
Shiseki M, Tanaka J, Motoji T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo, Japan.

L265P mutation in the MYD88 gene has recently been reported in Waldenström's
macroglobulinemia; however the incidence has been different according to the
methods used. To determine the relevance and compare the incidence by different
methods, we analyzed the L265P mutation in bone marrow mononuclear cells from
lymphoid neoplasms. We first performed cloning and sequencing in 10 patients: 8
Waldenström's macroglobulinemia; 1 non-IgM-secreting lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma;
and 1 low grade B-cell lymphoma with monoclonal IgG protein. The L265P mutation
was detected in only 1/8 Waldenström's macroglobulinemia patients (2 of 9
clones). To confirm these results, direct sequencing was performed in the 10
patients and an additional 17 Waldenström's macroglobulinemia patients and 1
lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma patient. Nine of 28 patients (7/25 Waldenström's
macroglobulinemia, 1/2 lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma, and B-cell lymphoma) harbored
the mutation. We next tested for the mutation with BSiE1 digestion and
allele-specific polymerase chain reaction in the 28 patients and 38 patients
with myeloma. Aberrant bands corresponding to the mutation were detected by
BSiE1 digestion in 19/25 patients with Waldenström's macroglobulinemia (76%),
1/2 lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma and B-cell lymphoma, but not in the 38 myeloma
patients. The L265P mutation was more frequent in patients with Waldenström's
macroglobulinemia than in those with myeloma (p=1.3x10(-10)). The mutation was
detected by allele-specific polymerase chain reaction in 18/25 Waldenström's
macroglobulinemia patients (72%). In the 25 Waldenström's macroglobulinemia
patients, the L265P was more frequently detected by BSiE1 digestion than by
direct sequencing (p=5.3x10(-4)), and in males (15/16, 94%) than in females
(4/9, 44%) (p=1.2x10(-2)). No siginificant difference was observed in the
incidence of the L265P mutation between BSiE1 digestion and allele-specific
polymerase chain reaction (p=0.32). These results suggest that the L265P
mutation is involved in the majority of Waldenström's macroglobulinemia. BSiE1
digestion and allele-specific polymerase chain reaction may detect a small
fraction of mutated cells in some cases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080088
PMCID: PMC3818242
PMID: 24224040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared
that no competing interests exist.
