---
reference_id: "PMID:33558691"
title: "Treatment strategies for cryptococcal infection: challenges, advances and future outlook."
authors:
- Iyer KR
- Revie NM
- Fu C
- Robbins N
- Cowen LE
journal: Nat Rev Microbiol
year: '2021'
doi: 10.1038/s41579-021-00511-0
keywords:
- Antifungal Agents/pharmacology
- "Cell Wall/chemistry, physiology"
- "Cryptococcosis/drug therapy, immunology, microbiology"
- "Cryptococcus/chemistry, cytology, drug effects, physiology"
- "Drug Resistance, Fungal"
- Echinocandins/pharmacology
- "Fungal Capsules/chemistry, physiology"
- Fungal Polysaccharides/chemistry
- Virulence Factors
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Treatment strategies for cryptococcal infection: challenges, advances and future outlook.
**Authors:** Iyer KR, Revie NM, Fu C, Robbins N, Cowen LE
**Journal:** Nat Rev Microbiol (2021)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41579-021-00511-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-021-00511-0)

## Content

1. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2021 Jul;19(7):454-466. doi: 10.1038/s41579-021-00511-0.
Epub  2021 Feb 8.

Treatment strategies for cryptococcal infection: challenges, advances and future 
outlook.

Iyer KR(#)(1), Revie NM(#)(1), Fu C(1), Robbins N(1), Cowen LE(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
(2)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada. leah.cowen@utoronto.ca.
(#)Contributed equally

Cryptococcus spp., in particular Cryptococcus neoformans and Cryptococcus 
gattii, have an enormous impact on human health worldwide. The global burden of 
cryptococcal meningitis is almost a quarter of a million cases and 181,000 
deaths annually, with mortality rates of 100% if infections remain untreated. 
Despite these alarming statistics, treatment options for cryptococcosis remain 
limited, with only three major classes of drugs approved for clinical use. 
Exacerbating the public health burden is the fact that the only new class of 
antifungal drugs developed in decades, the echinocandins, displays negligible 
antifungal activity against Cryptococcus spp., and the efficacy of the remaining 
therapeutics is hampered by host toxicity and pathogen resistance. Here, we 
describe the current arsenal of antifungal agents and the treatment strategies 
employed to manage cryptococcal disease. We further elaborate on the recent 
advances in our understanding of the intrinsic and adaptive resistance 
mechanisms that are utilized by Cryptococcus spp. to evade therapeutic 
treatments. Finally, we review potential therapeutic strategies, including 
combination therapy, the targeting of virulence traits, impairing stress 
response pathways and modulating host immunity, to effectively treat infections 
caused by Cryptococcus spp. Overall, understanding of the mechanisms that 
regulate anti-cryptococcal drug resistance, coupled with advances in genomics 
technologies and high-throughput screening methodologies, will catalyse 
innovation and accelerate antifungal drug discovery.

DOI: 10.1038/s41579-021-00511-0
PMCID: PMC7868659
PMID: 33558691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: L.E.C. is a co-founder and shareholder in Bright 
Angel Therapeutics, a platform company for development of novel antifungal 
therapeutics, and is a consultant for Boragen, a small-molecule development 
company focused on leveraging the unique chemical properties of boron chemistry 
for crop protection and animal health. K.R.I., N.M.R., C.F. and N.R. declare no 
competing interests.