---
reference_id: "PMID:25778940"
title: "A new case of UDP-galactose transporter deficiency (SLC35A2-CDG): molecular basis, clinical phenotype, and therapeutic approach."
authors:
- Dörre K
- Olczak M
- Wada Y
- Sosicka P
- Grüneberg M
- Reunert J
- Kurlemann G
- Fiedler B
- Biskup S
- Hörtnagel K
- Rust S
- Marquardt T
journal: J Inherit Metab Dis
year: '2015'
doi: 10.1007/s10545-015-9828-6
keywords:
- Animals
- CHO Cells
- "Child, Preschool"
- "Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation/genetics, therapy"
- Cricetinae
- Cricetulus
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Dogs
- Female
- Galactose/therapeutic use
- Humans
- Madin Darby Canine Kidney Cells
- "Monosaccharide Transport Proteins/deficiency, genetics"
- Phenotype
- UDP-Galactose Translocators
content_type: abstract_only
---

# A new case of UDP-galactose transporter deficiency (SLC35A2-CDG): molecular basis, clinical phenotype, and therapeutic approach.
**Authors:** Dörre K, Olczak M, Wada Y, Sosicka P, Grüneberg M, Reunert J, Kurlemann G, Fiedler B, Biskup S, Hörtnagel K, Rust S, Marquardt T
**Journal:** J Inherit Metab Dis (2015)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10545-015-9828-6](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10545-015-9828-6)

## Content

1. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2015 Sep;38(5):931-40. doi: 10.1007/s10545-015-9828-6.
Epub  2015 Mar 17.

A new case of UDP-galactose transporter deficiency (SLC35A2-CDG): molecular 
basis, clinical phenotype, and therapeutic approach.

Dörre K(1), Olczak M, Wada Y, Sosicka P, Grüneberg M, Reunert J, Kurlemann G, 
Fiedler B, Biskup S, Hörtnagel K, Rust S, Marquardt T.

Author information:
(1)Universitätsklinikum Münster, Klinik für Kinder-und Jugendmedizin, 
Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1, 48149, Muenster, Germany.

Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) are a group of hereditary metabolic 
diseases characterized by abnormal glycosylation of proteins and lipids. Often, 
multisystem disorders with central nervous system involvement and a large 
variety of clinical symptoms occur. The main characteristics are developmental 
delay, seizures, and ataxia. In this paper we report the clinical and 
biochemical characteristics of a 5-year-old girl with a defective 
galactosylation of N-glycans, resulting in developmental delay, muscular 
hypotonia, epileptic seizures, inverted nipples, and visual impairment. Next 
generation sequencing revealed a de novo mutation (c.797G > T, p.G266V) in the 
X-chromosomal gene SLC35A2 (solute carrier family 35, UDP-galactose transporter, 
member A2; MIM 300896). While this mutation was found heterozygous, random 
X-inactivation of the normal allele will lead to loss of normal SLC35A2 activity 
in respective cells. The functional relevance of the mutation was demonstrated 
by complementation of UGT-deficient MDCK-RCA(r) and CHO-Lec8 cells by normal 
UGT-expression construct but not by the mutant version. The effect of dietary 
galactose supplementation on glycosylation was investigated, showing a nearly 
complete normalization of transferrin glycosylation.

DOI: 10.1007/s10545-015-9828-6
PMID: 25778940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]