---
reference_id: "PMID:30285728"
title: The TRAX, DISC1, and GSK3 complex in mental disorders and therapeutic interventions.
authors:
- Weng YT
- Chien T
- Kuan II
- Chern Y
journal: J Biomed Sci
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1186/s12929-018-0473-x
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The TRAX, DISC1, and GSK3 complex in mental disorders and therapeutic interventions.
**Authors:** Weng YT, Chien T, Kuan II, Chern Y
**Journal:** J Biomed Sci (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1186/s12929-018-0473-x](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12929-018-0473-x)

## Content

1. J Biomed Sci. 2018 Oct 4;25(1):71. doi: 10.1186/s12929-018-0473-x.

The TRAX, DISC1, and GSK3 complex in mental disorders and therapeutic 
interventions.

Weng YT(1)(2), Chien T(1), Kuan II(1), Chern Y(3)(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, 128 Sec. 2, Academia Rd. 
Nankang, Taipei, 115, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(2)Program in Molecular Medicine, National Yang-Ming University and Academia 
Sinica, No.155, Sec.2, Linong Street, Taipei, 112, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(3)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, 128 Sec. 2, Academia Rd. 
Nankang, Taipei, 115, Taiwan, Republic of China. bmychern@ibms.sinica.edu.tw.
(4)Program in Molecular Medicine, National Yang-Ming University and Academia 
Sinica, No.155, Sec.2, Linong Street, Taipei, 112, Taiwan, Republic of China. 
bmychern@ibms.sinica.edu.tw.

Psychiatric disorders (such as bipolar disorder, depression, and schizophrenia) 
affect the lives of millions of individuals worldwide. Despite the tremendous 
efforts devoted to various types of psychiatric studies and rapidly accumulating 
genetic information, the molecular mechanisms underlying psychiatric disorder 
development remain elusive. Among the genes that have been implicated in 
schizophrenia and other mental disorders, disrupted in schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) 
and glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) have been intensively investigated. DISC1 
binds directly to GSK3 and modulates many cellular functions by negatively 
inhibiting GSK3 activity. The human DISC1 gene is located on chromosome 1 and is 
highly associated with schizophrenia and other mental disorders. A recent study 
demonstrated that a neighboring gene of DISC1, translin-associated factor X 
(TRAX), binds to the DISC1/GSK3β complex and at least partly mediates the 
actions of the DISC1/GSK3β complex. Previous studies also demonstrate that TRAX 
and most of its interacting proteins that have been identified so far are risk 
genes and/or markers of mental disorders. In the present review, we will focus 
on the emerging roles of TRAX and its interacting proteins (including DISC1 and 
GSK3β) in psychiatric disorders and the potential implications for developing 
therapeutic interventions.

DOI: 10.1186/s12929-018-0473-x
PMCID: PMC6171312
PMID: 30285728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: ETHICS APPROVAL AND CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE: Not 
applicable. CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION: Not applicable. COMPETING INTERESTS: The 
authors declare that they have no competing interests. PUBLISHER’S NOTE: 
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in 
published maps and institutional affiliations.