---
reference_id: "PMID:38181319"
title: "Cardiac Involvement in Neurosarcoidosis: A Single-Center Investigation."
authors:
- Noroozi Gilandehi S
- Wong KH
- Francis T
- Wright MA
- Lord J
- Stehlik J
- Kemeyou L
- Smith T
- Clardy SL
journal: Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000200196
keywords:
- Humans
- Female
- Adult
- Middle Aged
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Male
- Cardiovascular Diseases
- Retrospective Studies
- "Sarcoidosis/complications, diagnosis"
- Central Nervous System Diseases/diagnosis
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Cardiac Involvement in Neurosarcoidosis: A Single-Center Investigation.
**Authors:** Noroozi Gilandehi S, Wong KH, Francis T, Wright MA, Lord J, Stehlik J, Kemeyou L, Smith T, Clardy SL
**Journal:** Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1212/NXI.0000000000200196](https://doi.org/10.1212/NXI.0000000000200196)

## Content

1. Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm. 2024 Mar;11(2):e200196. doi:
10.1212/NXI.0000000000200196. Epub 2024 Jan 5.

Cardiac Involvement in Neurosarcoidosis: A Single-Center Investigation.

Noroozi Gilandehi S(1), Wong KH(1), Francis T(1), Wright MA(1), Lord J(1),
Stehlik J(1), Kemeyou L(1), Smith T(1), Clardy SL(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neurology (S.N.G., K.-H.W., T.F., M.A.W., J.L., T.S.,
S.L.C.); Division of Cardiovascular Medicine (J.S., L.K.), Department of
Internal Medicine, University of Utah; Department of Neurology (J.S., L.K.,
T.S., S.L.C.); Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center (T.S.), George
E. Whalen Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center; and Department of
Pathology (T.S.), University of Utah, Salt Lake City.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Sarcoidosis is a multisystem inflammatory
granulomatous disease. Among systemic sarcoidosis manifestations, cardiac or
nervous system involvement can result in significant morbidity and mortality. We
describe the overlapping incidence of cardiac sarcoidosis (CS) within a
neurosarcoidosis (NS) cohort and determine the frequency of other nonsarcoid
cardiac diseases in these patients.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective chart review of patients evaluated at the
University of Utah from 2010 to 2022. Patients were included if they had (1) at
least one instance of a diagnostic code for sarcoidosis in their medical
record-International Classification of Diseases (ICD) 9 code 135 or ICD 10 code
D86; (2) at least one outpatient visit in the Neurology Department within the
University of Utah electronic health record with a diagnosis of definite,
probable, or possible NS based on 2018 consensus criteria; (3) at least one
outpatient visit in the Cardiology Department within the University of Utah
electronic health record; and (4) ECG available in their medical record for
review. Of 64 definite, probable, or possible patients with NS in the University
of Utah cohort, 52 met our inclusion criteria and were included in this study.
RESULTS: Of 52 patients with NS who met our inclusion criteria, 65.38% were
female, with an average age of 60.9 years (range 38-84). More than half (58%)
were obese (BMI ≥ 30). CS was diagnosed in 6 patients with NS (12%). Symptoms
suggestive of possible cardiac dysfunction included lower extremity edema (50%),
palpitations (46%), chest pain (44%), and shortness of breath (27%). ECG
abnormalities included nonspecific T-wave change (40%) and right bundle branch
block (17%). Three patients experienced ventricular tachycardia: sustained in
one patient and nonsustained in 2 patients. Cardiac MRI was performed in 17
patients (32.7%) and in 3 patients (17.6%), which revealed diffuse myocardial
enhancement suggesting CS.
DISCUSSION: In this cohort, 12% of patients with NS also had confirmed CS. In
addition, these patients had a high burden of cardiovascular disease not
directly attributed to sarcoidosis. Our data suggest that patients with NS
require comprehensive cardiac evaluation. Future studies are needed to clarify
the extent of the direct contribution of granulomatous inflammation on the
cardiovascular system from the indirect contribution of treatments such as
glucocorticoids that lead to increased risk of cardiovascular disease in
sarcoidosis.

DOI: 10.1212/NXI.0000000000200196
PMCID: PMC11073871
PMID: 38181319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no relevant disclosures. Go
to Neurology.org/NN for full disclosures.
