---
reference_id: "PMID:33184170"
title: MIS-C and Cardiac Conduction Abnormalities.
authors:
- Choi NH
- Fremed M
- Starc T
- Weller R
- Cheung E
- Ferris A
- Silver ES
- Liberman L
journal: Pediatrics
year: '2020'
doi: 10.1542/peds.2020-009738
content_type: abstract_only
---

# MIS-C and Cardiac Conduction Abnormalities.
**Authors:** Choi NH, Fremed M, Starc T, Weller R, Cheung E, Ferris A, Silver ES, Liberman L
**Journal:** Pediatrics (2020)
**DOI:** [10.1542/peds.2020-009738](https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2020-009738)

## Content

1. Pediatrics. 2020 Dec;146(6):e2020009738. doi: 10.1542/peds.2020-009738. Epub 
2020 Nov 12.

MIS-C and Cardiac Conduction Abnormalities.

Choi NH(1), Fremed M(1), Starc T(1), Weller R(1), Cheung E(1), Ferris A(1), 
Silver ES(1), Liberman L(2).

Author information:
(1)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, NewYork-Presbyterian Morgan Stanley 
Children's Hospital, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, New 
York.
(2)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, NewYork-Presbyterian Morgan Stanley 
Children's Hospital, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, New 
York ll202@cumc.columbia.edu.

Erratum in
    Pediatrics. 2022 May 1;149(5):e2022056877. doi: 10.1542/peds.2022-056877.

OBJECTIVES: Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) has spread 
through the pediatric population during the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic. 
Our objective for the study was to report the prevalence of conduction anomalies 
in MIS-C and identify predictive factors for the conduction abnormalities.
METHODS: We performed a single-center retrospective cohort study of pediatric 
patients <21 years of age presenting with MIS-C over a 1-month period. We 
collected clinical outcomes, laboratory findings, and diagnostic studies, 
including serial electrocardiograms, in all patients with MIS-C to identify 
those with first-degree atrioventricular block (AVB) during the acute phase and 
assess for predictive factors.
RESULTS: Thirty-two patients met inclusion criteria. Median age at admission was 
9 years. Six of 32 patients (19%) were found to have first-degree AVB, with a 
median longest PR interval of 225 milliseconds (interquartile range 200-302), 
compared with 140 milliseconds (interquartile range 80-178) in patients without 
first-degree AVB. The onset of AVB occurred at a median of 8 days after the 
initial symptoms and returned to normal 3 days thereafter. No patients developed 
advanced AVB, although 1 patient developed a PR interval >300 milliseconds. 
Another patient developed new-onset right bundle branch block, which resolved 
during hospitalization. Cardiac enzymes, inflammatory markers, and cardiac 
function were not associated with AVB development.
CONCLUSIONS: In our population, there is a 19% prevalence of first-degree AVB in 
patients with MIS-C. All patients with a prolonged PR interval recovered without 
progression to high-degree AVB. Patients admitted with MIS-C require close 
electrocardiogram monitoring during the acute phase.

Copyright © 2020 by the American Academy of Pediatrics.

DOI: 10.1542/peds.2020-009738
PMID: 33184170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: POTENTIAL CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The authors have 
indicated they have no potential conflicts of interest to disclose.