---
reference_id: "PMID:36465068"
title: "Long-term Outcomes of Patients with Systemic Lupus Erythematosus: A Multicenter Cohort Study from CSTAR Registry."
authors:
- Wang Z
- Li M
- Ye Z
- Li C
- Li Z
- Li X
- Wu L
- Liu S
- Zuo X
- Zhu P
- Wang Z
- Ma L
- Zhang M
- Hou Z
- Bi L
- Wang Y
- Zhao J
- Wang Q
- Tian X
- Zeng X
journal: Rheumatol Immunol Res
year: '2021'
doi: 10.2478/rir-2021-0025
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term Outcomes of Patients with Systemic Lupus Erythematosus: A Multicenter Cohort Study from CSTAR Registry.
**Authors:** Wang Z, Li M, Ye Z, Li C, Li Z, Li X, Wu L, Liu S, Zuo X, Zhu P, Wang Z, Ma L, Zhang M, Hou Z, Bi L, Wang Y, Zhao J, Wang Q, Tian X, Zeng X
**Journal:** Rheumatol Immunol Res (2021)
**DOI:** [10.2478/rir-2021-0025](https://doi.org/10.2478/rir-2021-0025)

## Content

1. Rheumatol Immunol Res. 2021 Dec 15;2(3):195-202. doi: 10.2478/rir-2021-0025.
eCollection 2021 Sep.

Long-term Outcomes of Patients with Systemic Lupus Erythematosus: A Multicenter
Cohort Study from CSTAR Registry.

Wang Z(1), Li M(1), Ye Z(2), Li C(3), Li Z(4), Li X(5), Wu L(6), Liu S(7), Zuo
X(8), Zhu P(9), Wang Z(10), Ma L(11), Zhang M(12), Hou Z(13), Bi L(14), Wang
Y(15), Zhao J(1), Wang Q(1), Tian X(1), Zeng X(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Peking
Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Key Laboratory of
Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Ministry of Education, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Rheumatology, The Fourth People's Hospital of Shenzhen
Affiliated to Guangdong Medical College, Shenzhen, China.
(3)Department of Rheumatology, Beijing Children Hospital Affiliated to Capital
Medical University, Beijing, China.
(4)Department of Rheumatology, The Affiliated Hospital of Bengbu Medical
College, Bengbu, China.
(5)Department of Rheumatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of USTC, Anhui
Provincial Hospital, Hefei, China.
(6)Department of Rheumatology, The People's Hospital of Xinjiang Autonomous
Region, Urumqi, China.
(7)Department of Rheumatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Zhengzhou, China.
(8)Department of Rheumatology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, China.
(9)Department of Clinical Immunology, PLA Specialized Research Institute of
Rheumatology and Immunology, Xijing Hospital, Airforce Military Medical
University, Xi'an, China.
(10)Department of Rheumatology, Beijing Tongren Hospital Affiliated to Capital
Medical University, Beijing, China.
(11)Department of Rheumatology, China-Japan Friendship Hospital Affiliated to
the National Health Commission of PRC, Beijing, China.
(12)Department of Rheumatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China.
(13)Department of Rheumatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Shantou
University Medical College, Shantou, China.
(14)Department of Rheumatology, Sino-Japanese friendship Hospital of Jilin
University, Changchun, China.
(15)Department of Epidemiology and Bio-statistics, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, China Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the long-term outcomes, in the context of both mortality and
organ damage in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in the Chinese
SLE Treatment and Research group (CSTAR) registry cohort.
METHODS: Patients were enrolled from April 2009 to February 2010 and they were
followed up. The demographic data, clinical manifestations, labs test results
and imaging examinations, disease activity (SLEDAI-2K), damage scores
(SLLIC/Damage Index [SDI]), and medications were collected. Data were censored
at either the last clinic visit or telephonic interview. Survival rate was
analyzed by Kaplan-Meier (KM) method. COX proportional hazard model was adopted
to perform the analysis of predicting factors for mortality and organ damage.
Logistic regression analysis was employed to discuss the relationship among
mortality, organ damage, and flare.
RESULTS: A total of 2104 patients were recruited at baseline and 1494 patients
were followed up. The cumulative 1-year, 3-year, and 5-year survival rates were
98.3%, 96.9%, and 95.7%, respectively. Seventy-eight patients died during
follow-up, and the main causes of death were infection (34.6%), active disease
(26.9%), cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events (5.13%), and malignancy
(5.13%). At entry, 247 patients presented with irreversible organ damage and it
increased to 398 patients at the endpoint. The major accumulated organ damages
were kidney (25.9%), musculoskeletal disease (20.2%), neuropsychiatric disease
(12.2%), and pulmonary damage (10.9%). Cox regression analysis further showed
that male, late disease onset, delayed diagnosis (diagnosis from disease onset
>1 year), baseline organ damage, and specific organ involvements predicted for
higher mortality. In addition, early disease onset was a protecting factor for
organ damage, and anti-SSA was an independent predicting factor for new organ
damage. Logistic regression analysis showed that flare predicted for more organ
damage.
CONCLUSION: The 5-year survival rate of Chinese SLE patients has improved and is
comparable to Caucasians SLE patients. Disease flare impact on prognosis is the
increasing risk of damage development. Early diagnosis, prevention for flare and
damage to maintain remission, may improve outcome.

© 2021 Ziqian Wang et al., published by Sciendo.

DOI: 10.2478/rir-2021-0025
PMCID: PMC9524789
PMID: 36465068

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Xiaofeng Zeng is the
Editor-in-Chief of the journal; Xinping Tian is the Executive Editor-in-Chief;
Mengtao Li is an Associate Editor-in-Chief; Yanhong Wang and Jiuliang Zhao are
Editorial Board Members. The article was subject to the journal’s standard
procedures, with peer review handled independently of these members and their
research groups.
