---
reference_id: "PMID:24957864"
title: Genetic predisposition to schizophrenia associated with increased use of cannabis.
authors:
- Power RA
- Verweij KJ
- Zuhair M
- Montgomery GW
- Henders AK
- Heath AC
- Madden PA
- Medland SE
- Wray NR
- Martin NG
journal: Mol Psychiatry
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1038/mp.2014.51
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Genetic predisposition to schizophrenia associated with increased use of cannabis.
**Authors:** Power RA, Verweij KJ, Zuhair M, Montgomery GW, Henders AK, Heath AC, Madden PA, Medland SE, Wray NR, Martin NG
**Journal:** Mol Psychiatry (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1038/mp.2014.51](https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2014.51)

## Content

1. Mol Psychiatry. 2014 Nov;19(11):1201-4. doi: 10.1038/mp.2014.51. Epub 2014 Jun
 24.

Genetic predisposition to schizophrenia associated with increased use of 
cannabis.

Power RA(1), Verweij KJ(2), Zuhair M(3), Montgomery GW(4), Henders AK(4), Heath 
AC(5), Madden PA(5), Medland SE(4), Wray NR(6), Martin NG(4).

Author information:
(1)1] MRC Social, Genetic & Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of 
Psychiatry, King's College London, London, UK [2] Queensland Brain Institute, 
The University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD, Australia.
(2)Department of Developmental Psychology and EMGO Institute for Health and Care 
Research, VU University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(3)MRC Social, Genetic & Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of 
Psychiatry, King's College London, London, UK.
(4)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
(5)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
MO, USA.
(6)Queensland Brain Institute, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD, 
Australia.

Cannabis is the most commonly used illicit drug worldwide. With debate 
surrounding the legalization and control of use, investigating its health risks 
has become a pressing area of research. One established association is that 
between cannabis use and schizophrenia, a debilitating psychiatric disorder 
affecting ~1% of the population over their lifetime. Although considerable 
evidence implicates cannabis use as a component cause of schizophrenia, it 
remains unclear whether this is entirely due to cannabis directly raising risk 
of psychosis, or whether the same genes that increases psychosis risk may also 
increase risk of cannabis use. In a sample of 2082 healthy individuals, we show 
an association between an individual's burden of schizophrenia risk alleles and 
use of cannabis. This was significant both for comparing those who have ever 
versus never used cannabis (P=2.6 × 10(-4)), and for quantity of use within 
users (P=3.0 × 10(-3)). Although directly predicting only a small amount of the 
variance in cannabis use, these findings suggest that part of the association 
between schizophrenia and cannabis is due to a shared genetic aetiology. This 
form of gene-environment correlation is an important consideration when 
calculating the impact of environmental risk factors, including cannabis use.

DOI: 10.1038/mp.2014.51
PMCID: PMC4382963
PMID: 24957864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None