---
reference_id: "PMID:31182801"
title: The current and future global distribution and population at risk of dengue.
authors:
- Messina JP
- Brady OJ
- Golding N
- Kraemer MUG
- Wint GRW
- Ray SE
- Pigott DM
- Shearer FM
- Johnson K
- Earl L
- Marczak LB
- Shirude S
- Davis Weaver N
- Gilbert M
- Velayudhan R
- Jones P
- Jaenisch T
- Scott TW
- Reiner RC Jr
- Hay SI
journal: Nat Microbiol
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1038/s41564-019-0476-8
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The current and future global distribution and population at risk of dengue.
**Authors:** Messina JP, Brady OJ, Golding N, Kraemer MUG, Wint GRW, Ray SE, Pigott DM, Shearer FM, Johnson K, Earl L, Marczak LB, Shirude S, Davis Weaver N, Gilbert M, Velayudhan R, Jones P, Jaenisch T, Scott TW, Reiner RC Jr, Hay SI
**Journal:** Nat Microbiol (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1038/s41564-019-0476-8](https://doi.org/10.1038/s41564-019-0476-8)

## Content

1. Nat Microbiol. 2019 Sep;4(9):1508-1515. doi: 10.1038/s41564-019-0476-8. Epub 
2019 Jun 10.

The current and future global distribution and population at risk of dengue.

Messina JP(#)(1)(2), Brady OJ(#)(3)(4), Golding N(5), Kraemer MUG(6)(7)(8), Wint 
GRW(9), Ray SE(10), Pigott DM(10), Shearer FM(11), Johnson K(10), Earl L(10), 
Marczak LB(10), Shirude S(10), Davis Weaver N(10), Gilbert M(12), Velayudhan 
R(13), Jones P(14), Jaenisch T(15), Scott TW(16), Reiner RC Jr(10), Hay SI(17).

Author information:
(1)School of Geography and the Environment, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 
jane.messina@ouce.ox.ac.uk.
(2)School of Interdisciplinary Area Studies, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 
jane.messina@ouce.ox.ac.uk.
(3)Centre for the Mathematical Modelling of Infectious Diseases, London School 
of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(4)Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, London School of Hygiene & 
Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(5)School of BioSciences, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Australia.
(6)Harvard Medical School, Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(8)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(9)Environmental Research Group Oxford, c/o Department of Zoology, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(10)Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA.
(11)Big Data Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre for Health Information and Discovery, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(12)Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.
(13)World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.
(14)Waen Associates Ltd, Y Waen, Islaw'r Dref, Dolgellau, Gwynedd, UK.
(15)Department of Infectious Diseases, Section Clinical Tropical Medicine, 
Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.
(16)Department of Entomology and Nematology, University of California, Davis, 
USA.
(17)Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, USA. sihay@uw.edu.
(#)Contributed equally

Dengue is a mosquito-borne viral infection that has spread throughout the 
tropical world over the past 60 years and now affects over half the world's 
population. The geographical range of dengue is expected to further expand due 
to ongoing global phenomena including climate change and urbanization. We 
applied statistical mapping techniques to the most extensive database of case 
locations to date to predict global environmental suitability for the virus as 
of 2015. We then made use of climate, population and socioeconomic projections 
for the years 2020, 2050 and 2080 to project future changes in virus suitability 
and human population at risk. This study is the first to consider the spread of 
Aedes mosquito vectors to project dengue suitability. Our projections provide a 
key missing piece of evidence for the changing global threat of vector-borne 
disease and will help decision-makers worldwide to better prepare for and 
respond to future changes in dengue risk.

DOI: 10.1038/s41564-019-0476-8
PMCID: PMC6784886
PMID: 31182801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no competing interests.