---
reference_id: PMID:36927117
title: Management of Acne Vulgaris With Trifarotene.
authors:
- Tan J
- Chavda R
- Baldwin H
- Dreno B
journal: J Cutan Med Surg
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1177/12034754231163542
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Management of Acne Vulgaris With Trifarotene.
**Authors:** Tan J, Chavda R, Baldwin H, Dreno B
**Journal:** J Cutan Med Surg (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1177/12034754231163542](https://doi.org/10.1177/12034754231163542)

## Content

1. J Cutan Med Surg. 2023 Jul-Aug;27(4):368-374. doi: 10.1177/12034754231163542. 
Epub 2023 Mar 16.

Management of Acne Vulgaris With Trifarotene.

Tan J(1)(2), Chavda R(3), Baldwin H(4)(5), Dreno B(6).

Author information:
(1)Windsor Clinical Research Inc, Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Western Ontario, Windsor Campus, 
Canada.
(3)Galderma, Switzerland.
(4)Robert Wood Johnson Medical Center, New Brunswick, New Jersey, USA.
(5)The Acne Treatment and Research Center, Brooklyn, New York, USA.
(6)Dermato-cancerology Department, CHU Nantes, University of Nantes, France.

Topical retinoids have an essential role in treatment of acne. Trifarotene, a 
topical retinoid selective for retinoic acid receptor (RAR) γ, is the most 
recent retinoid approved for treatment of acne. RAR-γ is the most common isoform 
of RARs in skin, and the strong selectivity of trifarotene for RAR-γ translates 
to efficacy in low concentration. Trifarotene, like other topical retinoids, 
acts by increasing keratinocyte differentiation and decreasing proliferation, 
which reduces hyperkeratinization. Retinoids have also been shown to inhibit 
inflammatory pathways via effects on leukocyte migration, toll-like receptors, 
and Activator Protein (AP)-1. Large-scale randomized, controlled clinical trials 
have demonstrated trifarotene to be safe, well tolerated, and efficacious in 
reducing both comedones and papules/pustules of acne. However, unlike all other 
retinoids, trifarotene is the first topical retinoid with rigorous clinical data 
on safety and efficacy in truncal acne. Data supporting use of trifarotene to 
manage acne are reviewed in this publication.

DOI: 10.1177/12034754231163542
PMCID: PMC10486177
PMID: 36927117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared the following potential 
conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or 
publication of this article: Dr Tan has acted as an advisor, consultant, 
investigator and/or speaker and received grants/honoraria from Bausch, Galderma, 
Pfizer, Almirall, Boots/Walgreens, Botanix, Cipher Pharmaceuticals, Galderma, 
Novan, Novartis, Promius, Sun Pharma, Vichy, Cutera, CeraVe and La Roche Posay; 
Dr Chavda is an employee of Galderma; Dr Baldwin has acted as an investigator, 
consultant, and/or speaker for Almirall, Bausch, Cassiopea, EPI Health, 
Galderma, La Roche-Posay, L’Oreal, Mayne Pharma, Sol-Gel, Sun Pharma, and Vyne; 
Pr Dreno has acted as a consultant for Galderma.