---
reference_id: "PMID:7550321"
title: "Dominant mutations in the type II collagen gene, COL2A1, produce spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia, Strudwick type."
authors:
- Tiller GE
- Polumbo PA
- Weis MA
- Bogaert R
- Lachman RS
- Cohn DH
- Rimoin DL
- Eyre DR
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1995'
doi: 10.1038/ng0995-87
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Dominant mutations in the type II collagen gene, COL2A1, produce spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia, Strudwick type.
**Authors:** Tiller GE, Polumbo PA, Weis MA, Bogaert R, Lachman RS, Cohn DH, Rimoin DL, Eyre DR
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1995)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng0995-87](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng0995-87)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1995 Sep;11(1):87-9. doi: 10.1038/ng0995-87.

Dominant mutations in the type II collagen gene, COL2A1, produce 
spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia, Strudwick type.

Tiller GE(1), Polumbo PA, Weis MA, Bogaert R, Lachman RS, Cohn DH, Rimoin DL, 
Eyre DR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 
Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

The chondrodysplasias are a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by 
abnormal growth or development of cartilage. Current classification is based on 
mode of inheritance as well as clinical, histologic, and/or radiographic 
features. A clinical spectrum of chondrodysplasia phenotypes, ranging from mild 
to perinatal lethal, is due to defects in the gene for type II collagen, COL2A1. 
This spectrum includes Stickler syndrome, Kniest dysplasia, spondyloepiphyseal 
dysplasia congenita (SEDC), achondrogenesis type II, and hypochondrogenesis. 
Individuals affected with these disorders exhibit abnormalities of the growth 
plate, nucleus pulposus, and vitreous humor, which are tissues that contain type 
II collagen. The Strudwick type of spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia (SEMD) is 
characterized by disproportionate short stature, pectus carinatum, and 
scoliosis, as well as dappled metaphyses (which are not seen in SEDC). The 
phenotype was first described by Murdoch and Walker in 1969, and a series of 14 
patients was later reported by Anderson et al. The observation of two affected 
sibs born to unaffected parents led to the classification of SEMD Strudwick as 
an autosomal recessive disorder. We now describe the biochemical 
characterization of defects in alpha 1(II) collagen in three unrelated 
individuals with SEMD Strudwick, each of which is due to heterozygosity for a 
unique mutation in COL2A1. Our data support the hypothesis that some cases, if 
not all cases, of this distinctive chondrodysplasia result from dominant 
mutations in COL2A1, thus expanding the clinical spectrum of phenotypes 
associated with this gene.

DOI: 10.1038/ng0995-87
PMID: 7550321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]