---
reference_id: "PMID:29533749"
title: "Chikungunya virus: a rheumatologist's perspective."
authors:
- Runowska M
- Majewski D
- Niklas K
- Puszczewicz M
journal: Clin Exp Rheumatol
year: '2018'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Chikungunya virus: a rheumatologist's perspective.
**Authors:** Runowska M, Majewski D, Niklas K, Puszczewicz M
**Journal:** Clin Exp Rheumatol (2018)

## Content

1. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2018 May-Jun;36(3):494-501. Epub 2018 Mar 2.

Chikungunya virus: a rheumatologist's perspective.

Runowska M(1), Majewski D(2), Niklas K(2), Puszczewicz M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Internal Diseases, Poznań University of 
Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland. marta.runowska1@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Rheumatology and Internal Diseases, Poznań University of 
Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland.

Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) is an arthropod-borne alphavirus, transmitted by Aedes 
aegypti and Aedes albopictus mosquitoes. It is responsible for a febrile 
illness, typically accompanied by maculopapular rash and severe, incapacitating 
arthralgia. The disease, although generally self-limiting, frequently evolves 
into a long-lasting, debilitating rheumatic disorder, which shares many clinical 
features with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The underlying mechanism by which CHIKV 
induces persistent arthritis remains under investigation, however, currently, 
attention is drawn to the fact, that chronic chikungunya (CHIK) and RA have many 
common cellular and cytokine pathways involved in their pathogenesis. Over the 
past decades, the virus has dispersed unexpectedly from tropical and subtropical 
regions of Africa and Asia, affecting millions of people worldwide. No licensed 
vaccine, nor antiviral drug against CHIKV is yet available. Treatment of acute 
CHIK is symptomatic, whereas in chronic stages, different disease-modifying 
anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs) have been used with variable success. Hence, 
chronic CHIK is an emerging rheumatic condition that rheumatologists have to 
deal with. This review provides brief insights into the epidemiology, 
pathogenesis, clinical features and management of Chikungunya disease, with 
special regard to post-chikungunya rheumatic disorder and its relationship with 
RA.

PMID: 29533749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]