---
reference_id: "PMID:37236210"
title: "Progression of cerebral amyloid angiopathy: a pathophysiological framework."
authors:
- Koemans EA
- Chhatwal JP
- van Veluw SJ
- van Etten ES
- van Osch MJP
- van Walderveen MAA
- Sohrabi HR
- Kozberg MG
- Shirzadi Z
- Terwindt GM
- van Buchem MA
- Smith EE
- Werring DJ
- Martins RN
- Wermer MJH
- Greenberg SM
journal: Lancet Neurol
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(23)00114-X
keywords:
- Mice
- Animals
- Amyloid beta-Peptides
- Cerebral Amyloid Angiopathy/complications
- Brain/pathology
- Cerebral Hemorrhage/complications
- Cognitive Dysfunction/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Progression of cerebral amyloid angiopathy: a pathophysiological framework.
**Authors:** Koemans EA, Chhatwal JP, van Veluw SJ, van Etten ES, van Osch MJP, van Walderveen MAA, Sohrabi HR, Kozberg MG, Shirzadi Z, Terwindt GM, van Buchem MA, Smith EE, Werring DJ, Martins RN, Wermer MJH, Greenberg SM
**Journal:** Lancet Neurol (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/S1474-4422(23)00114-X](https://doi.org/10.1016/S1474-4422(23)00114-X)

## Content

1. Lancet Neurol. 2023 Jul;22(7):632-642. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(23)00114-X.
Epub  2023 May 23.

Progression of cerebral amyloid angiopathy: a pathophysiological framework.

Koemans EA(1), Chhatwal JP(2), van Veluw SJ(2), van Etten ES(1), van Osch 
MJP(1), van Walderveen MAA(1), Sohrabi HR(3), Kozberg MG(2), Shirzadi Z(2), 
Terwindt GM(1), van Buchem MA(1), Smith EE(4), Werring DJ(5), Martins RN(6), 
Wermer MJH(1), Greenberg SM(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Department of Radiology, Leiden University 
Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands.
(2)Department of Neurology and Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Centre for Healthy Ageing, Health Future Institute, Murdoch University, 
Perth, WA, Australia; Department of Biomedical Sciences, Macquarie University, 
North Ryde, NSW, Australia.
(4)Department of Clinical Neurosciences and Hotchkiss Brain Institute, 
University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
(5)Stroke Research Centre, Department of Brain Repair and Rehabilitation, 
University College London Queen Square Institute of Neurology, London, UK; 
National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, London, UK.
(6)Centre for Healthy Ageing, Health Future Institute, Murdoch University, 
Perth, WA, Australia; Department of Biomedical Sciences, Macquarie University, 
North Ryde, NSW, Australia; School of Medical and Health Sciences, Edith Cowan 
University, Joondalup, WA, Australia.
(7)Department of Neurology and Department of Radiology, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. Electronic address: sgreenberg@mgh.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2023 Jul;22(7):550-551. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(23)00196-5.

Cerebral amyloid angiopathy, which is defined by cerebrovascular deposition of 
amyloid β, is a common age-related small vessel pathology associated with 
intracerebral haemorrhage and cognitive impairment. Based on complementary lines 
of evidence from in vivo studies of individuals with hereditary, sporadic, and 
iatrogenic forms of cerebral amyloid angiopathy, histopathological analyses of 
affected brains, and experimental studies in transgenic mouse models, we present 
a framework and timeline for the progression of cerebral amyloid angiopathy from 
subclinical pathology to the clinical manifestation of the disease. Key stages 
that appear to evolve sequentially over two to three decades are (stage one) 
initial vascular amyloid deposition, (stage two) alteration of cerebrovascular 
physiology, (stage three) non-haemorrhagic brain injury, and (stage four) 
appearance of haemorrhagic brain lesions. This timeline of stages and the 
mechanistic processes that link them have substantial implications for 
identifying disease-modifying interventions for cerebral amyloid angiopathy and 
potentially for other cerebral small vessel diseases.

Copyright © 2023 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(23)00114-X
PMID: 37236210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests EAK reports funding 
from the Dutch CAA Foundation, Dutch Alzheimer Foundation, Dutch Heart 
Foundation, and KNAW van Leersum. SJvV reports funding from Therini Bio. MJPvO 
reports funding to his institution from Alnylam and Biogen, research funding 
from Phillips, and an unpaid leadership role for ISMRM study group on 
Neurofluids. MAAvW reports funding to her institution from Alnylam and Biogen. 
HRS reports funding to his institution from Alnylam and Biogen and lecture 
honoraria for ACNEM practitioners. ZS reports funding from the Alzheimer's 
society of Canada. MAvB reports funding to his institution from Alnylam and 
Biogen and research funding from Phillips. GMT reports funding to her 
institution from Alynlam and Biogen. EES reports consulting fees from Eli Lilly. 
DJW reports consulting fees from Alnylam and NovoNordisk; honoraria from 
NovoNordisk, Bayer, and Alexion; and unpaid leadership roles with the National 
Institute for Health and Care Excellence and the British & Irish Association of 
Stroke Physicians. MJHW reports funding to her institution from Alynlam and 
Biogen. SMG reports support from the Frechette Foundation and an unpaid 
leadership role for the International CAA Association.