---
reference_id: "PMID:22197273"
title: CD27 deficiency is associated with combined immunodeficiency and persistent symptomatic EBV viremia.
authors:
- van Montfrans JM
- Hoepelman AI
- Otto S
- van Gijn M
- van de Corput L
- de Weger RA
- Monaco-Shawver L
- Banerjee PP
- Sanders EA
- Jol-van der Zijde CM
- Betts MR
- Orange JS
- Bloem AC
- Tesselaar K
journal: J Allergy Clin Immunol
year: '2012'
doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2011.11.013
keywords:
- Agammaglobulinemia/etiology
- "Anemia, Aplastic/complications, genetics, immunology, physiopathology, virology"
- "B-Lymphocytes/immunology, metabolism, pathology"
- "Cells, Cultured"
- Consanguinity
- "Epstein-Barr Virus Infections/complications, genetics, immunology, physiopathology, virology"
- Fatal Outcome
- "Gram-Positive Bacterial Infections/complications, genetics, immunology, physiopathology, virology"
- "Herpesvirus 4, Human/immunology, pathogenicity"
- Humans
- "Immunity, Humoral/genetics"
- Male
- Mutation/genetics
- Pedigree
- "Severe Combined Immunodeficiency/complications, genetics, immunology, physiopathology, virology"
- Siblings
- "T-Lymphocytes/immunology, metabolism, pathology"
- "Tumor Necrosis Factor Receptor Superfamily, Member 7/genetics"
- "Viremia/genetics, immunology, virology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# CD27 deficiency is associated with combined immunodeficiency and persistent symptomatic EBV viremia.
**Authors:** van Montfrans JM, Hoepelman AI, Otto S, van Gijn M, van de Corput L, de Weger RA, Monaco-Shawver L, Banerjee PP, Sanders EA, Jol-van der Zijde CM, Betts MR, Orange JS, Bloem AC, Tesselaar K
**Journal:** J Allergy Clin Immunol (2012)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.jaci.2011.11.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaci.2011.11.013)

## Content

1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2012 Mar;129(3):787-793.e6. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2011.11.013. Epub 2011 Dec 24.

CD27 deficiency is associated with combined immunodeficiency and persistent
symptomatic EBV viremia.

van Montfrans JM(1), Hoepelman AI, Otto S, van Gijn M, van de Corput L, de Weger
RA, Monaco-Shawver L, Banerjee PP, Sanders EA, Jol-van der Zijde CM, Betts MR,
Orange JS, Bloem AC, Tesselaar K.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Pediatric Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Wilhelmina
Children's Hospital/University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2012 Apr;129(4):1175; author reply 1175-6. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2012.01.053.

BACKGROUND: CD27 is a lymphocyte costimulatory molecule that regulates T-cell,
natural killer (NK) cell, B-cell, and plasma cell function, survival, and
differentiation. On the basis of its function and expression pattern, we
considered CD27 a candidate gene in patients with hypogammaglobulinemia.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to describe the clinical and immunologic phenotypes of
patients with genetic CD27 deficiency.
METHODS: A molecular and extended immunologic analysis was performed on 2
patients lacking CD27 expression.
RESULTS: We identified 2 brothers with a homozygous mutation in CD27 leading to
absence of CD27 expression. Both patients had persistent symptomatic EBV
viremia. The index patient was hypogammaglobulinemic, and immunoglobulin
replacement therapy was initiated. His brother had aplastic anemia in the course
of his EBV infection and died from fulminant gram-positive bacterial sepsis.
Immunologically, lack of CD27 expression was associated with impaired T
cell-dependent B-cell responses and T-cell dysfunction.
CONCLUSION: Our findings identify a role for CD27 in human subjects and suggest
that this deficiency can explain particular cases of persistent symptomatic EBV
viremia with hypogammaglobulinemia and impaired T cell-dependent antibody
generation.

Copyright © 2011 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jaci.2011.11.013
PMCID: PMC3294016
PMID: 22197273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest All authors declare that
they have no conflict of interest.
