---
reference_id: "PMID:31726291"
title: Patterns of neurological manifestations in Woodhouse-Sakati Syndrome.
authors:
- Bohlega S
- Abusrair AH
- Al-Ajlan FS
- Alharbi N
- Al-Semari A
- Bohlega B
- Abualsaud D
- Alkuraya F
journal: Parkinsonism Relat Disord
year: '2019'
doi: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2019.10.007
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Alopecia/complications
- "Arrhythmias, Cardiac/complications"
- Basal Ganglia Diseases/complications
- Diabetes Mellitus
- Disease Progression
- Female
- Humans
- Hypogonadism/complications
- Intellectual Disability/complications
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Nervous System Diseases/genetics
- Phenotype
- Retrospective Studies
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Patterns of neurological manifestations in Woodhouse-Sakati Syndrome.
**Authors:** Bohlega S, Abusrair AH, Al-Ajlan FS, Alharbi N, Al-Semari A, Bohlega B, Abualsaud D, Alkuraya F
**Journal:** Parkinsonism Relat Disord (2019)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.parkreldis.2019.10.007](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parkreldis.2019.10.007)

## Content

1. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2019 Dec;69:99-103. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2019.10.007. Epub 2019 Oct 13.

Patterns of neurological manifestations in Woodhouse-Sakati Syndrome.

Bohlega S(1), Abusrair AH(2), Al-Ajlan FS(2), Alharbi N(3), Al-Semari A(2), 
Bohlega B(4), Abualsaud D(2), Alkuraya F(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research 
Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Electronic address: boholega@kfshrc.edu.sa.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research 
Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine Qassim University ,Qassim, Saudi 
Arabia. Electronic address: noraalharbi@qumed.edu.sa.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, King Faisal 
Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(5)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Woodhouse-Sakati syndrome (WSS) is a rare autosomal recessive 
disease with characteristic neuro-endocrine manifestations. WSS encompasses 
heterogeneous phenotypes and disease course.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to characterize neurological involvement of the disease 
through subgrouping of core neurological manifestations.
METHODS: A single-institution retrospective analysis of patients with clinically 
and genetically confirmed diagnosis of WSS.
RESULTS: A total of 38 individuals belonging to 17 families were identified to 
have WSS. The mean age at enrollment was 30.1 years (range 16-53 years). 
Neurological involvement was noted in 31 patients (81.5%). Dystonia was the most 
common neurological manifestation (67%), followed by intellectual disability 
(45%) and sensorineural hearing loss (30%). Based on the Neurological Impairment 
Scale (NIS), the disease was recognized to have two distinct patterns. A 
disabling, rapidly progressive pattern (NIS of 3-4; Type 1) was noted in 
eighteen patients (12 males, 6 females; 47.4%) with severe disability that 
occurs within a mean duration of 7.4 ± 3.6 years. Type 2 WSS was identified in 
twenty patients (8 males, 12 females; 52.6%), and showed either absent or mild 
neurological involvement with preserved activities of daily living (NIS of 0-1). 
The mean age of onset for neurological manifestations was earlier in type 1 
(12.6 ± 4.5 years) compared to type 2 (18.1 ± 4.3 years). Type 1 WSS has a 
significantly higher rate of intellectual disability (p= <0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: In this pleiotropic syndrome, we identified two distinct phenotypes 
with variable prognosis. A high Interfamilial and intrafamilial phenotypic 
variability despite having a similar gene mutation suggests a possible role of 
genetic or environmental modifying factor.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2019.10.007
PMID: 31726291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]