---
reference_id: "PMID:26668499"
title: Helicobacter pylori-induced inflammation and epigenetic changes during gastric carcinogenesis.
authors:
- Valenzuela MA
- Canales J
- Corvalán AH
- Quest AF
journal: World J Gastroenterol
year: '2015'
doi: 10.3748/wjg.v21.i45.12742
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Helicobacter pylori-induced inflammation and epigenetic changes during gastric carcinogenesis.
**Authors:** Valenzuela MA, Canales J, Corvalán AH, Quest AF
**Journal:** World J Gastroenterol (2015)
**DOI:** [10.3748/wjg.v21.i45.12742](https://doi.org/10.3748/wjg.v21.i45.12742)

## Content

1. World J Gastroenterol. 2015 Dec 7;21(45):12742-56. doi: 
10.3748/wjg.v21.i45.12742.

Helicobacter pylori-induced inflammation and epigenetic changes during gastric 
carcinogenesis.

Valenzuela MA(1), Canales J(1), Corvalán AH(1), Quest AF(1).

Author information:
(1)Manuel A Valenzuela, Jimena Canales, Andrew FG Quest, Laboratorio de 
Comunicaciones Celulares, Centro de Estudios Moleculares de la Célula, Programa 
de Biología Celular y Molecular, ICBM, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de 
Chile, Santiago 8380453, Chile.

The sequence of events associated with the development of gastric cancer has 
been described as "the gastric precancerous cascade". This cascade is a dynamic 
process that includes lesions, such as atrophic gastritis, intestinal metaplasia 
and dysplasia. According to this model, Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) 
infection targets the normal gastric mucosa causing non-atrophic gastritis, an 
initiating lesion that can be cured by clearing H. pylori with antibiotics or 
that may then linger in the case of chronic infection and progress to atrophic 
gastritis. The presence of virulence factors in the infecting H. pylori drives 
the carcinogenesis process. Independent epidemiological and animal studies have 
confirmed the sequential progression of these precancerous lesions. Particularly 
long-term follow-up studies estimated a risk of 0.1% for atrophic 
gastritis/intestinal metaplasia and 6% in case of dysplasia for the long-term 
development of gastric cancer. With this in mind, a better understanding of the 
genetic and epigenetic changes associated with progression of the cascade is 
critical in determining the risk of gastric cancer associated with H. pylori 
infection. In this review, we will summarize some of the most relevant 
mechanisms and focus predominantly but not exclusively on the discussion of gene 
promoter methylation and miRNAs in this context.

DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v21.i45.12742
PMCID: PMC4671030
PMID: 26668499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]