---
reference_id: "PMID:21932319"
title: "Néstor-Guillermo progeria syndrome: a novel premature aging condition with early onset and chronic development caused by BANF1 mutations."
authors:
- Cabanillas R
- Cadiñanos J
- Villameytide JA
- Pérez M
- Longo J
- Richard JM
- Alvarez R
- Durán NS
- Illán R
- González DJ
- López-Otín C
journal: Am J Med Genet A
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34249
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- "Bone Diseases, Developmental/genetics, pathology"
- Child
- "Child, Preschool"
- Chronic Disease
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- DNA-Binding Proteins/genetics
- Genetic Testing
- "Growth Disorders/genetics, pathology"
- Humans
- Male
- Mutation
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Phenotype
- "Progeria/diagnosis, genetics, pathology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Néstor-Guillermo progeria syndrome: a novel premature aging condition with early onset and chronic development caused by BANF1 mutations.
**Authors:** Cabanillas R, Cadiñanos J, Villameytide JA, Pérez M, Longo J, Richard JM, Alvarez R, Durán NS, Illán R, González DJ, López-Otín C
**Journal:** Am J Med Genet A (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1002/ajmg.a.34249](https://doi.org/10.1002/ajmg.a.34249)

## Content

1. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Nov;155A(11):2617-25. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34249. Epub 
2011 Sep 19.

Néstor-Guillermo progeria syndrome: a novel premature aging condition with early 
onset and chronic development caused by BANF1 mutations.

Cabanillas R(1), Cadiñanos J, Villameytide JA, Pérez M, Longo J, Richard JM, 
Alvarez R, Durán NS, Illán R, González DJ, López-Otín C.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Medicina Oncológica y Molecular de Asturias, Asturias, Spain.

Progeria syndromes are rare disorders that involve premature aging. Mutations in 
BANF1 have been recently reported to cause a new hereditary progeroid syndrome 
that we now propose to call the Néstor-Guillermo progeria syndrome (NGPS). We 
describe herein the clinical features of the first two NGPS patients, who 
phenocopy features of classic progerias (i.e., Hutchinson-Gilford progeria 
syndrome or mandibuloacral dysplasia), such as aged appearance, growth 
retardation, decreased subcutaneous fat, thin limbs, and stiff joints. However, 
these NGPS patients have a distinctive phenotype. In their early adulthood (32 
and 24 years of age), they have no signs of cardiovascular impairment, diabetes 
mellitus, or hypertriglyceridemia. In contrast, they suffer profound skeletal 
abnormalities that affect their quality of life. The observed differences are of 
utmost importance to patients and their families and palliation of osseous 
manifestations is a priority, given their relatively long lifespan. We define 
NGPS as a chronic progeria because of its slow clinical course and relatively 
long survival, despite its early onset. Understanding the differences between 
progeria syndromes might contribute to the development of treatment strategies 
for common skeletal conditions, as well as aging itself.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34249
PMID: 21932319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]