---
reference_id: "PMID:36147814"
title: "Long-term monitoring for short/branched-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency: A single-center 4-year experience and open issues."
authors:
- Rossi A
- Turturo M
- Albano L
- Fecarotta S
- Barretta F
- Crisci D
- Gallo G
- Perfetto R
- Uomo F
- Vallone F
- Villani G
- Strisciuglio P
- Parenti G
- Frisso G
- Ruoppolo M
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2022.895921
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Long-term monitoring for short/branched-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency: A single-center 4-year experience and open issues.
**Authors:** Rossi A, Turturo M, Albano L, Fecarotta S, Barretta F, Crisci D, Gallo G, Perfetto R, Uomo F, Vallone F, Villani G, Strisciuglio P, Parenti G, Frisso G, Ruoppolo M
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2022.895921](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2022.895921)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2022 Sep 6;10:895921. doi: 10.3389/fped.2022.895921.
eCollection  2022.

Long-term monitoring for short/branched-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency:
A single-center 4-year experience and open issues.

Rossi A(1), Turturo M(2), Albano L(3), Fecarotta S(1), Barretta F(2)(3), Crisci
D(3), Gallo G(3), Perfetto R(3), Uomo F(2), Vallone F(3), Villani G(2)(3),
Strisciuglio P(1), Parenti G(1), Frisso G(2)(3), Ruoppolo M(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Translational Medicine, Section of Pediatrics, University of
Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy.
(2)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, University of
Naples "Federico II", Naples, Italy.
(3)CEINGE Biotecnologie Avanzate s.c.ar.l, Naples, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Short/branched-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (SBCADD) is
an inherited disorder of L-isoleucine metabolism due to mutations in the ACADSB
gene. The role of current diagnostic biomarkers [i.e., blood
2-methylbutyrylcarnitine (C5) and urine 2-methylbutyrylglycine (2MBG)] in
patient monitoring and the effects of proposed treatments remain uncertain as
follow-data are lacking. This study presents first systematic longitudinal
biochemical assessment in SBCADD patients.
METHODS: A retrospective, observational single-center study was conducted on
newborns born between 2017 and 2020 and suspected with SBCADD. Biochemical,
molecular, clinical and dietary data collected upon NBS recall and during the
subsequent follow-up were recorded.
RESULTS: All enrolled subjects (n = 10) received adequate protein intake and
L-carnitine supplementation. Nine subjects were diagnosed with SBCADD. During
the follow-up [median: 20.5 (4-40) months] no patient developed symptoms related
to SBCADD. No patient normalized serum C5 and urine 2MBG values. In 7/9 SBCADD
patients mean serum C5 values decreased or stabilized compared to their first
serum C5 value. A major increase in serum C5 values was observed in two patients
after L-carnitine discontinuation and during intercurrent illness, respectively.
Urine 2MBG values showed moderate intra-patient variability.
DISCUSSION: The relatively stable serum C5 values observed during L-carnitine
supplementation together with C5 increase occurring upon L-carnitine
discontinuation/intercurrent illness may support the value of serum C5 as a
monitoring biomarker and the benefit of this treatment in SBCADD patients. The
role of urine 2MBG in patient monitoring remains uncertain. As all patients were
asymptomatic, no association between biochemical parameters and clinical
phenotype could be investigated in this study.

Copyright © 2022 Rossi, Turturo, Albano, Fecarotta, Barretta, Crisci, Gallo,
Perfetto, Uomo, Vallone, Villani, Strisciuglio, Parenti, Frisso and Ruoppolo.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2022.895921
PMCID: PMC9485620
PMID: 36147814

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
