---
reference_id: "PMID:39185424"
title: The fate of immune complexes in membranous nephropathy.
authors:
- Xu J
- Hu H
- Sun Y
- Zhao Z
- Zhang D
- Yang L
- Lu Q
journal: Front Immunol
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1441017
keywords:
- "Glomerulonephritis, Membranous/immunology"
- Humans
- "Antigen-Antibody Complex/immunology, metabolism"
- "Podocytes/immunology, metabolism"
- Animals
- Autoantibodies/immunology
- Autoantigens/immunology
- "Receptors, Phospholipase A2/immunology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The fate of immune complexes in membranous nephropathy.
**Authors:** Xu J, Hu H, Sun Y, Zhao Z, Zhang D, Yang L, Lu Q
**Journal:** Front Immunol (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fimmu.2024.1441017](https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2024.1441017)

## Content

1. Front Immunol. 2024 Aug 8;15:1441017. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1441017.
eCollection 2024.

The fate of immune complexes in membranous nephropathy.

Xu J(#)(1), Hu H(#)(1), Sun Y(1), Zhao Z(1), Zhang D(2), Yang L(3), Lu Q(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing,
China.
(2)Qi Huang of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Beijing University of Chinese
Medicine, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Nephropathy, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Beijing
University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing, China.
(#)Contributed equally

The most characteristic feature of membranous nephropathy (MN) is the presence
of subepithelial electron dense deposits and the consequential thickening of the
glomerular basement membrane. There have been great advances in the
understanding of the destiny of immune complexes in MN by the benefit of
experimental models represented by Heymann nephritis. Subepithelial immune
complexes are formed in situ by autoantibodies targeting native autoantigens or
exogenous planted antigens such as the phospholipase A2 receptor (PLA2R) and
cationic BSA respectively. The nascent immune complexes would not be pathogenic
until they develop into immune deposits. Podocytes are the major source of
autoantigens in idiopathic membranous nephropathy. They also participate in the
modulation and removal of the immune complexes to a large extent. The balance
between deposition and clearance is regulated by a wide range of factors such as
the composition and physicochemical properties of the immune complexes and the
complement system. Complement components such as C3 and C1q have been reported
to be precipitated with the deposits whereas a complement regulatory protein CR1
expressed by podocytes is involved in the phagocytosis of immune complexes by
podocytes. Podocytes regulate the dynamic change of immune complexes which is
disturbed in membranous nephropathy. To elucidate the precise fate of the immune
complexes is essential for developing more rational and novel therapies for
membranous nephropathy.

Copyright © 2024 Xu, Hu, Sun, Zhao, Zhang, Yang and Lu.

DOI: 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1441017
PMCID: PMC11342396
PMID: 39185424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
