---
reference_id: "PMID:29140122"
title: "Lymphangioleiomyomatosis Diagnosis and Management: High-Resolution Chest Computed Tomography, Transbronchial Lung Biopsy, and Pleural Disease Management. An Official American Thoracic Society/Japanese Respiratory Society Clinical Practice Guideline."
authors:
- Gupta N
- Finlay GA
- Kotloff RM
- Strange C
- Wilson KC
- Young LR
- Taveira-DaSilva AM
- Johnson SR
- Cottin V
- Sahn SA
- Ryu JH
- Seyama K
- Inoue Y
- Downey GP
- Han MK
- Colby TV
- Wikenheiser-Brokamp KA
- Meyer CA
- Smith K
- Moss J
- McCormack FX
- ATS Assembly on Clinical Problems
journal: Am J Respir Crit Care Med
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1164/rccm.201709-1965ST
keywords:
- Adult
- Aged
- "Aged, 80 and over"
- Biopsy/methods
- Critical Care/standards
- Female
- Humans
- Japan
- "Lymphangioleiomyomatosis/diagnosis, therapy"
- Male
- Middle Aged
- "Pleural Diseases/diagnosis, therapy"
- Practice Guidelines as Topic
- Respiratory Care Units/standards
- Societies
- Thorax/diagnostic imaging
- "Tomography, X-Ray Computed"
- United States
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Lymphangioleiomyomatosis Diagnosis and Management: High-Resolution Chest Computed Tomography, Transbronchial Lung Biopsy, and Pleural Disease Management. An Official American Thoracic Society/Japanese Respiratory Society Clinical Practice Guideline.
**Authors:** Gupta N, Finlay GA, Kotloff RM, Strange C, Wilson KC, Young LR, Taveira-DaSilva AM, Johnson SR, Cottin V, Sahn SA, Ryu JH, Seyama K, Inoue Y, Downey GP, Han MK, Colby TV, Wikenheiser-Brokamp KA, Meyer CA, Smith K, Moss J, McCormack FX, ATS Assembly on Clinical Problems
**Journal:** Am J Respir Crit Care Med (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1164/rccm.201709-1965ST](https://doi.org/10.1164/rccm.201709-1965ST)

## Content

1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2017 Nov 15;196(10):1337-1348. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201709-1965ST.

Lymphangioleiomyomatosis Diagnosis and Management: High-Resolution Chest 
Computed Tomography, Transbronchial Lung Biopsy, and Pleural Disease Management. 
An Official American Thoracic Society/Japanese Respiratory Society Clinical 
Practice Guideline.

Gupta N, Finlay GA, Kotloff RM, Strange C, Wilson KC, Young LR, Taveira-DaSilva 
AM, Johnson SR, Cottin V, Sahn SA, Ryu JH, Seyama K, Inoue Y, Downey GP, Han MK, 
Colby TV, Wikenheiser-Brokamp KA, Meyer CA, Smith K, Moss J, McCormack FX; ATS 
Assembly on Clinical Problems.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2018 Jun 1;197(11):1506-1507. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201712-2566LE.
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2018 Jun 1;197(11):1507-1508. doi: 
10.1164/rccm.201801-0043LE.

BACKGROUND: Recommendations regarding key aspects related to the diagnosis and 
pharmacological treatment of lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) were recently 
published. We now provide additional recommendations regarding four specific 
questions related to the diagnosis of LAM and management of pneumothoraces in 
patients with LAM.
METHODS: Systematic reviews were performed and then discussed by a 
multidisciplinary panel. For each intervention, the panel considered its 
confidence in the estimated effects, the balance of desirable (i.e., benefits) 
and undesirable (i.e., harms and burdens) consequences, patient values and 
preferences, cost, and feasibility. Evidence-based recommendations were then 
formulated, written, and graded using the GRADE (Grading of Recommendations, 
Assessment, Development, and Evaluation) approach.
RESULTS: For women who have cystic changes on high-resolution computed 
tomography of the chest characteristic of LAM, but who have no additional 
confirmatory features of LAM (i.e., clinical, radiologic, or serologic), the 
guideline panel made conditional recommendations against making a clinical 
diagnosis of LAM on the basis of the high-resolution computed tomography 
findings alone and for considering transbronchial lung biopsy as a diagnostic 
tool. The guideline panel also made conditional recommendations for offering 
pleurodesis after an initial pneumothorax rather than postponing the procedure 
until the first recurrence and against pleurodesis being used as a reason to 
exclude patients from lung transplantation.
CONCLUSIONS: Evidence-based recommendations for the diagnosis and treatment of 
patients with LAM are provided. Frequent reassessment and updating will be 
needed.

DOI: 10.1164/rccm.201709-1965ST
PMCID: PMC5694834
PMID: 29140122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]