---
reference_id: "PMID:38618928"
title: "Auriculocondylar syndrome 2 caused by a novel PLCB4 variant in a male Chinese neonate: A case report and review of the literature."
authors:
- Zhang Y
- Zhao Y
- Dai L
- Liu Y
- Shi Z
journal: Mol Genet Genomic Med
year: '2024'
doi: 10.1002/mgg3.2441
keywords:
- Humans
- "Infant, Newborn"
- Male
- China
- Ear/abnormalities
- Ear Diseases
- Micrognathism
- Phospholipase C beta
- East Asian People
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Auriculocondylar syndrome 2 caused by a novel PLCB4 variant in a male Chinese neonate: A case report and review of the literature.
**Authors:** Zhang Y, Zhao Y, Dai L, Liu Y, Shi Z
**Journal:** Mol Genet Genomic Med (2024)
**DOI:** [10.1002/mgg3.2441](https://doi.org/10.1002/mgg3.2441)

## Content

1. Mol Genet Genomic Med. 2024 Apr;12(4):e2441. doi: 10.1002/mgg3.2441.

Auriculocondylar syndrome 2 caused by a novel PLCB4 variant in a male Chinese 
neonate: A case report and review of the literature.

Zhang Y(1), Zhao Y(1), Dai L(1), Liu Y(1), Shi Z(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neonatology, Anhui Provincial Children's Hospital/Children's 
Hospital of Fudan University (Affiliated Anhui Branch), Hefei, Anhui, China.
(2)Radiology Department, Center of Imaging Diagnosis, Anhui Provincial 
Children's Hospital/Children's Hospital of Fudan University (Affiliated Anhui 
Branch), Hefei, Anhui, China.

BACKGROUND: Auriculocondylar syndrome (ARCND) is a rare congenital craniofacial 
developmental malformation syndrome of the first and second pharyngeal arches 
with external ear malformation at the junction between the lobe and helix, 
micromaxillary malformation, and mandibular condylar hypoplasia. Four subtypes 
of ARCND have been described so far, that is, ARCND1 (OMIM # 602483), ARCND2 
(ARCND2A, OMIM # 614669; ARCND2B, OMIM # 620458), ARCND3 (OMIM # 615706), and 
ARCND4 (OMIM # 620457).
METHODS: This study reports a case of ARCND2 resulting from a novel pathogenic 
variant in the PLCB4 gene, and summarizes PLCB4 gene mutation sites and 
phenotypes of ARCND2.
RESULTS: The proband, a 5-day-old male neonate, was referred to our hospital for 
respiratory distress. Micrognathia, microstomia, distinctive question mark ears, 
as well as mandibular condyle hypoplasia were identified. Trio-based whole-exome 
sequencing identified a novel missense variant of NM_001377142.1:c.1928C>T 
(NP_001364071.1:p.Ser643Phe) in the PLCB4 gene, which was predicted to impair 
the local structural stability with a result that the protein function might be 
affected. From a review of the literature, only 36 patients with PLCB4 gene 
mutations were retrieved.
CONCLUSION: As with other studies examining familial cases of ARCND2, incomplete 
penetrance and variable expressivity were observed within different families' 
heterozygous mutations in PLCB4 gene. Although, motor and intellectual 
development are in the normal range in the vast majority of patients with 
ARCND2, long-term follow-up and assessment are still required.

© 2024 The Authors. Molecular Genetics & Genomic Medicine published by Wiley 
Periodicals LLC.

DOI: 10.1002/mgg3.2441
PMCID: PMC11017300
PMID: 38618928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that there are no conflicts 
of interest.