---
reference_id: "PMID:35990955"
title: Mechanisms underlying the role of ankyrin-B in cardiac and neurological health and disease.
authors:
- York NS
- Sanchez-Arias JC
- McAdam ACH
- Rivera JE
- Arbour LT
- Swayne LA
journal: Front Cardiovasc Med
year: '2022'
doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.964675
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mechanisms underlying the role of ankyrin-B in cardiac and neurological health and disease.
**Authors:** York NS, Sanchez-Arias JC, McAdam ACH, Rivera JE, Arbour LT, Swayne LA
**Journal:** Front Cardiovasc Med (2022)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fcvm.2022.964675](https://doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2022.964675)

## Content

1. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2022 Aug 4;9:964675. doi: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.964675.
eCollection 2022.

Mechanisms underlying the role of ankyrin-B in cardiac and neurological health
and disease.

York NS(1), Sanchez-Arias JC(1), McAdam ACH(2), Rivera JE(1), Arbour LT(1)(2),
Swayne LA(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Sciences, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC, Canada.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Victoria, BC,
Canada.
(3)Department of Cellular and Physiological Sciences and Djavad Mowafaghian
Centre for Brain Health, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

The ANK2 gene encodes for ankyrin-B (ANKB), one of 3 members of the ankyrin
family of proteins, whose name is derived from the Greek word for anchor. ANKB
was originally identified in the brain (B denotes "brain") but has become most
widely known for its role in cardiomyocytes as a scaffolding protein for ion
channels and transporters, as well as an interacting protein for structural and
signaling proteins. Certain loss-of-function ANK2 variants are associated with a
primarily cardiac-presenting autosomal-dominant condition with incomplete
penetrance and variable expressivity characterized by a predisposition to
supraventricular and ventricular arrhythmias, arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy,
congenital and adult-onset structural heart disease, and sudden death. Another
independent group of ANK2 variants are associated with increased risk for
distinct neurological phenotypes, including epilepsy and autism spectrum
disorders. The mechanisms underlying ANKB's roles in cells in health and disease
are not fully understood; however, several clues from a range of molecular and
cell biological studies have emerged. Notably, ANKB exhibits several isoforms
that have different cell-type-, tissue-, and developmental stage- expression
profiles. Given the conservation within ankyrins across evolution, model
organism studies have enabled the discovery of several ankyrin roles that could
shed important light on ANKB protein-protein interactions in heart and brain
cells related to the regulation of cellular polarity, organization, calcium
homeostasis, and glucose and fat metabolism. Along with this accumulation of
evidence suggesting a diversity of important ANKB cellular functions, there is
an on-going debate on the role of ANKB in disease. We currently have limited
understanding of how these cellular functions link to disease risk. To this end,
this review will examine evidence for the cellular roles of ANKB and the
potential contribution of ANKB functional variants to disease risk and
presentation. This contribution will highlight the impact of ANKB dysfunction on
cardiac and neuronal cells and the significance of understanding the role of
ANKB variants in disease.

Copyright © 2022 York, Sanchez-Arias, McAdam, Rivera, Arbour and Swayne.

DOI: 10.3389/fcvm.2022.964675
PMCID: PMC9386378
PMID: 35990955

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
