---
reference_id: "PMID:36470502"
title: "The use of antivirals in the treatment of human monkeypox outbreaks: a systematic review."
authors:
- Shamim MA
- Padhi BK
- Satapathy P
- Veeramachaneni SD
- Chatterjee C
- Tripathy S
- Akhtar N
- Pradhan A
- Dwivedi P
- Mohanty A
- Rodriguez-Morales AJ
- Sah R
- Al-Tammemi AB
- Al-Tawfiq JA
- Nowrouzi-Kia B
- Chattu VK
journal: Int J Infect Dis
year: '2023'
doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2022.11.040
content_type: abstract_only
---

# The use of antivirals in the treatment of human monkeypox outbreaks: a systematic review.
**Authors:** Shamim MA, Padhi BK, Satapathy P, Veeramachaneni SD, Chatterjee C, Tripathy S, Akhtar N, Pradhan A, Dwivedi P, Mohanty A, Rodriguez-Morales AJ, Sah R, Al-Tammemi AB, Al-Tawfiq JA, Nowrouzi-Kia B, Chattu VK
**Journal:** Int J Infect Dis (2023)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.ijid.2022.11.040](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2022.11.040)

## Content

1. Int J Infect Dis. 2023 Feb;127:150-161. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2022.11.040. Epub 
2022 Dec 5.

The use of antivirals in the treatment of human monkeypox outbreaks: a 
systematic review.

Shamim MA(1), Padhi BK(2), Satapathy P(3), Veeramachaneni SD(4), Chatterjee 
C(5), Tripathy S(6), Akhtar N(7), Pradhan A(8), Dwivedi P(9), Mohanty A(10), 
Rodriguez-Morales AJ(11), Sah R(12), Al-Tammemi AB(13), Al-Tawfiq JA(14), 
Nowrouzi-Kia B(15), Chattu VK(16).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Jodhpur, 
India. Electronic address: aaqibsh@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Community Medicine and School of Public Health, Postgraduate 
Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India. Electronic 
address: bkpadhi@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Virology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research, Chandigarh, India. Electronic address: prakasini.satapathy@gmail.com.
(4)PSG College of Pharmacy, Coimbatore, India. Electronic address: 
saidutt.v@gmail.com.
(5)Parexel International Services, Chandigarh, India. Electronic address: 
chandrimac21@gmail.com.
(6)Department of Preventive Oncology, Homi Bhabha Cancer Hospital and Research 
Centre, Muzaffarpur, India. Electronic address: snehasish.tripathy12@gmail.com.
(7)Indian Council of Medical Research - Regional Medical Research Centre, 
Bhubaneswar, India. Electronic address: nakhtar118@gmail.com.
(8)Department of Pharmacology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Jodhpur, 
India. Electronic address: aninditapradhan22@gmail.com.
(9)Department of Pharmacology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Jodhpur, 
India; Centre of Excellence for Tribal Health, All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Jodhpur, India. Electronic address: dr.prad99@gmail.com.
(10)All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Gorakhpur, India. Electronic 
address: aroopmohanty7785@yahoo.com.
(11)Grupo de Investigación Biomedicina, Faculty of Medicine, Fundación 
Universitaria Autónoma de las Américas, Pereira, Colombia; Institución 
Universitaria Visión de las Américas, Pereira, Colombia; Clinical Epidemiology 
and Biostatistics, Universidad Cientifica del Sur, Lima, Peru. Electronic 
address: ajrodriguezmmd@gmail.com.
(12)Tribhuvan University Teaching Hospital, Institute of Medicine, Kathmandu, 
Nepal; Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA; Dr. D.Y. Patil Medical College, 
Hospital and Research Center, Dr. D.Y. Patil Vidyapeeth, Pune, Maharashtra, 
India. Electronic address: ranjitsah57@gmail.com.
(13)Migration Health Division, International Organization for Migration (IOM), 
Amman, Jordan. Electronic address: aaltammemi@iom.int.
(14)Infectious Diseases Division, Department of Medicine, Indiana University 
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, USA; Infectious Disease Division, Department 
of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, USA; 
Specialty Internal Medicine and Quality Department, Johns Hopkins Aramco 
Healthcare, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia. Electronic address: jaltawfi@yahoo.com.
(15)ReSTORE Lab, Department of Occupational Science & Occupational Therapy, 
Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. Electronic 
address: behdin.nowrouzi.kia@utoronto.ca.
(16)ReSTORE Lab, Department of Occupational Science & Occupational Therapy, 
Temerty Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada; Center for 
Transdisciplinary Research, Saveetha Institute of Medical and Technological 
Sciences, Saveetha University, Chennai, India; Department of Community Medicine, 
Faculty of Medicine, Datta Meghe Institute of Medical Sciences, Wardha, India. 
Electronic address: vijay.chattu@mail.utoronto.ca.

OBJECTIVES: Human monkeypox virus (MPXV) infection is a recently declared public 
health emergency of international concern by the World Health Organization. 
Besides, there is scant literature available on the use of antivirals in MPXV 
infection. This systematic review compiles all evidence of various antivirals 
used on their efficacy and safety and summarizes their mechanisms of action.
METHODS: A review was done of all original studies mentioning individual patient 
data on the use of antivirals in patients with MPXV infection.
RESULTS: Of the total 487 non-duplicate studies, 18 studies with 71 individuals 
were included. Tecovirimat was used in 61 individuals, followed by cidofovir in 
seven and brincidofovir (BCV) in three individuals. Topical trifluridine was 
used in four ophthalmic cases in addition to tecovirimat. Of the total, 59 
(83.1%) were reported to have complete resolution of symptoms; one was 
experiencing waxing and waning of symptoms, only one (1.8%) had died, and the 
others were having a resolution of symptoms. The death was thought unrelated to 
tecovirimat. Elevated hepatic panels were reported among all individuals treated 
with BCV (leading to treatment discontinuation) and five treated with 
tecovirimat.
CONCLUSION: Tecovirimat is the most used and has proven beneficial in several 
aggravating cases. No major safety concerns were detected upon its use. Topical 
trifluridine was used as an adjuvant treatment option along with tecovirimat. 
BCV and cidofovir were seldom used, with the latter often being used due to the 
unavailability of tecovirimat. BCV was associated with treatment discontinuation 
due to adverse events.

Copyright © 2022 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijid.2022.11.040
PMCID: PMC9719850
PMID: 36470502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest The authors 
have no competing interests to declare.