---
reference_id: "PMID:26799653"
title: "Hepatitis B: treatment choice and monitoring for response and resistance."
authors:
- Liu SH
- Seto WK
- Lai CL
- Yuen MF
journal: Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1586/17474124.2016.1145547
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Hepatitis B: treatment choice and monitoring for response and resistance.
**Authors:** Liu SH, Seto WK, Lai CL, Yuen MF
**Journal:** Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1586/17474124.2016.1145547](https://doi.org/10.1586/17474124.2016.1145547)

## Content

1. Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2016 Jun;10(6):697-707. doi: 
10.1586/17474124.2016.1145547. Epub 2016 Feb 11.

Hepatitis B: treatment choice and monitoring for response and resistance.

Liu SH(1), Seto WK(1)(2), Lai CL(1)(2), Yuen MF(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital , University of Hong Kong , 
Hong Kong , China.
(2)b State Key Laboratory for Liver Research , University of Hong Kong, Queen 
Mary Hospital , Hong Kong , China.

Despite effective preventive primary prevention with vaccination, many people 
remain infected with hepatitis B virus (HBV) and suffer from its complications. 
Effective treatments such as interferon-based regimens and oral 
nucleoside/nucleotides have been developed over the last 30 years, but they are 
not perfect. Each of the treatments has its own merits, but none can eradicate 
HBV from the host. As a result, regular monitoring of the response during 
treatment and after treatment is required. The choice and monitoring of selected 
treatments, new potential therapeutic agents, and treatment options for drug 
resistance are discussed in this review.

DOI: 10.1586/17474124.2016.1145547
PMID: 26799653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]