---
reference_id: "PMID:14529547"
title: Role of heme oxygenase-1 in cardiovascular function.
authors:
- Perrella MA
- Yet SF
journal: Curr Pharm Des
year: '2003'
doi: 10.2174/1381612033453776
keywords:
- Animals
- Cardiovascular Diseases/enzymology
- Cardiovascular System/enzymology
- "Heme Oxygenase (Decyclizing)/biosynthesis, deficiency, physiology"
- Heme Oxygenase-1
- Humans
- Membrane Proteins
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Role of heme oxygenase-1 in cardiovascular function.
**Authors:** Perrella MA, Yet SF
**Journal:** Curr Pharm Des (2003)
**DOI:** [10.2174/1381612033453776](https://doi.org/10.2174/1381612033453776)

## Content

1. Curr Pharm Des. 2003;9(30):2479-87. doi: 10.2174/1381612033453776.

Role of heme oxygenase-1 in cardiovascular function.

Perrella MA(1), Yet SF.

Author information:
(1)Pulmonary and Critical Care Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,
MA, 02115, USA. mperrella@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

Heme oxygenase (HO) is a cytoprotective enzyme that degrades heme (a potent
oxidant) to generate carbon monoxide (a vasodilatory gas that has
anti-inflammatory properties), bilirubin (an antioxidant derived from
biliverdin), and iron (sequestered by ferritin). Due to the properties of
inducible HO (HO-1) and its products, we hypothesized that HO-1 would play an
important role in the regulation of cardiovascular function. In this article we
will review the role of HO-1 in cardiovascular function, and highlight our
previous studies using gene deletion and gene overexpression transgenic
approaches in mice. These studies will include the investigation of HO-1 in the
setting of hypertension (renovascular), atherosclerosis and vascular injury
(vein graft stenosis), hypotension (endotoxemia), and ischemia/reperfusion
injury (heart). In a chronic renovascular hypertension model, blood pressure
elevation, cardiac hypertrophy, acute renal failure, and acute mortality induced
by one kidney-one clip surgery are more severe in HO-1 null mice. Moreover,
absence of HO-1 leads to accelerated atherosclerotic lesion formation and vein
graft disease. In addition, HO-1 null mice with endotoxemia have earlier
resolution of hypotension, yet the mortality and the incidence of end organ
damage are higher in the absence of HO-1. In contrast, mice with
cardiac-specific overexpression of HO-1 have an improvement in cardiac function,
smaller myocardial infarcts, and reduced inflammatory and oxidative damage after
coronary artery ligation and reperfusion. Taken together, these studies suggest
that an absence of HO-1 has detrimental consequences, while overexpression of
HO-1 plays a protective role in ischemia/reperfusion injury.

DOI: 10.2174/1381612033453776
PMID: 14529547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
