---
reference_id: "PMID:30009962"
title: "Antibodies targeting circulating protective molecules in lupus nephritis: Interest as serological biomarkers."
authors:
- Dumestre-Pérard C
- Clavarino G
- Colliard S
- Cesbron JY
- Thielens NM
journal: Autoimmun Rev
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2018.03.013
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Antibodies targeting circulating protective molecules in lupus nephritis: Interest as serological biomarkers.
**Authors:** Dumestre-Pérard C, Clavarino G, Colliard S, Cesbron JY, Thielens NM
**Journal:** Autoimmun Rev (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.autrev.2018.03.013](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autrev.2018.03.013)

## Content

1. Autoimmun Rev. 2018 Sep;17(9):890-899. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2018.03.013. Epub
 2018 Jul 29.

Antibodies targeting circulating protective molecules in lupus nephritis: 
Interest as serological biomarkers.

Dumestre-Pérard C(1), Clavarino G(2), Colliard S(3), Cesbron JY(2), Thielens 
NM(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire d'Immunologie, Pôle de Biologie, CHU Grenoble Alpes, CS 10217, 
38043 Grenoble Cedex 9, France; BNI TIMC-IMAG, UMR5525, CNRS-Université Grenoble 
Alpes, BP170, 38042 Grenoble Cedex 9, France. Electronic address: 
cdumestre-perard@chu-grenoble.fr.
(2)Laboratoire d'Immunologie, Pôle de Biologie, CHU Grenoble Alpes, CS 10217, 
38043 Grenoble Cedex 9, France; BNI TIMC-IMAG, UMR5525, CNRS-Université Grenoble 
Alpes, BP170, 38042 Grenoble Cedex 9, France.
(3)Laboratoire d'Immunologie, Pôle de Biologie, CHU Grenoble Alpes, CS 10217, 
38043 Grenoble Cedex 9, France.
(4)Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, CEA, IBS, F-38000 Grenoble, France.

Lupus nephritis (LN) is one of the most frequent and severe manifestations of 
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), considered as the major predictor of poor 
prognosis. An early diagnosis of LN is a real challenge in the management of SLE 
and has an important implication in guiding treatments. In clinical practice, 
conventional parameters still lack sensitivity and specificity for detecting 
ongoing disease activity in lupus kidneys and early relapse of nephritis. LN is 
characterized by glomerular kidney injury, essentially due to deposition of 
immune complexes involving autoantibodies against cellular components and 
circulating proteins. One of the possible mechanisms of induction of 
autoantibodies in SLE is a defect in apoptotic cells clearance and subsequent 
release of intracellular autoantigens. Autoantibodies against soluble protective 
molecules involved in the uptake of dying cells, including complement proteins 
and pentraxins, have been described. In this review, we present the main 
autoantibodies found in LN, with a focus on the antibodies against these 
protective molecules. We also discuss their pathogenic role and conclude with 
their potential interest as serological biomarkers in LN.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2018.03.013
PMID: 30009962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]