---
reference_id: "PMID:29939616"
title: Insulin Resistance.
authors:
- Freeman AM
- Acevedo LA
- Pennings N
year: '2025'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Insulin Resistance.
**Authors:** Freeman AM, Acevedo LA, Pennings N

## Content

1. Insulin Resistance.

Freeman AM(1), Acevedo LA(2), Pennings N(3).

In: StatPearls [Internet]. Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing; 2025 
Jan–.
2023 Aug 17.

Author information:
(1)Southeastern Regional Medical Center
(2)Campbell University School of Osteopathic Medicine
(3)Campbell University

Insulin resistance is identified as the impaired biologic response of target 
tissues to insulin stimulation. All tissues with insulin receptors can become 
insulin resistant, but the tissues that primarily drive insulin resistance are 
the liver, skeletal muscle, and adipose tissue. Insulin resistance impairs 
glucose disposal, resulting in a compensatory increase in beta-cell insulin 
production and hyperinsulinemia. Recent studies have debated whether 
hyperinsulinemia precedes insulin resistance, as hyperinsulinemia itself is a 
driver of insulin resistance. This concept may be clinically valuable, 
suggesting that hyperinsulinemia associated with excess caloric intake may drive 
the metabolic dysfunction associated with insulin resistance. The metabolic 
consequences of insulin resistance include hyperglycemia, hypertension, 
dyslipidemia, hyperuricemia, elevated inflammatory markers, endothelial 
dysfunction, and a prothrombotic state. Progression of insulin resistance can 
lead to metabolic syndrome, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), and type 2 
diabetes. Insulin resistance is primarily an acquired condition related to 
excess body fat, though genetic causes are also identified. The clinical 
definition of insulin resistance remains elusive, as there is no generally 
accepted test for insulin resistance. Clinically, insulin resistance is 
recognized via the metabolic consequences associated with insulin resistance as 
described in metabolic syndrome and insulin resistance syndrome. The gold 
standard for measurement of insulin resistance is the 
hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic glucose clamp technique. This research technique has 
limited clinical applicability; however, several clinically useful surrogate 
measures of insulin resistance include HOMA-IR, HOMA2, QUICKI, serum 
triglyceride, and triglyceride/HDL ratio. In addition, several measures assess 
insulin resistance based on serum glucose or insulin response to a glucose 
challenge. The predominant consequence of insulin resistance is type 2 diabetes 
(T2D). Insulin resistance is thought to precede the development of T2D by 10 to 
15 years. The development of insulin resistance typically results in impaired 
glucose disposal into insulin-resistant tissues, especially skeletal muscle. 
Consequently, in the presence of excess calorie consumption, more insulin is 
required to traffic glucose into these tissues. The resultant hyperinsulinemia 
further contributes to insulin resistance. This vicious cycle continues until 
pancreatic beta-cell activity can no longer adequately meet the insulin demand 
created by insulin resistance, resulting in hyperglycemia. With a continued 
mismatch between insulin demand and insulin production, glycemic levels rise to 
those consistent with T2D. Weight gain usually occurs alongside hyperinsulinemia 
but may be related more to a chronic caloric excess than hyperinsulinemia. The 
anabolic effect of insulin decreases as tissues become more insulin-resistant, 
and weight gain eventually slows. Resistance to exogenous insulin has also been 
described. An arbitrary but clinically useful benchmark considers patients 
insulin-resistant when requiring more than 1 unit/kilogram/day of exogenous 
insulin to maintain glycemic control. Patients requiring greater than 200 units 
of exogenous insulin per day are considered severely insulin-resistant. In 
addition to T2D, the disease spectrum associated with insulin resistance 
includes obesity, cardiovascular disease, NAFLD, metabolic syndrome, and 
polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). These are all of great consequence in the 
United States, with a tremendous burden on the healthcare system to treat the 
direct and indirect conditions associated with insulin resistance. The 
microvascular complications of diabetes, such as neuropathy, retinopathy, and 
nephropathy, as well as the associated macrovascular complications of coronary 
artery disease [CAD], cerebral-vascular disease, and peripheral artery disease 
(PAD), will eventually consume the lion's share of the healthcare dollar as the 
disease progresses in severity. Lifestyle modifications should be the primary 
focus when treating insulin resistance. Nutritional intervention with calorie 
reduction and avoidance of carbohydrates that stimulate excessive insulin demand 
is a cornerstone of treatment. Physical activity helps to increase energy 
expenditure and improve skeletal muscle insulin sensitivity. 
Medications also can improve insulin response and reduce insulin demand.

Copyright © 2025, StatPearls Publishing LLC.

PMID: 29939616

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: Andrew Freeman declares no relevant 
financial relationships with ineligible companies. Disclosure: Luis Acevedo 
declares no relevant financial relationships with ineligible companies. 
Disclosure: Nicholas Pennings declares no relevant financial relationships with 
ineligible companies.