---
reference_id: "PMID:23073594"
title: "[Analysis of risk factors in development of thrombosis in patients with antiphospholipid syndrome]."
authors:
- Li R
- Zhou YS
- Jia Y
- Li ZG
journal: Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban
year: '2012'
keywords:
- Adolescent
- Adult
- Aged
- "Antibodies, Anticardiolipin/blood"
- Antiphospholipid Syndrome/complications
- "Cerebral Infarction/epidemiology, etiology"
- China/epidemiology
- Female
- Humans
- Hypertension/complications
- Male
- Middle Aged
- Retrospective Studies
- Risk Factors
- "Thrombosis/epidemiology, etiology"
- "Venous Thrombosis/epidemiology, etiology"
- Young Adult
content_type: abstract_only
---

# [Analysis of risk factors in development of thrombosis in patients with antiphospholipid syndrome].
**Authors:** Li R, Zhou YS, Jia Y, Li ZG
**Journal:** Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban (2012)

## Content

1. Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2012 Oct 18;44(5):788-91.

[Analysis of risk factors in development of thrombosis in patients with 
antiphospholipid syndrome].

[Article in Chinese]

Li R(1), Zhou YS, Jia Y, Li ZG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Peking University People's 
Hospital, Beijing, China.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the risk factors in the development of thrombosis in 
antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) patients.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed the characteristics of thrombosis in 61 APS 
patients. Clinical and laboratory parameters such as sex, age, thrombocytopenia, 
smoking, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia and anti-phospholipid 
antibodies were investigated to find out the risk factors of thrombosis.
RESULTS: Thrombosis was found in 70.49% APS patients, of whom, the prevalence of 
arterial and venous thrombosis were 36.67% and 39.34%, respectively. Deep vein 
thrombosis of lower extremity (37.7%) and cerebral infarction (24.59%) were the 
most common thrombosis events, and then pulmonary embolism, thrombotic 
microangiopathy and renal artery thrombosis were also common in APS patients. 
The positive anti-cardiolipin antibody and hypertension were the independent 
risk factors for venous and arterial thrombosis, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Anti-cardiolipin antibody is associated with a higher risk of venous 
thrombosis, and hypertension is associated with arterial thrombosis.

PMID: 23073594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]