---
reference_id: "PMID:35392024"
title: Multi-Transcriptomic Analysis and Experimental Validation Implicate a Central Role of STAT3 in Skin Barrier Dysfunction Induced Aggravation of Rosacea.
authors:
- Wang Y
- Wang B
- Huang Y
- Li Y
- Yan S
- Xie H
- Zhang Y
- Li J
journal: J Inflamm Res
year: '2022'
doi: 10.2147/JIR.S356551
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Multi-Transcriptomic Analysis and Experimental Validation Implicate a Central Role of STAT3 in Skin Barrier Dysfunction Induced Aggravation of Rosacea.
**Authors:** Wang Y, Wang B, Huang Y, Li Y, Yan S, Xie H, Zhang Y, Li J
**Journal:** J Inflamm Res (2022)
**DOI:** [10.2147/JIR.S356551](https://doi.org/10.2147/JIR.S356551)

## Content

1. J Inflamm Res. 2022 Mar 31;15:2141-2156. doi: 10.2147/JIR.S356551. eCollection
 2022.

Multi-Transcriptomic Analysis and Experimental Validation Implicate a Central 
Role of STAT3 in Skin Barrier Dysfunction Induced Aggravation of Rosacea.

Wang Y(1)(2), Wang B(1)(2), Huang Y(1), Li Y(1)(2), Yan S(1), Xie H(1)(2)(3), 
Zhang Y(1)(2)(3), Li J(1)(2)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Dermatology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, People's Republic of China.
(2)Hunan Key Laboratory of Aging Biology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South 
University, Changsha, People's Republic of China.
(3)National Clinical Research Center for Geriatric Disorders, Xiangya Hospital, 
Central South University, Changsha, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: Rosacea is a chronic inflammatory skin disease with high morbidity. 
Previous studies have described the contribution of skin barrier dysfunction 
(SBD) in the progression of rosacea, but the specific mechanism remains unclear. 
In this study, we aim to investigate the key genes that may involve SBD-mediated 
rosacea aggravation.
METHODS: In this study, we evaluated the SBD patterns of rosacea based on the 
expression of 23 skin barrier-related genes (SBRGs) using a consensus clustering 
analysis, and revealed the SBD-mediated immune cells infiltration in rosacea 
using GSE65914 dataset. The key genes associated with SBD and rosacea 
progression were identified using WGCNA analysis and then verified in rosacea 
mice model.
RESULTS: Two distinct SBD patterns (moderate- and high-SBD patterns) were 
determined in rosacea. GO, KEGG and GSEA analysis revealed the differently 
immune-related signal pathways between two SBD patterns in rosacea. The XCell 
immune cell assays showed that the increased immune infiltration with SBD. 
Subsequently, the WGCNA analysis identified STAT3 as the hub gene related to 
rosacea and SBD, and correlation analysis revealed that STAT3 could contribute 
to the progression of rosacea partly by dysregulating immune infiltration via 
activating the cytokine/chemokines signal. Finally, the up-regulated STAT3 was 
verified in the epidermis of rosacea tissues and correlated with SBRGs 
expression using IHC and epidermal transcriptome data of rosacea. The vivo 
experiment showed that tape stripping-induced SBD evidently induced the 
expression of STAT3 and increased CD4+ T cell infiltration in LL37-induced 
rosacea-like skin lesion in mice.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, our results showed that the destruction of the skin 
barrier aggravates the inflammation levels and immune infiltration of rosacea 
partly by activating STAT3-mediated cytokine signal pathways in keratinocytes.

© 2022 Wang et al.

DOI: 10.2147/JIR.S356551
PMCID: PMC8980297
PMID: 35392024

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.