---
reference_id: "PMID:24448315"
title: Opposing roles of Akt and STAT3 in the protection of the maternal heart from peripartum stress.
authors:
- Ricke-Hoch M
- Bultmann I
- Stapel B
- Condorelli G
- Rinas U
- Sliwa K
- Scherr M
- Hilfiker-Kleiner D
journal: Cardiovasc Res
year: '2014'
doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvu010
keywords:
- Animals
- "Cells, Cultured"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- Female
- Fibrosis/metabolism
- Mice
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- "Myocytes, Cardiac/metabolism"
- Oxidative Stress/physiology
- Peripartum Period
- Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinases/metabolism
- Pregnancy
- Proto-Oncogene Proteins c-akt/metabolism
- STAT3 Transcription Factor/metabolism
- "Stress, Physiological/physiology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Opposing roles of Akt and STAT3 in the protection of the maternal heart from peripartum stress.
**Authors:** Ricke-Hoch M, Bultmann I, Stapel B, Condorelli G, Rinas U, Sliwa K, Scherr M, Hilfiker-Kleiner D
**Journal:** Cardiovasc Res (2014)
**DOI:** [10.1093/cvr/cvu010](https://doi.org/10.1093/cvr/cvu010)

## Content

1. Cardiovasc Res. 2014 Mar 15;101(4):587-96. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvu010. Epub 2014 
Jan 20.

Opposing roles of Akt and STAT3 in the protection of the maternal heart from 
peripartum stress.

Ricke-Hoch M(1), Bultmann I, Stapel B, Condorelli G, Rinas U, Sliwa K, Scherr M, 
Hilfiker-Kleiner D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology and Angiology, Hannover Medical School, Carl-Neuberg 
Str. 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Peripartum cardiomyopathy (PPCM) is a pregnancy-associated 
cardiomyopathy in previously healthy women. Mice with a cardiomyocyte-restricted 
deletion of signal transducer and activator of transcription-3 (STAT3, CKO) 
develop PPCM. PI3K-Akt signalling is thought to promote cardiac hypertrophy and 
protection during pregnancy. We evaluated the role of activated Akt signalling 
in the maternal heart postpartum.
METHODS AND RESULTS: CKO mice were bred to mice harbouring an Akt transgene, 
specifically expressed in cardiomyocytes (CAkt(tg)) generating CKO; CAkt(tg), 
CAkt(tg), CKO, and wild-type sibling mice. CAkt(tg) and CKO;CAkt(tg) female mice 
developed PPCM with systolic dysfunction. Both genotypes displayed cardiac 
hypertrophy and lower capillary density, showed increased phosphorylation of p66 
Src homology 2 domain containing protein and FoxO3A, and reduced expression of 
manganese superoxide dismutase as well as increased cathepsin D activity and 
increased miR-146a levels [indicative for generation of the anti-angiogenic 16 
kDa prolactin (PRL)]. Cardiac inflammation and fibrosis was accelerated in 
CKO;CAkt(tg) and associated with high postpartum mortality. The PRL blocker, 
bromocriptine (BR), prevented heart failure and the decrease in capillary 
density in CKO;CAkt(tg) and CAkt(tg) mice. BR attenuated high mortality, 
up-regulation of CCL2, and cardiac inflammation as well as fibrosis in 
CKO;CAkt(tg). PRL infusion induced cardiac inflammation in CKO;CAkt(tg) 
independent of pregnancy. In neonatal rat cardiomyocytes, PRL and interferon γ 
(IFNγ) induced the expression of CCL2 via activation of Akt.
CONCLUSION: Postpartum Akt activation is detrimental for the peripartum heart as 
it lowers anti-oxidative defence and in combination with low STAT3 conditions, 
accelerate cardiac inflammation and fibrosis. PRL and its cleaved 16 kDa form 
are central for Akt-induced PPCM as indicated by the protection from the disease 
by PRL blockade.

DOI: 10.1093/cvr/cvu010
PMID: 24448315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]