---
reference_id: "PMID:16648851"
title: Mutations in the gene encoding the PML nuclear body protein Sp110 are associated with immunodeficiency and hepatic veno-occlusive disease.
authors:
- Roscioli T
- Cliffe ST
- Bloch DB
- Bell CG
- Mullan G
- Taylor PJ
- Sarris M
- Wang J
- Donald JA
- Kirk EP
- Ziegler JB
- Salzer U
- McDonald GB
- Wong M
- Lindeman R
- Buckley MF
journal: Nat Genet
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1038/ng1780
keywords:
- Female
- Hepatic Veno-Occlusive Disease/genetics
- Humans
- Immunologic Deficiency Syndromes/genetics
- Male
- Minor Histocompatibility Antigens
- Mutation
- Nuclear Proteins/genetics
- Pedigree
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in the gene encoding the PML nuclear body protein Sp110 are associated with immunodeficiency and hepatic veno-occlusive disease.
**Authors:** Roscioli T, Cliffe ST, Bloch DB, Bell CG, Mullan G, Taylor PJ, Sarris M, Wang J, Donald JA, Kirk EP, Ziegler JB, Salzer U, McDonald GB, Wong M, Lindeman R, Buckley MF
**Journal:** Nat Genet (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1038/ng1780](https://doi.org/10.1038/ng1780)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 2006 Jun;38(6):620-2. doi: 10.1038/ng1780. Epub 2006 Apr 30.

Mutations in the gene encoding the PML nuclear body protein Sp110 are associated 
with immunodeficiency and hepatic veno-occlusive disease.

Roscioli T(1), Cliffe ST, Bloch DB, Bell CG, Mullan G, Taylor PJ, Sarris M, Wang 
J, Donald JA, Kirk EP, Ziegler JB, Salzer U, McDonald GB, Wong M, Lindeman R, 
Buckley MF.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Vascular Research, University of New South Wales, Sydney 2052, 
Australia. tony.roscioli@email.cs.nsw.gov.au

We describe mutations in the PML nuclear body protein Sp110 in the syndrome 
veno-occlusive disease with immunodeficiency, an autosomal recessive disorder of 
severe hypogammaglobulinemia, combined T and B cell immunodeficiency, absent 
lymph node germinal centers, absent tissue plasma cells and hepatic 
veno-occlusive disease. This is the first report of the involvement of a nuclear 
body protein in a human primary immunodeficiency and of high-penetrance genetic 
mutations in hepatic veno-occlusive disease.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1780
PMID: 16648851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]