---
reference_id: "PMID:10319867"
title: Mutations in RECQL4 cause a subset of cases of Rothmund-Thomson syndrome.
authors:
- Kitao S
- Shimamoto A
- Goto M
- Miller RW
- Smithson WA
- Lindor NM
- Furuichi Y
journal: Nat Genet
year: '1999'
doi: 10.1038/8788
keywords:
- Adenosine Triphosphatases/genetics
- Base Sequence
- "Cells, Cultured"
- DNA Helicases/genetics
- DNA Mutational Analysis
- Female
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Isoenzymes/genetics
- Male
- Mutation
- Pedigree
- RecQ Helicases
- Rothmund-Thomson Syndrome/genetics
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Mutations in RECQL4 cause a subset of cases of Rothmund-Thomson syndrome.
**Authors:** Kitao S, Shimamoto A, Goto M, Miller RW, Smithson WA, Lindor NM, Furuichi Y
**Journal:** Nat Genet (1999)
**DOI:** [10.1038/8788](https://doi.org/10.1038/8788)

## Content

1. Nat Genet. 1999 May;22(1):82-4. doi: 10.1038/8788.

Mutations in RECQL4 cause a subset of cases of Rothmund-Thomson syndrome.

Kitao S(1), Shimamoto A, Goto M, Miller RW, Smithson WA, Lindor NM, Furuichi Y.

Author information:
(1)AGENE Research Institute, Kamakura, Japan.

Rothmund-Thomson syndrome (RTS; also known as poikiloderma congenitale) is a 
rare, autosomal recessive genetic disorder characterized by abnormalities in 
skin and skeleton, juvenile cataracts, premature ageing and a predisposition to 
neoplasia. Cytogenetic studies indicate that cells from affected patients show 
genomic instability often associated with chromosomal rearrangements causing an 
acquired somatic mosaicism. The gene(s) responsible for RTS remains unknown. The 
genes responsible for Werner and Bloom syndromes (WRN and BLM, respectively) 
have been identified as homologues of Escherichia coli RecQ, which encodes a DNA 
helicase that unwinds double-stranded DNA into single-stranded DNAs. Other 
eukaryotic homologues thus far identified are human RECQL, Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae SGS1 and Schizosaccharomyces pombe rqh1. We recently cloned two new 
human helicase genes, RECQL4 at 8q24.3 and RECQL5 at 17q25, which encode members 
of the RecQ helicase family. Here, we report that three RTS patients carried two 
types of compound heterozygous mutations in RECQL4. The fact that the mutated 
alleles were inherited from the parents in one affected family and were not 
found in ethnically matched controls suggests that mutation of RECQL4 at human 
chromosome 8q24.3 is responsible for at least some cases of RTS.

DOI: 10.1038/8788
PMID: 10319867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]