---
reference_id: "PMID:23074140"
title: "Van Buchem disease: clinical, biochemical, and densitometric features of patients and disease carriers."
authors:
- van Lierop AH
- Hamdy NA
- van Egmond ME
- Bakker E
- Dikkers FG
- Papapoulos SE
journal: J Bone Miner Res
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1002/jbmr.1794
keywords:
- "Adaptor Proteins, Signal Transducing"
- Adult
- Bone Density
- Bone Morphogenetic Proteins/blood
- Case-Control Studies
- Collagen Type I/blood
- Densitometry
- Female
- Genetic Markers
- Heterozygote
- Humans
- Male
- "Osteochondrodysplasias/blood, diagnostic imaging, pathology, physiopathology"
- Peptide Fragments/blood
- Peptides/blood
- Procollagen/blood
- Radiography
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Van Buchem disease: clinical, biochemical, and densitometric features of patients and disease carriers.
**Authors:** van Lierop AH, Hamdy NA, van Egmond ME, Bakker E, Dikkers FG, Papapoulos SE
**Journal:** J Bone Miner Res (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1002/jbmr.1794](https://doi.org/10.1002/jbmr.1794)

## Content

1. J Bone Miner Res. 2013 Apr;28(4):848-54. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.1794.

Van Buchem disease: clinical, biochemical, and densitometric features of 
patients and disease carriers.

van Lierop AH(1), Hamdy NA, van Egmond ME, Bakker E, Dikkers FG, Papapoulos SE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolic Diseases, Leiden University Medical 
Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Van Buchem disease (VBD) is a rare bone sclerosing dysplasia caused by the lack 
of a regulatory element of the SOST gene, which encodes for sclerostin, an 
osteocyte-derived negative regulator of bone formation. We studied the 
demographic, clinical, biochemical, and densitometric features of 15 patients 
with VBD (12 adults and 3 children) and 28 related carriers of the gene 
mutation. The most common clinical findings in patients were facial palsy (100%) 
and various degrees of hearing impairment (93%); raised intracranial pressure 
had been documented in 20%. The clinical course of the disease appeared to 
stabilize in adulthood, with the majority of patients reporting no progression 
of symptoms or development of complications with time. Carriers of the disease 
had none of the clinical features or complications of the disease. Sclerostin 
could be detected in the serum in all but 1 VBD patients (mean 8.0 pg/mL; 95% 
confidence interval [CI], 4.9-11.0 pg/mL), and were lower than those of carriers 
(mean 28.7 pg/mL; 95% CI, 24.5-32.9 pg/mL; p < 0.001) and healthy controls (mean 
40.0 pg/mL; 95% CI, 34.5-41.0 pg/mL; p < 0.). Serum procollagen type 1 
amino-terminal propeptide (P1NP) levels were also significantly higher in adult 
patients (mean 96.0; 95% CI, 54.6-137.4 ng/mL versus mean 47.8; 95% CI, 
39.4-56.2 ng/mL, p = 0.003 in carriers and mean 37.8; 95% CI, 34.5-41.0 ng/mL, 
p = 0.028 in healthy controls) and declined with age. Bone mineral density (BMD) 
was markedly increased in all patients (mean Z-score 8.7 ± 2.1 and 9.5 ± 1.9 at 
the femoral neck and spine, respectively); BMD of carriers was significantly 
lower than that of patients but varied widely (mean Z-scores 0.9 ± 1.0 and 
1.3 ± 1.5 at the femoral neck and spine, respectively). Serum sclerostin levels 
were inversely correlated with serum P1NP levels (r = -0.39, p = 0.018) and BMD 
values (femoral neck r = -0.69, p < 0.001; lumbar spine r = -0.78, p < 0.001). 
Our results show that there is a gene-dose effect of the VBD deletion on 
circulating sclerostin and provide further in vivo evidence of the role of 
sclerostin in bone formation in humans. The small amounts of sclerostin produced 
by patients with VBD may explain their milder phenotype compared to that of 
patients with sclerosteosis, in whom serum sclerostin is undetectable.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.1794
PMID: 23074140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]