---
reference_id: "PMID:30079398"
title: SIGMAR1 gene mutation causing Distal Hereditary Motor Neuropathy in a Portuguese family.
authors:
- Almendra L
- Laranjeira F
- Fernández-Marmiesse A
- Negrão L
journal: Acta Myol
year: '2018'
keywords:
- Adult
- Family
- Female
- Hereditary Sensory and Motor Neuropathy/genetics
- Humans
- Mutation
- Phenotype
- Portugal
- "Receptors, sigma/genetics"
- "Sequence Analysis, DNA"
- Sigma-1 Receptor
content_type: abstract_only
---

# SIGMAR1 gene mutation causing Distal Hereditary Motor Neuropathy in a Portuguese family.
**Authors:** Almendra L, Laranjeira F, Fernández-Marmiesse A, Negrão L
**Journal:** Acta Myol (2018)

## Content

1. Acta Myol. 2018 May 1;37(1):2-4. eCollection 2018 May.

SIGMAR1 gene mutation causing Distal Hereditary Motor Neuropathy in a Portuguese 
family.

Almendra L(1), Laranjeira F(2), Fernández-Marmiesse A(3), Negrão L(1).

Author information:
(1)Consulta de Doenças Neuromusculares, Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de 
Coimbra, Praceta Mota Pinto, 3000-075 Coimbra, Portugal.
(2)Centro de Genética Clínica, Centro Hospitalar do Porto.
(3)Unidad de Diagnóstico y Tratamiento de Enfermidades Metabolicas Congénitas 
(UDyTEMC), Hospital Clínico Universitário de Santiago de Compostela.

SIGMAR1 gene encodes a non-opioid endoplasmic reticulum (ER) protein which is 
involved in a large diversity of cell functions and is expressed ubiquitously in 
both central and peripheral nervous systems. Alterations of its normal function 
may contribute to two different phenotypes: juvenile amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS 16) and distal hereditary motor neuropathies (dHMN). We present 
the case of a female patient, of 37-years-old, with distal muscle weakness and 
atrophy beginning in childhood and slowly progressive in the first two decades 
of life. Neurological examination revealed a symmetrical severe muscle wasting 
and weakness in distal lower and upper limbs, with claw hands, footdrop with 
equinovarus deformity and hammer toes, generalized areflexia and normal sensory 
examination. The electrodiagnostic study revealed a pure chronic motor 
peripheral nerve involvement without signs of demyelination. The molecular study 
found the deletion c.561_576del on exon 4 and a deletion of all exon 4, in the 
SIGMAR1 gene.

PMCID: PMC6060428
PMID: 30079398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]