---
reference_id: "PMID:29372536"
title: "Biological Therapies for Eosinophilic Esophagitis: Where Do We Stand?"
authors:
- Ko E
- Chehade M
journal: Clin Rev Allergy Immunol
year: '2018'
doi: 10.1007/s12016-018-8674-3
keywords:
- Adult
- "Allergens/immunology, therapeutic use"
- Animals
- "Antibodies, Monoclonal/therapeutic use"
- Biological Therapy/methods
- Chemotaxis
- Child
- Environmental Exposure/adverse effects
- Eosinophilic Esophagitis/therapy
- Eosinophils/immunology
- Food
- Food Hypersensitivity/therapy
- Humans
- Immunotherapy/methods
- Interleukin-13/immunology
- Th1-Th2 Balance
- Tumor Necrosis Factor-alpha/immunology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Biological Therapies for Eosinophilic Esophagitis: Where Do We Stand?
**Authors:** Ko E, Chehade M
**Journal:** Clin Rev Allergy Immunol (2018)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s12016-018-8674-3](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12016-018-8674-3)

## Content

1. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2018 Oct;55(2):205-216. doi:
10.1007/s12016-018-8674-3.

Biological Therapies for Eosinophilic Esophagitis: Where Do We Stand?

Ko E(1), Chehade M(2).

Author information:
(1)Mount Sinai Center for Eosinophilic Disorders, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, Box 1198, New York, NY, 10029, USA.
(2)Mount Sinai Center for Eosinophilic Disorders, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, Box 1198, New York, NY, 10029, USA.
mirna.chehade@mssm.edu.

Eosinophilic esophagitis (EoE) is an immune-mediated, chronic esophageal disease
characterized by esophageal symptoms and esophageal eosinophilia. It is
triggered by foods and possibly by environmental allergens. Currently, there are
no FDA-approved therapies for EoE. Commonly used treatments include dietary
restrictions and topical corticosteroids. Many of these therapies are suboptimal
in their efficacy, have side effects, or diminish patients' quality of life.
Biologic therapies for EoE have therefore been sought as an alternative. The
mechanism by which food allergens trigger EoE is thought to be a T helper type 2
(Th2) reaction, resulting in secretion of the cytokines IL-4, IL-5, and IL-13.
IL-5 induces eosinophil production and trafficking to the esophagus, and IL-13
induces esophageal epithelial cells to secrete eotaxin-3, which drives
eosinophil chemotaxis and activation. Mepolizumab and reslizumab, two anti-IL-5
antibodies, were studied in children and adults with EoE and resulted in
reduction of esophageal tissue and blood eosinophils, but no significant
reduction in symptoms. QAX576, an anti-IL-13 antibody, was studied in adults
with EoE and showed a decrease in the esophageal eosinophil load and a trend
towards clinical improvement. Since in situ IgE production was demonstrated in
the EoE esophagus, omalizumab, an anti-IgE antibody, was studied in patients
with EoE and not found to be overall beneficial. Furthermore, given the
increased esophageal epithelial cell TNF-α expression in EoE, infliximab, an
anti-TNF-α antibody, was studied in patients with EoE, with lack of success both
clinically and histologically. In summary, although none of the biologicals
studied so far in EoE have been highly effective, many demonstrated some
histological benefit, especially those that targeted the Th2 axis. Therefore,
the future for biologicals is promising as the pathophysiology of EoE is better
understood, clinical assessment tools are validated, identification of patient
subsets that respond best to biologicals is made, and dosages of biologicals are
optimized.

DOI: 10.1007/s12016-018-8674-3
PMID: 29372536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
