---
reference_id: "PMID:8644708"
title: "FGFR2 exon IIIa and IIIc mutations in Crouzon, Jackson-Weiss, and Pfeiffer syndromes: evidence for missense changes, insertions, and a deletion due to alternative RNA splicing."
authors:
- Meyers GA
- Day D
- Goldberg R
- Daentl DL
- Przylepa KA
- Abrams LJ
- Graham JM Jr
- Feingold M
- Moeschler JB
- Rawnsley E
- Scott AF
- Jabs EW
journal: Am J Hum Genet
year: '1996'
content_type: abstract_only
---

# FGFR2 exon IIIa and IIIc mutations in Crouzon, Jackson-Weiss, and Pfeiffer syndromes: evidence for missense changes, insertions, and a deletion due to alternative RNA splicing.
**Authors:** Meyers GA, Day D, Goldberg R, Daentl DL, Przylepa KA, Abrams LJ, Graham JM Jr, Feingold M, Moeschler JB, Rawnsley E, Scott AF, Jabs EW
**Journal:** Am J Hum Genet (1996)

## Content

1. Am J Hum Genet. 1996 Mar;58(3):491-8.

FGFR2 exon IIIa and IIIc mutations in Crouzon, Jackson-Weiss, and Pfeiffer 
syndromes: evidence for missense changes, insertions, and a deletion due to 
alternative RNA splicing.

Meyers GA(1), Day D, Goldberg R, Daentl DL, Przylepa KA, Abrams LJ, Graham JM 
Jr, Feingold M, Moeschler JB, Rawnsley E, Scott AF, Jabs EW.

Author information:
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, MD 
21287-3914, USA.

Fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) mutations have been associated with 
the craniosynostotic conditions Crouzon, Jackson-Weiss, and Pfeiffer syndromes. 
Previously, mutations were described in the exons IIIa and IIIc, which form the 
extracellular, third immunoglobulin-like domain (IgIII) and adjacent linker 
regions, both of which are normally involved in ligand binding. For all three 
conditions, mutations were found in exon IIIc. Only in Crouzon syndrome were 
mutations identified in exon IIIa. In this study, 39 cases with one of these 
three conditions were screened for exon IIIa or IIIc mutations. Eleven mutations 
are reported in 17 unrelated cases. Mutations in exon IIIa are identified for 
not only Crouzon but also Jackson-Weiss and Pfeiffer syndromes. Four mutations 
in either exon IIIa or exon IIIc reported only in Crouzon syndrome are present 
also in one of the other two syndromes. Two insertions, one in exon IIIa in a 
Crouzon syndrome patient and the other in exon IIIc in a Pfeiffer syndrome 
patient, were observed. The latter mutation has the same alternative RNA 
splicing effect as a reported synonymous mutation for Crouzon syndrome. A 
missense mutation was detected in one Pfeiffer syndrome family in which two 
members had craniosynostosis without limb anomalies. The inter- and 
intrafamilial variability in expression of FGFR2 mutations suggests that these 
three syndromes, presumed to be clinically distinct, are instead representative 
of a spectrum of related craniosynostotic and digital disorders.

PMCID: PMC1914562
PMID: 8644708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]