---
reference_id: "PMID:26972528"
title: "Targeting the prodromal stage of spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 mice: G-CSF in the prevention of motor deficits via upregulating chaperone and autophagy levels."
authors:
- Chang YC
- Lin CW
- Hsu CM
- Lee-Chen GJ
- Su MT
- Ro LS
- Chen CM
- Huang HJ
- Hsieh-Li HM
journal: Brain Res
year: '2016'
doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2016.03.004
keywords:
- Animals
- "Apoptosis/drug effects, physiology"
- "Autophagy/drug effects, physiology"
- "Disease Models, Animal"
- "Drug Evaluation, Preclinical"
- Extracellular Signal-Regulated MAP Kinases/metabolism
- Granulocyte Colony-Stimulating Factor/pharmacology
- HSP70 Heat-Shock Proteins/metabolism
- "Mice, Transgenic"
- Microtubule-Associated Proteins/metabolism
- "Motor Activity/drug effects, physiology"
- Neuroprotective Agents/pharmacology
- Prodromal Symptoms
- "Purkinje Cells/drug effects, pathology, physiology"
- "Spinocerebellar Ataxias/drug therapy, pathology, physiopathology"
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Targeting the prodromal stage of spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 mice: G-CSF in the prevention of motor deficits via upregulating chaperone and autophagy levels.
**Authors:** Chang YC, Lin CW, Hsu CM, Lee-Chen GJ, Su MT, Ro LS, Chen CM, Huang HJ, Hsieh-Li HM
**Journal:** Brain Res (2016)
**DOI:** [10.1016/j.brainres.2016.03.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2016.03.004)

## Content

1. Brain Res. 2016 May 15;1639:132-48. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2016.03.004. Epub
2016 Mar 10.

Targeting the prodromal stage of spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 mice: G-CSF in
the prevention of motor deficits via upregulating chaperone and autophagy
levels.

Chang YC(1), Lin CW(2), Hsu CM(2), Lee-Chen GJ(2), Su MT(2), Ro LS(3), Chen
CM(3), Huang HJ(4), Hsieh-Li HM(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Taiwan Adventist Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; Department
of Life Science, National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Life Science, National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei,
Taiwan.
(3)Department of Neurology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Nursing, Mackay Junior College of Medicine, Nursing and
Management, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address: camera0207@yahoo.com.tw.
(5)Department of Life Science, National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei,
Taiwan. Electronic address: hmhsieh@ntnu.edu.tw.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 17 (SCA17), an autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia,
is a devastating, incurable disease caused by the polyglutamine (polyQ)
expansion of transcription factor TATA binding protein (TBP). The polyQ
expansion causes misfolding and aggregation of the mutant TBP, further leading
to cytotoxicity and cell death. The well-recognized prodromal phase in many
forms of neurodegeneration suggests a prolonged period of partial neuronal
dysfunction prior to cell loss that may be amenable to therapeutic intervention.
The objective of this study was to assess the effects and molecular mechanisms
of granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) therapy during the
pre-symptomatic stage in SCA17 mice. Treatment with G-CSF at the pre-symptomatic
stage improved the motor coordination of SCA17 mice and reduced the cell loss,
insoluble mutant TBP protein, and vacuole formation in the Purkinje neurons of
these mice. The neuroprotective effects of G-CSF may be produced by increases in
Hsp70, Beclin-1, LC3-II and the p-ERK survival pathway. Upregulation of
chaperone and autophagy levels further enhances the clearance of mutant protein
aggregation, slowing the progression of pathology in SCA17 mice. Therefore, we
showed that the early intervention of G-CSF has a neuroprotective effect,
delaying the progression of SCA17 in mutant mice via increases in the levels of
chaperone expression and autophagy.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2016.03.004
PMID: 26972528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
