---
reference_id: "PMID:16481446"
title: Regulation of cytoplasmic dynein ATPase by Lis1.
authors:
- Mesngon MT
- Tarricone C
- Hebbar S
- Guillotte AM
- Schmitt EW
- Lanier L
- Musacchio A
- King SJ
- Smith DS
journal: J Neurosci
year: '2006'
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5095-05.2006
keywords:
- 1-Alkyl-2-acetylglycerophosphocholine Esterase
- Alternative Splicing
- Animals
- Axonal Transport/physiology
- Brain/physiology
- Cell Line
- Cell Movement/physiology
- Dyneins/metabolism
- Genetic Variation
- Mice
- Microtubule-Associated Proteins/physiology
- Neurons/physiology
- Recombinant Proteins/metabolism
- Spodoptera
- Transfection
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Regulation of cytoplasmic dynein ATPase by Lis1.
**Authors:** Mesngon MT, Tarricone C, Hebbar S, Guillotte AM, Schmitt EW, Lanier L, Musacchio A, King SJ, Smith DS
**Journal:** J Neurosci (2006)
**DOI:** [10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5095-05.2006](https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5095-05.2006)

## Content

1. J Neurosci. 2006 Feb 15;26(7):2132-9. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5095-05.2006.

Regulation of cytoplasmic dynein ATPase by Lis1.

Mesngon MT(1), Tarricone C, Hebbar S, Guillotte AM, Schmitt EW, Lanier L,
Musacchio A, King SJ, Smith DS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of South Carolina, Columbia,
South Carolina 29208, USA.

Mutations in Lis1 cause classical lissencephaly, a developmental brain
abnormality characterized by defects in neuronal positioning. Over the last
decade, a clear link has been forged between Lis1 and the microtubule motor
cytoplasmic dynein. Substantial evidence indicates that Lis1 functions in a
highly conserved pathway with dynein to regulate neuronal migration and other
motile events. Yeast two-hybrid studies predict that Lis1 binds directly to
dynein heavy chains (Sasaki et al., 2000; Tai et al., 2002), but the mechanistic
significance of this interaction is not well understood. We now report that
recombinant Lis1 binds to native brain dynein and significantly increases the
microtubule-stimulated enzymatic activity of dynein in vitro. Lis1 does this
without increasing the proportion of dynein that binds to microtubules,
indicating that Lis1 influences enzymatic activity rather than microtubule
association. Dynein stimulation in vitro is not a generic feature of
microtubule-associated proteins, because tau did not stimulate dynein. To our
knowledge, this is the first indication that Lis1 or any other factor directly
modulates the enzymatic activity of cytoplasmic dynein. Lis1 must be able to
homodimerize to stimulate dynein, because a C-terminal fragment (containing the
dynein interaction site but missing the self-association domain) was unable to
stimulate dynein. Binding and colocalization studies indicate that Lis1 does not
interact with all dynein complexes found in the brain. We propose a model in
which Lis1 stimulates the activity of a subset of motors, which could be
particularly important during neuronal migration and long-distance axonal
transport.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5095-05.2006
PMCID: PMC4399971
PMID: 16481446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
