---
reference_id: "PMID:38720945"
title: "Case Report: Efficacy, safety, and favorable long-term outcome of early treatment with IL-1 inhibitors in a patient with chronic infantile neurological cutaneous articular (CINCA) syndrome caused by NLRP3 mosaicism."
authors:
- Costagliola G
- "D'Elios S"
- Cappelli S
- Massei F
- Maestrini G
- Beni A
- Peroni D
- Consolini R
journal: Front Pediatr
year: '2024'
doi: 10.3389/fped.2024.1379616
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Case Report: Efficacy, safety, and favorable long-term outcome of early treatment with IL-1 inhibitors in a patient with chronic infantile neurological cutaneous articular (CINCA) syndrome caused by NLRP3 mosaicism.
**Authors:** Costagliola G, D'Elios S, Cappelli S, Massei F, Maestrini G, Beni A, Peroni D, Consolini R
**Journal:** Front Pediatr (2024)
**DOI:** [10.3389/fped.2024.1379616](https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2024.1379616)

## Content

1. Front Pediatr. 2024 Apr 24;12:1379616. doi: 10.3389/fped.2024.1379616. 
eCollection 2024.

Case Report: Efficacy, safety, and favorable long-term outcome of early 
treatment with IL-1 inhibitors in a patient with chronic infantile neurological 
cutaneous articular (CINCA) syndrome caused by NLRP3 mosaicism.

Costagliola G(#)(1), D'Elios S(#)(2), Cappelli S(2), Massei F(1), Maestrini 
G(3), Beni A(3), Peroni D(3), Consolini R(2).

Author information:
(1)Section of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Azienda Ospedaliero 
Universitaria Pisana, Pisa, Italy.
(2)Section of Clinical and Laboratory Immunology, Division of Pediatrics, 
Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Pisa, Pisa, 
Italy.
(3)Division of Pediatrics, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, 
University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(#)Contributed equally

Chronic infantile neurological cutaneous articular (CINCA) syndrome is an 
autoinflammatory disease encompassed in the group of cryopyrin-associated 
periodic syndromes (CAPS). Patients suffering from CINCA have an elevated risk 
of developing chronic sequelae, including deforming arthropathy, chronic 
meningitis, neurodevelopmental delay, and neurosensorial hearing loss. The 
diagnosis of CINCA presents several difficulties, as the clinical phenotype 
could be difficult to recognize, and almost half of the patients have negative 
genetic testing. In this paper, we describe the case of a patient presenting 
with the typical phenotype of neonatal-onset CINCA who resulted negative for 
NLRP3 mutations. Based on the clinical judgment, the patient underwent treatment 
with anti-interleukin-1 (IL-1) agents (anakinra and, later, canakinumab) 
resulting in a complete clinical and laboratory response that allowed 
confirmation of the diagnosis. Additional genetic investigations performed after 
the introduction of anti-IL-1 therapy revealed a pathogenic mosaicism in the 
NLRP3 gene. After a 12-year follow-up, the patient has not experienced chronic 
complications. Although genetics is rapidly progressing, this case highlights 
the importance of early diagnosis of CINCA patients when the clinical and 
laboratory picture is highly suggestive in order to start the appropriate 
anti-cytokine treatment even in the absence of a genetic confirmation.

© 2024 Costagliola, D'Elios, Cappelli, Massei, Maestrini, Beni, Peroni and 
Consolini.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2024.1379616
PMCID: PMC11076766
PMID: 38720945

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that the research was 
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest. The author(s) declared that 
they were an editorial board member of Frontiers, at the time of submission. 
This had no impact on the peer review process and the final decision.