---
reference_id: "PMID:21287222"
title: Prophylactic surgery in Lynch syndrome.
authors:
- Celentano V
- Luglio G
- Antonelli G
- Tarquini R
- Bucci L
journal: Tech Coloproctol
year: '2011'
doi: 10.1007/s10151-010-0666-0
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Prophylactic surgery in Lynch syndrome.
**Authors:** Celentano V, Luglio G, Antonelli G, Tarquini R, Bucci L
**Journal:** Tech Coloproctol (2011)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10151-010-0666-0](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10151-010-0666-0)

## Content

1. Tech Coloproctol. 2011 Jun;15(2):129-34. doi: 10.1007/s10151-010-0666-0. Epub 
2011 Feb 2.

Prophylactic surgery in Lynch syndrome.

Celentano V(1), Luglio G, Antonelli G, Tarquini R, Bucci L.

Author information:
(1)Department of General, Oncologic and Video-Assisted Surgery, University 
"Federico II", Via S. Pansini, 5, 80131, Naples, Italy. 
valeriocelentano@yahoo.it

Lynch syndrome (LS) is caused by a germline mutations in DNA mismatch repair 
genes and is a dominantly inherited syndrome, responsible for 2-5% of all 
colorectal cancer (CRC) cases. Mutation carriers have a 60-85% risk of 
developing CRC. With the increasing use of genetic predisposition testing, 
patients and health care providers must decide on cancer risk-reduction 
strategies. The cancers observed in families with LS are diagnosed at an 
unusually early age and may be multiple. The decision about which surgery is 
suitable should be made on the basis of patient factors and preferences, with 
special emphasis on age, comorbidity, sphincteric function, and the ability of 
the patient to cope with intensive surveillance. Colectomy decreases the risk of 
second CRC significantly. The estimated lifetime risk for endometrial 
adenocarcinoma is 40-60% in women with LS, and the mean age at diagnosis is 
around 50 years. This risk equals or exceeds the risk of CRC. The optimal 
management of the elevated risk for cancer in carriers of mutations for 
hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer is unclear. Patients who are gene 
mutation carriers should receive counseling about colectomy, and if women, 
prophylactic hysterectomy and bilateral oophorectomy.

DOI: 10.1007/s10151-010-0666-0
PMID: 21287222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]