---
reference_id: "PMID:23917331"
title: Interstitial cells of Cajal in the normal human gut and in Hirschsprung disease.
authors:
- Gfroerer S
- Rolle U
journal: Pediatr Surg Int
year: '2013'
doi: 10.1007/s00383-013-3364-y
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Interstitial cells of Cajal in the normal human gut and in Hirschsprung disease.
**Authors:** Gfroerer S, Rolle U
**Journal:** Pediatr Surg Int (2013)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s00383-013-3364-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00383-013-3364-y)

## Content

1. Pediatr Surg Int. 2013 Sep;29(9):889-97. doi: 10.1007/s00383-013-3364-y.

Interstitial cells of Cajal in the normal human gut and in Hirschsprung disease.

Gfroerer S(1), Rolle U.

Author information:
(1)Department of Paediatric Surgery, University Hospital, Goethe University 
Frankfurt/M, 60596 Frankfurt/M, Germany, Stefan.Gfroerer@kgu.de

Hirschsprung disease (HD) is the most prevalent congenital gastrointestinal 
motility disorder. The pathogenesis of HD is defined as a functional intestinal 
obstruction resulting from a defect in the intrinsic innervation of the distal 
bowel. In addition to the enteric nervous system, the interstitial cells of 
Cajal (ICC) play an important role in the generation of coordinated 
gastrointestinal peristalsis. The major function of the ICCs is the generation 
of slow waves that allow these cells to act as specialised pacemaker cells 
within various tissues. ICCs have additional functions in the gastrointestinal 
tract as regulators of mechanical activity and neurotransmission. Due to the 
central role of ICCs in gastrointestinal peristalsis, it has been suggested that 
defects or impairments of the ICCs may contribute to motility dysfunction in 
several gastrointestinal motility disorders. This review describes the 
distribution and functions of ICCs in the normal gut and in Hirschsprung 
disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s00383-013-3364-y
PMID: 23917331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]