---
reference_id: "PMID:28417216"
title: Pathogenic mechanisms following ischemic stroke.
authors:
- Khoshnam SE
- Winlow W
- Farzaneh M
- Farbood Y
- Moghaddam HF
journal: Neurol Sci
year: '2017'
doi: 10.1007/s10072-017-2938-1
keywords:
- Animals
- Brain/pathology
- Brain Injuries/pathology
- Brain Ischemia/pathology
- Humans
- Inflammation/pathology
- Oxidative Stress/physiology
- Stroke/pathology
content_type: abstract_only
---

# Pathogenic mechanisms following ischemic stroke.
**Authors:** Khoshnam SE, Winlow W, Farzaneh M, Farbood Y, Moghaddam HF
**Journal:** Neurol Sci (2017)
**DOI:** [10.1007/s10072-017-2938-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10072-017-2938-1)

## Content

1. Neurol Sci. 2017 Jul;38(7):1167-1186. doi: 10.1007/s10072-017-2938-1. Epub
2017  Apr 17.

Pathogenic mechanisms following ischemic stroke.

Khoshnam SE(1), Winlow W(2)(3), Farzaneh M(4), Farbood Y(5), Moghaddam HF(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Physiology Research Center,
Ahvaz Jundishapur University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran.
Esmaeil.khoshnam1392@gmail.com.
(2)Dipartimento di Biologia, Università degli Studi di Napoli, Federico II, Via
Cintia 26, 80126, Napoli, Italy. bill.winlow@gmail.com.
(3)Honorary Research Fellow, Institute of Ageing and Chronic Diseases, The APEX
building, 6 West Derby Street, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L7 8TX, UK.
bill.winlow@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Stem Cells and Developmental Biology, Cell Science Research
Center, Royan Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Technology, ACECR, Tehran,
Iran.
(5)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Physiology Research Center,
Ahvaz Jundishapur University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Iran.

Stroke is the second most common cause of death and the leading cause of
disability worldwide. Brain injury following stroke results from a complex
series of pathophysiological events including excitotoxicity, oxidative and
nitrative stress, inflammation, and apoptosis. Moreover, there is a mechanistic
link between brain ischemia, innate and adaptive immune cells, intracranial
atherosclerosis, and also the gut microbiota in modifying the cerebral responses
to ischemic insult. There are very few treatments for stroke injuries, partly
owing to an incomplete understanding of the diverse cellular and molecular
changes that occur following ischemic stroke and that are responsible for
neuronal death. Experimental discoveries have begun to define the cellular and
molecular mechanisms involved in stroke injury, leading to the development of
numerous agents that target various injury pathways. In the present article, we
review the underlying pathophysiology of ischemic stroke and reveal the
intertwined pathways that are promising therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-017-2938-1
PMID: 28417216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]